9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/684
City of Frisco
Code of Ordinances
Including Web Update 18.1
This Code of Ordinances contains all ordinances deemed appropriate to be included as enacted through
Ordinance 2020-06-34 adopted 6/16/20.
PART I - HOME RULE CHARTER*
PREAMBLE
We, the citizens of Frisco, Texas, in order to establish a Home Rule municipal government, provide for the
future progress of our city and obtain more fully the benefits of local self-government, and provide for the public
welfare, hereby adopt this Home Rule Charter, in accordance with the statutes of the State of Texas; and do
hereby declare the residents of the City of Frisco, in Collin and Denton County, Texas living within the legally
established boundaries of the said city, to be a political subdivision of the State of Texas, incorporated forever
under the name and style of the “City of Frisco” with such powers, rights, privileges, authorities, duties, and
immunities, as are herein provided.
ARTICLE I. FORM OF GOVERNMENT AND BOUNDARIES
Sec. 1.01 Form of government
The municipal government provided by this Charter, shall be known as the “Council-Manager Government”.
Pursuant to its provisions, and subject only to the limitations imposed by the state Constitution, the statutes of
this state, and by this Charter, all powers of the city shall be vested in an elective council, hereinafter referred to
as the “city council”, which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies, and appoint the city
manager, who in turn, shall be held responsible to the city council for the execution of the laws and the
administration of the government of the city. All powers of the city shall be exercised in the manner prescribed
by this Charter, or if the manner not be prescribed, then in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance, the
state Constitution, or by the statutes of the State of Texas.
Sec. 1.02 The boundaries
The citizens of the city, Collin and Denton County, Texas, residing within its corporate limits, as heretofore or
hereafter established, are hereby constituted and shall constitute to be a municipal body politic and corporate, in
perpetuity, under the name of the “City of Frisco” with such powers, privileges, rights, duties, authorities, and
immunities, as are herein provided.
Sec. 1.03 Extension of boundaries
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/684
The boundaries of the city may be enlarged and extended by the annexation of additional territory, irrespective
of size and configuration, by the method hereinafter set forth:
(1) The city council shall have the power by ordinance to fix the boundary limits of the city and to
provide for the alteration and extension of said boundary limits, and the annexation of additional
territory lying adjacent to the city, in any manner provided by law.
(2) When any additional territory has been so annexed, same shall be a part of the city and the
property situated therein shall bear taxes levied by the city, and the citizens thereof shall be entitled to
all the rights and privileges of the other citizens of said city, and shall be bound by the acts,
ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of the city.
ARTICLE II. POWERS OF THE CITY
Sec. 2.01 General powers of the city
The city shall have all powers and rights of self-government and home rule that exists now or may be granted to
municipalities by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, unless such power or right is expressly
prohibited or restricted by this Charter.
Sec. 2.02 Public improvements
The city shall have the power to, among others, construct and maintain, within or without its corporate limits,
streets, flood control and sanitary facilities, water and storm drainage facilities in, over, under or upon all public
property or easements granted for that purpose and to levy assessments for the costs of such improvements. The
city shall have the power to collect attorney's fees for the collection of paving assessment in foreclosure cases as
allowed under state law. It shall have the power to cause liens to be established for the purpose of securing the
payment of such levies and shall have the power to compel the use of such improvements by the citizens of the
city.
Sec. 2.03 Miscellaneous powers
The city shall have the power to, among others, establish and maintain ordinances and regulations governing the
use of lands within the city and to enforce by all lawful means these ordinances and regulations, within and
without its corporate limits. The city shall have the power to authorize, regulate and inspect all construction and
existing structures within or without its limits, consistent with state statutes, and to establish and enforce
ordinances and regulations concerning their use, construction and reconstruction. The city shall have the power
to license and regulate persons, corporations and associations engaged in any business, occupation, profession or
trade when authorized by state law. The city shall have all powers granted by any section of this Charter.
ARTICLE III. THE CITY COUNCIL
Sec. 3.01 Composition
(1) The “city council” shall be composed of a “mayor” and six “councilmembers” elected under the place
system, with there being places 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6. The mayor and each councilmember shall be elected at large,
and unless sooner removed under the provisions of this Charter, shall serve for a term of three years, and until
their successor has been elected and duly qualified. All of the city council holding office at the time of passage
of any amendments to this Charter shall continue to hold their respective office until the respective term for
which they were elected expires.
(2) Terms of the council members shall be staggered so that every year there shall be an election for two of the
places as follows: Places 1 and 3; Places 2 and 4; and Places 5 and 6. The mayor shall be elected in the same
year as Places 5 and 6.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/684
(Ordinance 10-02-13 adopted 3/16/2010; Ordinance 10-05-28, sec. 2, ex. B, adopted 5/18/2010)
Sec. 3.02 Limitations on terms
No person shall serve as mayor for more than three consecutive elected terms, and no person shall serve as
councilmember for more than three consecutive elected terms. No person shall serve as a councilmember and
mayor (combined) for more than 18 consecutive years. For purposes of this Section 3.02 and computing the
limitations on terms:
(1) A mayor or councilmember, who vacates, for any reason, city office before the end of the term
for which he was elected, shall be considered to have completed that term.
(2) An appointment or election to fulfill an unexpired councilmember term, or unexpired mayor
term if applicable, shall be computed as follows:
(i) If 50 percent or more of the term is remaining, it shall be included in the computation of
term limits; or
(ii) If less than 50 percent of the term is remaining, it shall not be included in the
computation of term limits.
Any councilmember or mayor, who is ineligible to run for elected city office due to the limitations on terms as
provided herein, shall remain ineligible to hold an elected city office for a period of one full term following the
expiration of the most recent term of city office for which he or she was elected with the exception of a
councilmember seeking the office of mayor or the mayor seeking the office of a councilmember.
(Ordinance 10-02-13 adopted 3/16/2010; Ordinance 10-05-28, sec. 2, ex. B, adopted 5/18/2010; Ordinance 19-
05-38, prop. J, adopted 5/14/19)
Sec. 3.03 Qualifications of city council
In addition to any other qualifications prescribed by law, the mayor and each councilmember shall meet the
qualifications set forth in article V of this Charter while in office.
Sec. 3.04 Compensation
The Mayor shall receive compensation in the amount of $850.00 per month. Each Councilmember shall receive
compensation in the amount of $700.00 per month. In addition to such compensation, the Mayor and each
Councilmember shall be entitled to reimbursement of actual expenses incurred in the performance of their
official duties with the approval of the City Council at a public meeting. To the extent possible, all related
expenses for conferences, meetings, meals and other types of events that recur during a budget year that are
attended by the Mayor and Councilmembers (whether one or more) shall be included in the City's annual budget.
The City Manager and Finance Director shall create and administer the regulations for the implementation of
this policy. (Ordinance 19-05-38, prop. G, adopted 5/14/19)
Sec. 3.05 Mayor, mayor pro-tem and deputy mayor pro-tem
(1) The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the City Council, and shall be recognized as head of the City
government for all ceremonial purposes, and by the Governor for purposes of military law, but shall have no
regular administrative duties. The Mayor may participate in the discussion of all matters coming before the City
Council. The Mayor shall not be entitled to vote as a member thereof, on legislative or other matters, except in
case of a tie, when the Mayor shall cast the deciding vote, or when a certain percentage of affirmative votes of
all of the members of the City Council is required to pass a measure pursuant to state law, City ordinance or this
Charter, but shall have no power to veto.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/684
(2) The Mayor Pro-Tem shall be a Councilmember elected by the City Council at the first regular meeting
after each election of Councilmembers and/or Mayor, except that in the event a runoff election is required for
any such office, the City Council shall not elect a Mayor Pro-Tem until the runoff election is completed and the
duly elected candidate(s) have been officially seated on the City Council. The Mayor Pro-Tem shall serve in
such capacity until a majority of the City Council votes to elect a new Mayor Pro-Tem. The Mayor Pro-Tem
shall act as Mayor during the disability or absence of the Mayor, and in this capacity shall have the rights
conferred upon the Mayor.
(3) The Deputy Mayor Pro-Tem shall be a Councilmember elected by the City Council at the first regular
meeting after each election of Councilmembers and/or Mayor, except that in the event a runoff election is
required for any such office, the City Council shall not elect a Deputy Mayor Pro-Tem until the runoff election is
completed and the duly elected candidate(s) have been officially seated on the City Council. The Deputy Mayor
Pro-Tem shall serve in such capacity until a majority of the City Council votes to elect a new Deputy Mayor
Pro-Tem. The Deputy Mayor Pro-Tem shall act as Mayor during the disability or absence of the Mayor and
Mayor Pro-Tem, and in this capacity shall have the rights conferred upon the Mayor.
(Ordinance 19-05-38, props. I, K, adopted 5/14/19)
Sec. 3.06 Vacancies, forfeiture and filling of vacancies
(1) The office of a councilmember or the mayor shall become vacant upon his death, resignation, forfeiture of,
or removal from office by any manner authorized by law.
(2) If any member of the city council is absent from three consecutive regular meetings, without explanation
acceptable to a majority of the remaining councilmembers, his office shall be declared vacant at the next regular
meeting of the city council by resolution.
(3) Any person on the city council who ceases to possess the required qualifications for office or who is
convicted of a felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or is convicted of violating any state laws
regulating conflicts of interest of municipal officers shall forfeit his office. Every forfeiture shall be declared and
enforced by the city council.
(4) If there is a vacancy in the office of mayor, a new mayor shall be elected by special election within 120
days after such vacancy occurs, in accordance with the Texas Constitution and the Texas Election Code.
(5) A vacancy in the office of a councilmember, shall be filled by special election within 120 days after such
vacancy occurs, in accordance with the Texas Constitution and the Texas Election Code. If the vacated office is
that of mayor pro-tem or deputy mayor pro-tem, the city council shall elect a new mayor pro-tem or deputy
mayor pro-tem at the next regular meeting.
(6) Vacancies filled by special election shall be for the remainder of the term that was vacated.
Sec. 3.07 Powers of the city council
All powers of the city and the determination of all matters of policy shall be vested in the city council. Except
where in conflict with and otherwise expressly provided by this Charter, the city council shall have all powers
authorized to be exercised by the Constitution and laws of the United States and the State of Texas and the acts
amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto, now or hereafter enacted. Without limitation of the foregoing
and among the other powers that may be exercised by the city council, the following are hereby enumerated for
greater certainty:
(1) Appoint and remove the city manager;
(2) Appoint and remove the municipal judge(s) of the municipal court;
(3) Appoint and remove the city attorney;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/684
(4) Reserved;
(5) Establish administrative departments;
(6) Adopt the budget of the city;
(7) Collectively inquire into the conduct of any office, department or agency of the city and make
investigations as to municipal affairs;
(8) Provide for a planning and zoning commission and a board of adjustment and other boards as
deemed necessary, and appoint the members of all such boards and commissions. Such boards and
commissions shall have all powers and duties now or hereafter conferred and created by this Charter,
by city ordinance or by law;
(9) Adopt and modify the official map of the city;
(10) Adopt, modify and carry out plans in cooperation with the planning and zoning commission
for the replanning, improvement and redevelopment of specific areas of the city;
(11) Adopt, modify and carry out plans in cooperation with the planning and zoning commission
for the replanning, reconstruction or redevelopment of any area or district which may have been
destroyed in whole or part by disaster;
(12) Regulate, license and fix the charges or fares made by any person owning, operating or
controlling any vehicle of any character used for the carrying of passengers for hire on the public
streets and alleys of the city;
(13) Provide for the establishment and designation of fire limits and prescribe the kind and
character of buildings or structures or improvements to be erected therein; provided for the erection
of fireproof buildings within certain limits; and provide for the condemnation of dangerous structures
of buildings or dilapidated buildings or buildings calculated to increase the fire hazard, and the
manner of their removal or destruction;
(14) Fix and regulate rates and charges of all utilities and public services;
(15) Adopt plats, unless the city council votes to give this authority exclusively to the planning and
zoning commission.
(Ordinance 10-02-13 adopted 3/16/2010; Ordinance 10-05-28, sec. 2, ex. B, adopted 5/18/2010)
Sec. 3.08 Prohibitions
(1) Except where authorized by law or by this Charter, no mayor or councilmember shall hold any other city
office or city employment during his or her term as mayor or councilmember. No former mayor or
councilmember shall hold any compensated appointive office or city employment until one year after the
expiration of the term for which they were elected or appointed to the city council.
(2) Members of the city council shall not in any way dictate the appointment or removal of the city
administrative officers or employees whom the city manager or any of the city manager's subordinates are
empowered to appoint. The city council, at a meeting called for that purpose, may express its views and fully
and freely discuss with the city manager anything pertaining to appointment and removal of such officers and
employees.
(3) Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations as provided by this Charter, the city council shall
deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager solely
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/684
through the city manager. The city council shall not give orders to any such officer or employee either publicly
or privately except as otherwise provided in this Charter.
Sec. 3.09 Meetings of the city council
(1) The city council shall hold at least two regular meetings each month and as many additional meetings as it
deems necessary to transact the business of the city; provided, however, the city council may, in its sole
discretion, determine to hold one regular monthly meeting two months out of the calendar year. The city council
shall fix by ordinance the date and time of the regular meetings.
(2) Special meetings of the city council shall be held at the call of the mayor or a majority of the
councilmembers upon provision of public notice in accordance with state law.
(3) Except as provided by state law, all city council meetings shall be open to the public and shall be held and
notice given in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act.
(Ordinance 10-02-13 adopted 3/16/2010; Ordinance 10-05-28, sec. 2, ex. B, adopted 5/18/2010)
Sec. 3.10 Quorum and voting
Four council members shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of transaction of business. No action of the city
council, except as specifically provided in this Charter, shall be valid or binding unless adopted by the
affirmative vote of a majority of the city council present. If a certain percentage of affirmative votes to pass a
measure is required, the number of affirmative votes must be measured against the entire qualified city council,
not just the number present and voting. (Ordinance 10-02-13 adopted 3/16/2010; Ordinance 10-05-28, sec 2, ex.
B, adopted 5/18/2010)
Sec. 3.11 Conflict of interest
Should any person on the city council have a conflict of interest, pursuant to any state laws and/or city
ordinances regulating conflicts of interest of municipal officers, with an agenda item then before the city council,
he shall openly declare same before discussion proceeds, and he is thereby prohibited from discussing the item
or voting on the question, and is not considered as present and voting for the purposes of the tally.
Sec. 3.12 Abstention
Should any person on the city council choose to abstain from voting on any question before the city council,
where no conflict of interest exists, the person's vote shall be recorded as a negative vote in the official minutes
of the meeting.
Sec. 3.13 Rules of procedure
The city council shall determine its own rules of order and business. The city council shall provide that the
citizens of the city shall have a reasonable opportunity to clearly hear and be heard at public hearings with
regard to specific matters under consideration. The city council shall provide for minutes to be taken and
recorded for all public meetings as required by law. Such minutes shall be a public record and shall be kept and
maintained by the person performing the duties of the city secretary.
Sec. 3.14 Passage of ordinances in general
(1) The city council shall legislate by ordinance only, and the enacting clause of every ordinance shall be “Be
it ordained by the City Council of the City of Frisco, Texas”. Each proposed ordinance shall be introduced in the
written or printed form required for adoption. No ordinance shall contain more than one subject which shall be
clearly expressed in its title. General appropriation ordinances may contain various subjects and accounts for
which monies are to be appropriated. After adoption, an ordinance shall not be amended or repealed except by
the adoption of another ordinance amending or repealing the original ordinance. Copies of any proposed
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/684
ordinance, in the form required for adoption, shall be furnished to the city council. Copies of the proposed
ordinance, in the form required for adoption, shall be available at the city offices and shall be furnished citizens
upon request to the city secretary from and after the date on which such proposed ordinance is posted as an
agenda item for a city council meeting and, if amended, shall be available and furnished in amended form for as
long as the proposed ordinance is before the city council.
(2) A proposed ordinance which has been amended in substance after its placement on the agenda for a city
council meeting may not be voted on at such meeting. Such amended ordinance shall be placed upon the agenda
of a subsequent meeting of the city council in accordance with the provisions of this article. All persons
interested in such ordinance shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard.
(3) Every ordinance shall become effective upon adoption or at any later time(s) specified in the ordinance,
except that every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine or forfeiture shall become effective only after having
been published twice in its entirety or summary form after adoption, in a newspaper designated as the official
newspaper of the City, or by such other means as may be allowed by state law.
(4) If a majority of the city council present request that the ordinance title and caption or its entirety be read, it
must be read.
(Ordinance 19-05-38, prop. L, adopted 5/14/19)
Sec. 3.15 Emergency ordinances
(1) The city council may adopt emergency ordinances only to meet public emergencies affecting life, health,
property or the public peace. In particular, such ordinances shall not levy taxes, grant or renew or extend a
franchise, or regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services. Neither shall they authorize the
borrowing of money except as provided elsewhere in this Charter.
(2) An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner generally prescribed for ordinances,
except that they shall be plainly designated in the title as an emergency ordinance and shall contain after the
enacting clause a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific
terms.
(3) An emergency ordinance may be introduced at any City Council meeting and can be adopted with or
without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced. The affirmative vote of majority of a
quorum of the City Council present and qualified to vote shall be required for adoption.
(4) Emergency ordinances shall become effective upon adoption and shall be published as soon thereafter as
practicable. Every emergency ordinance so adopted, except one authorizing the borrowing of money as
described herein, is automatically repealed as of the 61st day following the day on which it became effective.
The ordinance may be re-enacted if the emergency still exists.
(Ordinance 19-05-38, prop. M, adopted 5/14/19)
Sec. 3.16 Authentication, recording, codification and distribution
(1) All ordinances and resolutions adopted by the City Council shall be authenticated by seal and signature of
the person performing the duties of the City Secretary. They shall be properly indexed and made available for
public inspection.
(2) The City Council may maintain the codification of ordinances of the City. This codification shall be
known and cited as “The Frisco City Code” and shall be in full force and effect without the necessity of such
code or any part thereof being published in any newspaper. The caption, descriptive clause and other formal
parts of the ordinances of the City may be omitted without affecting the validity of such ordinances when
codified. Every general ordinance enacted subsequent to such codification shall be enacted as an amendment to
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/684
the code. For the purpose of this section, general ordinances shall be deemed to be those ordinances of a
permanent or continuing nature which affect the residents of the City at-large. The Frisco City Code shall be
made available to the public.
(3) The City Council shall cause all ordinances and amendments to this Charter to be made available promptly
following their adoption.
(Ordinance 19-05-38, prop. N, adopted 5/14/19)
Sec. 3.17 Investigations by the city council
The city council shall have the power to inquire into the official conduct of any department, agency, office,
officer or employee of the city. For that purpose, the city council shall have the power to administer oaths,
subpoena witnesses and compel the production of books, papers or other evidence material to the inquiry. The
city council shall provide, by ordinance, penalties for contempt for failing or refusing to obey any such subpoena
or to produce any such books, papers, or other evidence, and shall have the power to punish any such contempt
in the manner provided by the ordinance.
Sec. 3.18 Bond
The city council shall require bonds of all municipal officers and employees who receive or pay out any monies
of the city. The amount of the bonds shall be determined by the city council and the cost shall be borne by the
city.
ARTICLE IV. CITY ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 4.01 City manager
(1) The city council shall appoint, upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the full membership of the city
council, a city manager who shall serve as chief administrative officer of the city. The city manager shall be
responsible to the city council for administration of all the affairs of the city, with only those exceptions that are
named in this Charter. The city manager shall be appointed solely upon the city manager's executive,
administrative and educational qualifications, and shall have previous city manager or assistant city manager
experience and/or a degree in a field related to city government. The city manager need not be a resident of the
city when appointed, but shall, within a reasonable time after such appointment, reside within the city during the
balance of the tenure of his appointment.
(2) The city council shall fix the compensation of the city manager, and the city manager's compensation may
be amended, from time to time, in accordance with the city manager's experience, qualifications and
performance.
(3) The city manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term, and may be removed at the discretion of the
city council by the affirmative vote of a majority of the full membership of the city council. Upon decision to
remove the city manager, notice, in writing, of such decision shall be immediately furnished to him and the city
council may then suspend him from duty.
(A) If, within five days after being notified of his termination and removal, the city manager files a
written request to the city council requesting that his termination be reconsidered, the city council
shall, as soon as practical, meet with the city manager in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings
Act to review its decision to terminate.
(B) After such review, after affording the city manager an opportunity to respond to such initial
decision to terminate, a new vote shall be taken with regards to termination of the city manager.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/684
(C) The city manager shall, from the date of suspension, continue to receive his salary pending the
final decision of the city council.
(D) This procedure for a review meeting with the city manager shall not alter the fact that the city
manager serves at the pleasure of the city council and the city manager shall not have, nor should this
procedure be construed to grant to the city manager, right to continued employment.
(4) In case of the absence, disability or suspension of the city manager, the city council may designate a
qualified administrative officer of the city to perform the duties of the office.
(5) The city manager shall:
(A) Appoint, suspend and remove all city employees and appointive administrative officers
provided for in this Charter, except as otherwise provided by law, this Charter or personnel rules
adopted pursuant thereto;
(B) Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the city,
except as otherwise provided by law or this Charter;
(C) See that all state laws and city ordinances are effectively enforced;
(D) Attend all city council meetings, with the right to take part in discussion, but the city manager
shall not vote;
(E) Prepare and accept, or designate an appropriate department head or city employee to prepare
and accept, items for inclusion in the official agenda of all city council meetings and meetings of all
boards and commissions;
(F) Prepare and recommend to the city council the annual budget and capital program, and
administer the budget as adopted by the city council;
(G) Keep the city council fully advised at least quarterly as to the financial conditions and future
needs of the city, and make such recommendations concerning the affairs of the city, as the city
manager or the city council deems desirable or necessary;
(H) Make reports as the city manager or the city council may require concerning the operations of
the city departments, offices, or agencies subject to the city manager's direction or supervision; and
(I) Perform such other duties as are specified in this Charter or may be required by the city council,
and are consistent with this Charter or state or federal law.
Sec. 4.02 City secretary
(1) The city manager shall appoint or remove the city secretary.
(2) The city secretary shall:
(A) Give notice of all official public meetings of the city council in a manner consistent with this
Charter and state laws;
(B) Attend all public meetings and hearings of the city council;
(C) Keep the minutes of the proceedings of all public official meetings and hearings of the city
council in a manner prescribed by the city council consistent with applicable law;
(D) Act as custodian of all official records of the city council;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/684
(E) Hold and maintain the seal of the city and affix this seal to all appropriate documents;
(F) Authenticate by signature and seal and record all ordinances, resolutions and proclamations of
the city; and
(G) Perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager consistent with this Charter
and the laws of the State of Texas.
(Ordinance 10-02-13 adopted 3/16/2010; Ordinance 10-05-28, sec. 2, ex. B, adopted 5/18/2010)
Sec. 4.03 Municipal court
(1) The city council shall establish and cause to be maintained a municipal court. The court shall have all the
powers and duties as are now, or as may be, prescribed by the laws of the State of Texas.
(2) The City Council shall appoint by the affirmative vote of a majority of the full membership of the City
Council such Municipal Judges of the Municipal Court as may be necessary, all of whom shall be competent,
duly qualified attorneys licensed and practicing for at least two (2) years in the State of Texas. In the event a
duly qualified attorney is not available, the City Council shall then select a qualified person to be the Municipal
Judge. The Municipal Judge(s) of the Municipal Court(s) shall be appointed to a term of four (4) years and may
be appointed to additional consecutive terms upon completion of his/her/their term(s) of office. The appointment
of the Municipal Judge(s) may be terminated, without cause, at any time by the affirmative vote of a majority of
the full membership of the City Council. The Municipal Judge(s) shall receive compensation as may be
determined by the City Council.
(3) Reserved.
(4) The clerk and deputy clerks of the municipal court(s) shall have the power to administer oaths, certify
affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of the court, and perform all usual and necessary clerical acts in
conducting the business of the court(s) including but not limited to, the keeping of records and accounts of the
municipal court(s).
(5) All special expenses and fines imposed by the municipal court(s) shall be paid into the city treasury for the
use and benefit of the city, as may be consistent with present and future laws.
(Ordinance 19-05-38, prop. O, adopted 5/14/19)
Sec. 4.04 City attorney
(1) The city council shall appoint by the affirmative vote of a majority of the full membership of the city
council a competent, duly qualified licensed and practicing attorney in the State of Texas who shall serve as the
city attorney.
(2) The city attorney shall:
(A) Serve as the legal advisory to the city council and city manager;
(B) Represent the city in litigation and legal proceedings as directed by the city council and the
city manager; and
(C) Review and provide opinions as requested by the city council or city manager on contracts,
legal instruments, ordinances of the city and other city business.
(3) The city council shall have the right to retain special counsel at any time that it may deem necessary and
appropriate.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/684
(4) The city attorney and special counsel shall receive compensation as may be determined by the city council.
(5) The city attorney, with approval of the city council, may select additional attorneys to act for him and the
city in its representation and/or litigation.
(6) The city attorney may be removed, without cause, by the affirmative vote of a majority of the full
membership of the city council.
Sec. 4.05 Administrative departments, offices and agencies
(1) The city council may, after hearing recommendations of the city manager, establish, abolish, redesignate
and/or combine departments, offices or agencies in addition to those provided for by this Charter, and may
prescribe the functions and duties of such departments, offices and agencies.
(2) Except as provided elsewhere in this Charter, all departments, offices and agencies of the city shall be
under the direction and supervision of the city manager, and shall be administered by officers appointed by and
subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager. The city manager may, with the consent of the city
council, serve as the head of one or more city departments, offices or agencies or appoint one person as head of
two or more of them.
(3) The city manager may appoint a city tax collector, whose duties and functions shall be those usual to the
office and consistent to existing or future laws of the State of Texas as they may apply to city or county tax
collectors. The city manager may recommend that the city council enter into an outside contract for such
services.
Sec. 4.06 Personnel system
(1) Personnel rules shall be prepared by the city manager and presented to the city council, who may adopt
them by ordinance, with or without amendment. The adopted rules shall establish the city as an equal
opportunity employer and shall govern the equitable administration of the personnel system of the city.
(2) The adopted rules shall provide for the following requirements:
(A) A pay and benefit plan for all city employment positions;
(B) A plan for working hours, attendance policy and regulation and provision for sick and vacation
leave;
(C) Procedure for the hearing and adjudication of grievances;
(D) Additional practices and procedures necessary to the beneficial and equitable administration of
the city's personnel system;
(E) A plan for annual oral and written evaluation based on a job description for all City employees
by their immediate supervisor, including evaluation of the City Manager, Municipal Judge, and City
Attorney by the City Council; and
(F) Procedure for the giving and receiving of gifts by city employees.
(Ordinance 10-02-13 adopted 3/16/2010; Ordinance 10-05-28, sec. 2, ex. B, adopted 5/18/2010; Ordinance 19-
05-38, prop. P, adopted 5/14/19)
ARTICLE V. NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS
Sec. 5.01 City elections
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/684
(1) All city elections shall be conducted in accordance with the Texas Election Code.
(2) The regular City election shall be held annually on the first Saturday in May or such other date as required
by the Texas Election Code. The City Council shall be responsible for specification of places for holding such
elections.
(3) The city council may, by resolution, order a special election for purposes consistent with this Charter and
laws of the State of Texas. The city council will fix the time and places for such a special election, and provide
all means for holding same.
(4) Municipal elections shall be conducted by election officials appointed by the city council, or as prescribed
by law. Sample ballots identical in format to those used in the specific election shall be posted in the voting
place(s) for the purpose of voter orientation.
(5) All municipal elections shall be publicized in accordance with the Texas Election Code.
(6) A sample ballot shall be published in at least one of the official media of communication designated for
City notices.
(Ordinance 10-02-13 adopted 3/16/2010; Ordinance 10-05-28, sec. 2, ex. B, 5/18/2010; Ordinance 19-05-38,
props. Q–R, adopted 5/14/19)
Sec. 5.02 Filing for office
(1) Candidates for elective City offices shall file for office in accordance with the Texas Election Code. Each
candidate's application for a place on the ballot must be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee of two
hundred dollars ($200.00) or, in lieu of the payment of a filing fee, a petition signed by no less than 25 qualified
voters of the City or one-half of one percent of the total votes received in the City by all candidates for Mayor in
the most recent mayoral Special Election, whichever is greater.
(2) Candidates for elective city offices shall meet the following qualifications:
(A) Shall be at least 18 years of age at the time of the election for which they are filing;
(B) Shall be a qualified voter;
(C) Shall have resided within the corporate limits of the city, or recently annexed territory, for at
least one year immediately preceding the filing date;
(D) Shall not, at the time of filing or while in office, be in arrears in payment of taxes or other
liabilities due the city after notice of any delinquency;
(E) No candidate may file in a single election for more than one office or position as provided by
this Charter;
(F) Reserved;
(G) The office of an incumbent elected city official shall become vacant when the person holding
such office files an application to have his name placed on an official ballot as a candidate for any
elective public office other than the one such person holds, unless otherwise prohibited by law; and
(H) Shall comply with all other city ordinances or resolutions that may be applicable.
(Ordinance 10-02-13 adopted 3/16/2010; Ordinance 10-05-28, sec. 2, ex. B, adopted 5/18/2010; Ordinance 19-
05-38, props. F, S, adopted 5/14/19
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/684
Sec. 5.03 Official ballots
(1) The name of each candidate seeking elective office, except those who have withdrawn, died, or become
ineligible, shall be printed on the official ballot in the form designated by the candidate in accordance with the
Texas Election Code. If two or more candidates have the same surname, their residence addresses shall be
printed with their names on the ballot.
(2) The order of the names of the candidates on the ballot shall be determined by lot in a public drawing to be
held under the supervision of the person performing the duties of the city secretary in accordance with the Texas
Election Code.
(3) Procedures for voting by absence ballot shall be consistent with the Texas Election Code.
(4) An ordinance, bond issue, or Charter amendment to be voted on by the voters of the city shall be presented
for voting by ballot title. The ballot title of a measure may be different from its legal title and shall be a clear,
concise statement, approved by the city council, describing the substance of the measure without argument or
prejudice.
(5) Procedures for write-in votes shall be consistent with the Texas Election Code.
Sec. 5.04 Official results
(1) The candidate for elective office receiving a majority of the votes cast shall be declared the winner. In the
event that no candidate receives a majority of all votes cast for any one place at such election, the city council
shall, upon completion of the official canvass of the ballots, issue a call for a runoff election to be held within 30
days following the issuance of such call, or in accordance with the Texas Election Code. At such runoff election,
the two candidates receiving the highest number of votes (or three persons in case of tie for second place) for
any one place in the first election shall again be voted for.
(2) The returns of every municipal election shall be handled in accordance with the Texas Election Code.
These returns shall be delivered from the election judges to the person performing the duties of the City
Secretary and the Mayor at City Hall as soon as possible after the closing of the polls. Election returns, general
and special, shall be presented to the City Council at their next meeting in accordance with the Texas Election
Code, at which time the City Council shall canvass and declare the results of the election, which shall be
recorded in the minutes of the meeting.
(Ordinance 19-05-38, prop. T, adopted 5/14/19)
Sec. 5.05 Taking of office
(1) Each newly elected person to the City Council shall be inducted into office at the first regular City Council
meeting following the official canvassing of the election.
(2) At such meeting the oath shall be in accordance with the city Charter.
(Ordinance 19-05-38, prop. T, adopted 5/14/19)
ARTICLE VI. RECALL, INITIATIVE, AND REFERENDUM
Sec. 6.01 Scope of recall
Any elected City official shall be subject to recall and removal from office by the qualified voters of the City on
grounds of incompetency, misconduct, or malfeasance in office. (Ordinance 19-05-38, prop. U, adopted 5/14/19)
Sec. 6.02 Petitions for recall
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/684
Before the question of recall of such officer shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the city, a petition
demanding such question to be so submitted shall first be filed with the person performing duties of city
secretary, which said petition must be signed by qualified voters of the city of at least 30 percent of the number
of votes cast at the last regular mayoral election, or 150, whichever is greater. Each signature on a recall petition
shall conform to the requirements for information as set forth in the Texas Election Code, as amended.
(Ordinance 10-02-13 adopted 3/16/2010; Ordinance 10-05-28, sec. 2, ex. B, adopted 5/18/2010)
Sec. 6.03 Form of recall petition
The recall petition mentioned above must be addressed to the city council of the city, must be distinctly and
specifically pointed to the grounds upon which such petition for removal is predicated, and, if there be more than
one ground, said petition shall specifically state each ground with such certainty as to give the officer sought to
be removed notice of the matters and things with which the officer is charged. The signature shall be verified by
oath in the following form.
“State of Texas”
County of ____________/____________/____________
I, ____________/____________/____________, being first duly sworn, on oath depose and say that I am one of
the signers of the above petition, and that the statements made therein are true, and that each signature appearing
thereto was made in my presence on the day and date it purports to have been made, and I solemnly swear that
the same is the genuine signature of the person it purports to be.
____________
Signature
Sworn and subscribed before me this ____________ day of ____________, 20____________.
Signed _______________________
Notary Public in and for State of Texas
Sec. 6.04 Various papers constituting petition
The petition may consist of one or more copies, or subscription lists, circulated separately, and the signatures
thereto may be upon the paper or papers containing the form of petition, or upon other paper attached thereto.
Verifications provided for in the next preceding section of this article may be made by one or more petitioners,
and the several parts of copies of the petition may be filed separately and by different persons, but no signatures
to such petition shall remain effective or be counted which were placed thereon more than 45 days prior to the
filing of such petition or petitions with the person performing the duties of city secretary. All papers comprising
a recall petition shall be filed with the person performing the duties of city secretary on the same day, and the
said person performing the duties of city secretary shall immediately notify, in writing, the officer so sought to
be removed, by mailing such notice to the officer's city address.
Sec. 6.05 Presentation of petition to the city council
Within thirty-five (35) days after the date of the filing of the papers constituting the recall petition, the person
performing the duties of City Secretary shall present such petition to the City Council of the City. (Ordinance
19-05-38, prop. V, adopted 5/14/19)
Sec. 6.06 Public hearing to be held
The officer whose removal is sought may, within seven days after such recall petition has been presented to the
city council, request that a public hearing be held to permit him to present the facts pertinent to the charges
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/684
specified in the recall petition. In this event, the city council shall order such public hearing to be held, not less
than five days nor more than 15 days after receiving such request for a public hearing.
Sec. 6.07 Calling of recall election
If the officer whose removal is sought does not resign, then the city council shall order an election and set the
date for holding such recall election. The date selected for the recall election shall be in accordance with the
Texas Election Code. If after the recall election date is established, the officer vacates his position, the election
shall be cancelled.
Sec. 6.08 Ballots in recall election
Ballots used at recall elections shall conform to the following requirements:
(1) With respect to each person whose removal is sought, the question shall be submitted: “Shall
____________ be removed from the office of ____________ by recall?”
(2) Immediately below each such question there shall be printed the following words, one above
the other, in the order indicated:
“Yes”
“No”
Sec. 6.09 Result of recall election
If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be “No”, that is against the recall of the person named on
the ballot, the officer shall continue in office for the remainder of his unexpired term, subject to recall as before.
If a majority of the votes cast at such election be “Yes”, that is for the recall of the person named on the ballot,
the officer shall, regardless of any technical defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed from office and
the vacancy be filled by the city council as provided in this Charter.
Sec. 6.10 Recall, restrictions thereon
No recall petition shall be filed against any officer of the city within three months after the officer's election, nor
within three months after an election for such officer's recall.
Sec. 6.11 Failure of the city council to call an election-recall
In case that all the requirements of this Charter shall have been met and the City Council shall fail or refuse to
receive the recall petition, or order such recall election, or discharge any other duties imposed on the City
Council by the provisions of this Charter with reference to such recall, then any petitioning citizen may file an
application for a writ of mandamus with the appropriate court to require the discharge of such duties herein
provided to be discharged by the person performing the duties of City Secretary or by the City Council.
(Ordinance 19-05-38, prop. W, adopted 5/14/19)
Sec. 6.12 General power of initiative and referendum
The qualified voters of the city, in addition to the method of legislation herein before provided, shall have the
power of direct legislation by the initiative and referendum.
(1) Initiative: Such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program or any ordinance not
subject to initiative as provided by state law, relating to appropriation of money, issuing, of bonds,
levy of taxes or salaries of city officers or employees.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/684
(2) Referendum: Such power shall not extend to the budget or capital program or any emergency
ordinance or ordinance not subject to referendum as provided by state law, relating to appropriation
of money, issuing of bonds, or levy of taxes.
Sec. 6.13 Initiative
Following a review by the City Attorney for enforceability and legality, qualified voters of the City may initiate
legislation by submitting a petition addressed to the City Council which requests the submission of a proposed
ordinance or resolution to a vote of the qualified voters of the City. Said petition must be signed by qualified
voters of the City of at least thirty percent (30%) of the number of votes cast at the last regular mayoral election,
or one hundred and fifty (150), whichever is greater, and each copy of the petition shall have attached to it a
copy of the proposed legislation. The petition shall be signed in the same manner as recall petitions are signed,
as provided in this Article, and shall be verified by oath in the manner and form provided for recall petitions in
this Article. The petition may consist of one (1) or more copies as permitted for recall petitions. Such petition
shall be filed with the person performing the duties of City Secretary. Within thirty-five (35) days after the filing
of such petition, the person performing the duties of City Secretary shall present said petition and proposed
ordinance or resolution to the City Council. Upon presentation to the City Council, it shall become the duty of
the City Council, within two (2) regularly scheduled City Council meetings after the receipt thereof, to pass and
adopt such ordinance or resolution without alteration as to meaning or effect in the opinion of the persons filing
the petition, or to call a special election, to be held within thirty (30) days thereafter and/or on a date allowed
under the Texas Election Code, at which the qualified voters of the City shall vote on the question of adopting or
rejecting the proposed legislation. However, if any other City election is to be held within sixty (60) days after
the filing of the petition, the question may be voted on at such election. Any election order so issued shall
comply fully with the Texas Election Code. Unless otherwise provided by law, any election for an initiative
under this Charter shall be held on the first authorized uniform election date that occurs after the sixty-fifth
(65th) day after the petition was presented to the City Council. (Ordinance 10-02-13 adopted 3/16/2010;
Ordinance 10-05-28, sec. 2, ex. B, adopted 5/18/2010; Ordinance 19-05-38, prop. V, adopted 5/14/19)
Sec. 6.14 Referendum
Qualified voters of the City may require that any ordinance or resolution, with the exception of ordinances or
resolutions appropriating money or levying taxes, passed by the City Council be submitted to the voters of the
City for approval or disapproval, by submitting a petition for this purpose within thirty (30) days after final
passage of said ordinance or resolution, or within thirty (30) days after its publication. Said petition must be
signed by qualified voters of the City of at least thirty percent (30%) of the number of votes cast at the last
regular mayoral election, or one hundred and fifty (150), whichever is greater. Said petition shall be addressed,
signed, and verified as required for recall petitions in this Article and shall be submitted to the person
performing the duties of City Secretary. Within thirty-five (35) days after the filing of such petition, the person
performing the duties of City Secretary shall present said petition to the City Council. Thereupon, the City
Council shall immediately reconsider such ordinance or resolution and, if the City Council does not entirely
repeal the same, shall submit it to popular vote as provided in Section 6.13 of this Charter. Pending the holding
of such election, each ordinance or resolution shall be suspended from taking effect and shall not later take effect
unless a majority of the qualified voters voting thereon at such election shall vote in favor thereof. Unless
otherwise provided by law, any election for a referendum under this Charter shall be held on the first authorized
uniform election date that occurs after the sixty-fifth (65th) day after the petition was presented to the City
Council. (Ordinance 19-05-38, props. V, X, adopted 5/14/19)
Sec. 6.15 Voluntary submission of legislation by the city council
The city council, upon its own motion and by the affirmative vote of a majority of the full membership of the
city council, may submit to popular vote at any election for adoption or rejection any proposed ordinance or
resolution or measure, or may submit for repeal any existing ordinance, or resolution, or measure, in the same
manner and with the same force and effect as provided in this article for submission of petition, and may at its
discretion call a special election for this purpose.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/684
Sec. 6.16 Form of ballots
The ballots used when voting upon such proposed and referred ordinance, resolutions or measures, shall set for
their nature sufficiently to identify them and shall also set forth upon separate lines the words:
“For the Ordinance” or
“Against the Ordinance” or
“For the Resolution” or
“Against the Resolution” or
“For the Measure” or
“Against the Measure”
(Ordinance 19-05-38, prop. Y, adopted 5/14/19)
Sec. 6.17 Publication of proposed and referred ordinances
The person performing the duties of City Secretary of the City shall publish at least twice (2x) in the official
newspaper of the City, or by such other means as may be allowed by state law, the proposed or referred
ordinance or resolution within fifteen (15) days before the date of the election, and shall give such other notices
and do such other things relative to such election as are required by law in municipal elections and by the
ordinance or resolution calling said election. (Ordinance 19-05-38, prop. L, adopted 5/14/19)
Sec. 6.18 Adoption of ordinances
If a majority of the qualified voters voting on any proposed ordinance or resolution or measure shall vote in
favor thereof, it shall thereupon or at any time fixed therein, become effective as a law or as a mandatory order
of the city council.
Sec. 6.19 Inconsistent ordinances
If the provisions of two or more proposed ordinances or resolutions approved at the same election are
inconsistent, the ordinance or resolution receiving the highest number of votes shall prevail.
Sec. 6.20 Ordinances passed by popular vote, repeal or amendment
No ordinance or resolution which may have been passed by the city council upon a petition or adopted by
popular vote under the provisions of this article shall be repealed or amended except by the city council in
response to a referendum petition or by submission as provided by section 6.15 of this Charter.
Sec. 6.21 Further regulations by the city council
The city council may pass ordinances or resolutions providing other and further regulations for carrying out the
provisions of this article consistent herewith.
Sec. 6.22 Franchise ordinances
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to be in conflict with any of the provisions of this Charter,
pertaining to ordinances granting franchises when valuable rights shall have accrued thereunder.
Sec. 6.23 Failure of the city council to call an election-initiative or referendum
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/684
In case that all of the requirements of this Charter shall have been met and the City Council shall fail or refuse to
receive the initiative or referendum petition, or order such initiative or referendum election, or discharge any
other duties imposed on the City Council by the provisions of this Charter with reference to such initiative or
referendum, then any petitioning citizen may file an application for a writ of mandamus with the appropriate
court to require the discharge of such duties herein provided to be discharged by the person performing the
duties of City Secretary or by the City Council. (Ordinance 19-05-38, prop. W, adopted 5/14/19)
ARTICLE VII. FINANCIAL PROCEDURES
Sec. 7.01 Fiscal year
The fiscal year of the city shall begin on October 1 and end on September 30 on the next succeeding year. Such
fiscal year shall also constitute the budget and accounting year.
Sec. 7.02 Submission of budget and budget message
On or before August 15th of the fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a budget for the
ensuing fiscal year and an accompanying budget message.
Sec. 7.03 Budget message
The city manager's message shall explain the budget both in fiscal terms and in terms of the work programs. It
shall outline the proposed financial policies of the city for the ensuing fiscal year, describe the important features
of the budget, indicate any major changes from the current year in financial policies, expenditures, and revenues
together with the reasons for such changes, summarize the city's debt position and include such other material as
the city manager deems desirable.
Sec. 7.04 Budget a public record
The budget and all supporting schedules shall be filed with the person performing the duties of city secretary
when submitted to the city council and shall be open to public inspection by anyone interested.
Sec. 7.05 Public hearing on budget
At the City Council meeting when the budget is submitted, the City Council shall name the date and place of a
public hearing and shall have published in the official newspaper of the City, at least twice (2x), or by such other
means as may be allowed by state law, the time and place, which will be not less than ten (10) days nor more
than thirty (30) days after the date of notice. At this hearing, interested citizens may express their opinions
concerning items of expenditures, giving their reasons for wishing to increase or decrease any items of expense.
(Ordinance 19-05-38, prop. L, adopted 5/14/19)
Sec. 7.06 Proceeding on adoption of budget
After public hearing, the city council shall analyze the budget, making any additions or deletions which they feel
appropriate, and shall, at least ten days prior to the beginning of the next fiscal year, adopt the budget by the
affirmative vote of a majority of the full membership of the city council. Should the city council take no final
action on or prior to such day, the current budget shall be in force on a month-to-month basis until a new budget
is adopted.
Sec. 7.07 Budget, appropriation and amount to be raised by taxation
On final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the budget year. Final adoption of the budget by the city
council shall constitute the official appropriations as proposed by expenditures for the current year and shall
constitute the basis of official levy of the property tax as the amount of tax to be assessed and collected for the
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/684
corresponding tax year. Estimated expenditures will in no case exceed proposed revenue plus cash on hand.
Unused appropriations may be transferred to any item required for the same general purpose.
Sec. 7.08 Contingent appropriation
Provision shall be made in the annual budget and in the appropriation ordinance for a contingent appropriation in
an amount not more than three percent of the total general fund expenditures, to be used in case of unforeseen
items of expenditures. This contingent appropriation shall apply to current operating expenses and shall not
include any reserve funds of the city. Such contingent appropriation shall be under the control of the city
manager and distributed by him only after prior approval by the city council. The proceeds of the contingent
appropriation shall be disbursed only by transfer to other departmental appropriation, the spending of which
shall be charged to the departments or activities for which the appropriations are made.
Sec. 7.09 Amending the budget
Under conditions which may arise and which could not reasonably have been foreseen in the normal process of
planning the budget, the city council may, by the affirmative vote of a majority of the full membership of the city
council, amend or change the budget to provide for any additional expense in which the general welfare of the
citizenry is involved. These amendments shall be by ordinance, and shall become an attachment to the original
budget.
Sec. 7.10 Certification; copies made available
A copy of the budget, as finally adopted, shall be filed with the person performing the duties of city secretary
and such other places required by state law or as the city council shall designate. The final budget shall be
printed or otherwise reproduced and sufficient copies shall be made available for the use of all offices, agencies,
and for the use of interested persons and civic organizations.
Sec. 7.11 Capital program
The city manager shall submit a five-year capital program as an attachment to the annual budget. The program
as submitted shall include:
(1) A clear general summary of its contents;
(2) A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be undertaken during the five fiscal
years succeeding the budget year, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for
such improvements;
(3) Cost estimates, method of financing, and recommended time schedules for each improvement;
and
(4) The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or
acquired. The above information may be revised and extended each year with regard to capital
improvements still pending or in process of construction or acquisition.
Sec. 7.12 Defect shall not invalidate the tax levy
Errors or defects in the form or preparation of the budget or the failure to perform any procedural requirements
shall not nullify the tax levy or the tax rate.
Sec. 7.13 Lapse of appropriations
Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure, shall lapse at the close of the fiscal year
to the extent that it has not been expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall
continue in force until the purpose for which it was made had been accomplished or abandoned. The purpose of
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/684
any such appropriation shall be deemed abandoned if three years pass without any disbursement from or
encumbrance of the appropriation. Any funds not expended, disbursed or encumbered shall be deemed excess
funds.
Sec. 7.14 Borrowing
(1) The city shall have the right and power, except as prohibited by law or this Charter, to borrow money by
whatever method it may deem to be in the public interest.
(2) General obligation bonds:
(A) The city shall have the power to borrow money on the credit of the city and to issue general
obligation bonds for permanent public improvements or any other public purpose not prohibited by
law and this Charter, and to issue refunding bonds to refund outstanding bonds previously issued. All
such bonds shall be issued in conformity with the laws of the State of Texas and shall be used only
for purposes for which they were issued.
(B) Any bonds issued under the provisions of this section shall not be issued without an election.
The city council shall prescribe the procedure for calling and holding such elections, shall define the
voting precincts and shall provide for the return and canvass of the ballots cast at such elections.
(C) If at such elections a majority of the vote shall be in favor of creating such a debt or refunding
outstanding valid bonds of the city, it shall be lawful for the city council to issue bonds as proposed
in the ordinance submitting same. However, if a majority of the voted polled shall be against the
creation of such debt or refunding such bonds, the city council shall be without authority to issue the
bonds. In all cases when the city council shall order an election for the issuance of bonds of the city,
it shall at the same time submit the question of whether or not a tax shall be levied upon the property
within the city for the purpose of paying the interest on the bonds and to create a sinking fund for
their redemption.
(3) The city shall have the power to borrow money for the purpose of constructing, purchasing, improving,
extending or repairing of public utilities, or any other self-liquidating municipal function not prohibited by the
Constitution and the laws of the State of Texas. With an affirmative vote of at least five councilmembers, it shall
have the power to issue revenue bonds and to evidence the obligation created thereby. Such bonds shall be a
charge upon and payable from the properties, or interest therein pledged, or the income therein gained from, or
both. The holders of the revenue bonds shall never have the right to demand payment thereof out of monies
raised or to be raised by taxation. All such bonds shall be issued in conformity with the laws of the State of
Texas and shall be used only for the purpose for which they were issued.
(4) In any budget year, the city council may, by affirmative vote of at least five councilmembers, authorize the
borrowing of money. Notes may be issued which are repayable not later than the end of the current fiscal year.
Sec. 7.15 Purchasing
(1) The city council may by ordinance, give the city manager general authority to contract for expenditure
without further approval of the city council for all budgeted items not exceeding limits set by the city council
within the ordinance.
(2) All contracts for expenditures or purchases involving more than the limits must be expressly approved in
advance by the city council. All contracts or purchases involving more than the limits set by the city council
shall be awarded by the city council, in accordance with state law.
(3) Emergency contracts as authorized by law and this Charter may be negotiated by the city council or city
manager if given authority by the city council, without competitive bidding, and in accordance with state law.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/684
Such emergency shall be declared by the city manager and approved by the city council, or may be declared by
the city council.
Sec. 7.16 Administration of budget
(1) No payment shall be made or obligation incurred against any allotment or appropriation except in
accordance with appropriations duly made, unless the city manager, or the city manager's designee, first certifies
that there is a sufficient unencumbered balance in such allotment or appropriation and that sufficient funds
therefrom are or will be available to cover the claim or meet the obligation when it becomes due and payable.
(2) Any authorization of payment or incurring of obligation in violation of the provisions of this Charter shall
be void and any payment so made illegal. Such action shall be cause for removal of any officer who knowingly
authorized or made such payment or incurred such payment or obligation, and the officer shall also be liable to
the city for any amount so paid.
(3) This prohibition shall not be construed to prevent the making or authorizing of payments, or making of
contracts for capital improvements to be financed wholly or partly by the issuance of bonds, time warrants,
certificates of indebtedness, or certificates of obligation, or to prevent the making of any contract or lease
providing for payments beyond the end of the fiscal year, providing that such action is made or approved by
ordinance.
(4) The city manager shall submit to the city council each month a report covering the revenues and
expenditures of the city in such form as requested by the city council.
Sec. 7.17 Depository
All monies received by any person, department or agency of the city for or in connection with the affairs of the
city shall be deposited promptly in the city depository or depositories. The city depositories shall be designated
by the city council in accordance with such regulations and subject to the requirements as to security for deposits
and interest thereon as may be established by ordinance and law. Procedures for withdrawal of money or the
disbursement of funds from the city depositories shall be prescribed by ordinance.
Sec. 7.18 Independent audit
At the close of each fiscal year, and at such other times as may be deemed necessary, the city council shall call
for an independent audit to be all accounts of the city by a certified public accountant. No more than five
consecutive annual audits shall be completed by the same firm. The certified public accountant selected shall
have no personal interest, directly or indirectly, in the financial affairs of the city or any of its officers. The report
of audit, with the auditor's recommendations will be made to the city council. Upon completion of the audit, the
summary shall be published immediately in the official newspaper of the city and copies of the audit placed on
file in the office of the person performing the duties of city secretary, as a public record.
Sec. 7.19 Power to tax
(1) The city shall have the power to levy, assess and collect taxes of every character and type for any
municipal purpose not prohibited by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas as now written or hereafter
amended.
(2) The city shall have the power to grant tax exemptions in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas.
Sec. 7.20 Office of tax collector
There shall be an office of taxation to collect taxes, the head of which shall be the city tax collector. The city
council may contract for such services.
Sec. 7.21 Taxes; when due and payable
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/684
(1) All taxes due in the city shall be payable at the office of the city tax collector, or at such location or
locations as may be designated by the city council, and may be paid at any time after the tax rolls for the year
have been completed and approved. Taxes for each year shall be paid before February 1 of the next succeeding
year, and all such taxes not paid prior to that date shall be deemed delinquent, and shall be subject to penalty and
interest as the city council shall provide by ordinance. The city council may provide discounts for the payment
of taxes prior to January 1 in amount not to exceed those established by the laws of the State of Texas.
(2) Failure to levy and assess taxes through omission in preparing the appraisal rolls shall not relieve the
person, firm or corporation so omitted from obligation to pay such current or past due taxes as shown to be
payable by recheck of the rolls and receipts for the years in question, omitting penalty and interest.
Sec. 7.22 Tax liens, liabilities and suits
(1) All taxable property located in the city on January 1 of each year shall stand charged from that date with a
special lien in favor of the city for the taxes due. All persons purchasing any such property on or after January 1
in any year shall take the property subject to the liens provided above. In addition to the liens herein provided,
on January 1 of any year, the owner of property subject to taxation by the city shall be personally liable for the
taxes due for that year.
(2) The city shall have the power to sue for and recover personal judgment for taxes without foreclosure, or to
foreclose its lien or liens, or to recover both personal judgment and foreclosure. In any such suit where it appears
that the description of any property in the city appraisal rolls is insufficient to identify such property, the city
shall have the right to plead a good description of the property to be assessed, to prove the same, and to have its
judgment foreclosing the tax lien or for personal judgment against the owners for such taxes.
ARTICLE VIII. BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Sec. 8.01 Authority, composition and procedures
(1) The city council shall create, establish or appoint, as may be required by the laws of the State of Texas or
this Charter, or deemed desirable by the city council, such boards, commissions and committees as it deems
necessary to carry out the functions and obligations of the city. The city council shall, by ordinance or resolution,
prescribed the purpose, composition, function, duties, accountability and tenure of each board, commission and
committee where such are not prescribed by law or this Charter.
(2) Individuals who are qualified voters in the city maybe appointed by the city council to serve on one or
more boards, commissions or committees. Such appointees shall serve at the pleasure of the city council and
may be removed at the discretion of the city council. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, members of
any such board, commission or committee shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual
expenses as approved by the city council.
(3) All boards, commissions or committees of the City shall keep and maintain minutes of any proceedings
held and make them available to the City Council.
(4) No officer or employee of the city nor any person who holds a compensated appointive position with the
city shall be appointed to any board, commission or committee created or established by this Charter other than
in an advisory capacity.
(5) Any member of a board, commission or committee who is absent from three consecutive regular meetings,
or 25 percent of regularly scheduled meetings during the 12-month period immediately preceding and including
the absence in question, without explanation acceptable to a majority of the other members shall forfeit his
position on the board, commission, or committee.
(Ordinance 19-05-38, prop. Z, adopted 5/14/19)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/684
ARTICLE IX. PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
Sec. 9.01 Organization
There is hereby established a planning and zoning commission which shall consist of at least seven members
who shall be qualified voters of the city and appointed by the city council to staggered terms in accordance with
the then existing zoning ordinance. The length and number of terms shall be established in accordance with the
then existing zoning ordinance. (Ordinance 10-02-13 adopted 3/16/2010; Ordinance 10-05-28, sec. 2, ex. B,
adopted 5/18/2010)
Sec. 9.02 Duties and powers
(1) The commission shall be responsible to and act as an advisory board to the city council. The commission
shall:
(A) Review all current and proposed ordinances and amendments pertaining to planning and
zoning and make recommendations to the city council for action to be taken;
(B) Make proposals to the city council to amend, extend and add to the comprehensive plan for the
physical development of the city;
(C) Keep public records of its resolutions, findings and determinations; and
(D) Review plats and zoning requests and make recommendations to the city council for final
adoption of same.
(2) The commission, shall have full power to:
(A) Exercise the authority of the commission as provided by state law, this Charter and city
ordinances;
(B) Make reports and recommendations relating to the comprehensive plan and development of the
city; and
(C) Adopt plats, if it has been given that authority by the city council.
(3) A vote of three-fourths (3/4ths) of the members of the City Council is required to overrule a
recommendation of the Commission that a proposed zoning amendment, supplement, or change be denied. The
Mayor shall be entitled to vote when a vote of three-fourths (3/4ths) of the members of the City Council is
required under this subsection or by state law or City ordinance.
(Ordinance 19-05-38, prop. H, adopted 5/14/19)
Sec. 9.03 Procedure
(1) All rules and regulations adopted by the commission shall be forwarded in writing to the city manager who
shall submit them to the city council with the city manager's recommendations. The city council may amend,
adopt or reject any such rules or regulations. If any rules or regulations should be rejected, the commission may
modify them and submit such modified rules and recommendations to the city council.
(2) Should any person on the commission have a conflict of interest, pursuant to any state laws and/or city
ordinances regulating conflicts of interest of municipal officers, with an agenda item then before the
commission, he shall openly declare same before discussion proceeds, and he is thereby prohibited from
discussing the item or voting on the question, and is not considered as present and voting for the purposes of the
tally.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/684
(3) Should any person on the commission choose to abstain from voting on any question before the
commission, where no conflict of interest exists, the person's vote shall be recorded as a negative vote in the
official minutes of the meeting.
(Ordinance 10-02-13 adopted 3/16/2010; Ordinance 10-05-28, sec. 2, ex. B, adopted 5/18/2010)
Sec. 9.04 The comprehensive plan: Procedure and legal effect
(1) The comprehensive plan shall include, but not be limited to, the future land use plan, thoroughfare use
plan, and parks and open space plan. The existing comprehensive plan for the physical development of the city
contains recommendations for the growth, development and beautification of the city and its extraterritorial
jurisdiction. Additions to and amendments of the comprehensive plan shall be by ordinance or resolution, but
before any such revision, the commission shall hold at least one public hearing on the proposed action.
(2) A copy of the proposed revisions to the comprehensive plan shall be forwarded to the city manager who
shall submit the proposal to the city council, together with the city manager's recommendations, if any. The city
council, after a public hearing, shall adopt or reject such proposed revision or any part thereof as submitted
within 60 days following its submission by the city manager. If the proposed revisions or part thereof should be
rejected by the city council, the city council may request the commission to make other modifications and again
forward it to the city manager for submission to the city council.
(3) Following the adoption by the city council of the comprehensive plan, and any revisions thereto, it shall
serve as a guide to all future city council action concerning land use and development regulations and
expenditures for capital improvements. Any proposal which deviates from the comprehensive plan regarding
land use and development regulations shall not be authorized until and unless the location and extent thereof
shall have been submitted to and approved by the commission. In case of denial, the commission shall
communicate its reasons to the city council, which shall have the power to overrule such denial with a vote of
three-fourths of the council members present, or four votes, whichever is greater, and upon such overruling, the
city council or the appropriate office, department or agency shall have authority to proceed.
(Ordinance 10-02-13 adopted 3/16/2010; Ordinance 10-05-28, sec. 2, ex. B, 5/18/2010)
Sec. 9.05 Board of adjustment
The city council shall create and establish a board of adjustment. The city council shall, by ordinance, provide
standards and procedures for such board to hear and determine appeals of administrative decisions, petition for
variances in the case of peculiar and unusual circumstances which would prevent the reasonable use of land and
such other matters as may be required by the city council or by law. Appointment and removal of members of
the board of adjustment shall be in accordance with the provisions of article VIII, sec. 8.01(2) of this Charter and
state law.
Sec. 9.06 Sale of liquor prohibited in residential districts
The sale of liquor, as defined in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended, shall be prohibited by a
person or entity holding a package store permit, as described in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as
amended, in any zoning district which allows, in whole or in part, residential development in the city.
(Ordinance 10-02-13 adopted 3/16/2010; Ordinance 10-05-28, sec. 2, ex. B, 5/18/2010)
ARTICLE X. UTILITY AND PUBLIC SERVICE FRANCHISES AND LICENSES
Sec. 10.01 Authority
The city shall have the power to buy, own, and sell, construct, lease, maintain, operate and regulate public
services and utilities and to manufacture, distribute and sell the output of such services and utility operations.
The city shall not supply any utilities service outside the city limits, except by a written contract. The city shall
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/684
have such regulatory and other power as may now or hereafter be granted under the Constitution and laws of the
State of Texas.
Sec. 10.02 Ordinance granting franchise
No franchise shall be granted for a term of more than 20 years from the date of the grant, renewal or extension of
any franchise.
Sec. 10.03 Transfer of franchise
No public service or utility franchise is transferable, except with the approval of the city council. However, the
franchisee may pledge franchise assets as security for a valid debt or mortgage.
Sec. 10.04 Franchise value not to be allowed
Franchises granted by the city are of no value in fixing rates and charges for public services or utilities within the
city and in determining just compensation to be paid by the city for property which the city may acquire by
condemnation or otherwise.
Sec. 10.05 Right of regulation
In granting, amending, renewing and extending public service and utility franchises, the city reserves unto itself
all the usual and customary rights, including, but not limited to, the following rights:
(1) To repeal the franchise by ordinance for failure to begin construction or operation within the
time prescribed, or for failure to comply with terms of the franchise;
(2) To require all extensions of service within the city limits to become part of the aggregate
property of the service and operate subject to all obligations and reserved rights contained in this
Charter. Any such extension is considered part of the original grant and terminable at the same time
and under the same conditions as the original grant;
(3) To require expansion and extension of facilities and services and to require maintenance of
existing facilities to provide adequate service at the highest level of efficiency;
(4) To require reasonable standards of service and quality of product and prevent rate
discrimination;
(5) To impose reasonable regulations and restrictions to insure the safety and welfare of the public;
(6) To examine and audit accounts and records and to require annual reports on local operations of
the public service or utility;
(7) To require the franchisee to restore, at franchisee's expense, all public or private property to a
condition as good as or better than before disturbed by the franchisee for construction, repair or
removal;
(8) To require the franchisee to furnish to the city, from time to time within a reasonable time
following request of the city, at franchisee's expense a general map outlining current location,
character, size, length, depth, height and terminal of all facilities over and under property within the
city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction; and
(9) To require compensation, rent or franchise fees to be paid to the city as may be permitted by the
laws of the State of Texas.
Sec. 10.06 Regulation of rates
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/684
(1) The city council has the power to fix and regulate the rates and charges of all utilities and public services,
consistent with state statutes.
(2) Upon receiving written request from a utility or public service requesting a change in rates, or upon a
recommendation from the city that rates for services provided by or owned by the city be changed, the city
council shall call a public hearing for consideration of the change.
(3) The city, public service or utility must show the necessity for the change by any evidence required by the
city council, including but not limited to, the following:
(A) Cost of its investment for service to the city;
(B) Amount and character of expenses and revenues connected with rendering the service;
(C) Copies of any reports or returns filed with any state or federal regulatory agency within the last
three years; or
(D) Demonstration that the return on investment, if any, is within state and federal limitations.
(4) If not satisfied with the sufficiency of evidence, the city council may hire rate consultants, auditors and
attorneys to investigate and, if necessary, litigate requests for rate changes, the expense of which shall be
reimbursed to the city by the franchisee.
Sec. 10.07 Licenses
The city shall have the power to license, levy and collect fees in order to license any lawful business, occupation
or calling subject to control pursuant to the police powers of the State of Texas and/or for any other purpose not
contrary to the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas.
ARTICLE XI. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 11.01 Public records
All records of the city shall be open to inspection in accordance with state law.
Sec. 11.02 Official medium of communication
The City Council shall declare annually one or more official media for the communication of all notices and
other matters required by this Charter, City ordinance, or the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas to be
published or made available by the City. (Ordinance 19-05-38, prop. AA, adopted 5/14/19)
Sec. 11.03 Oaths
All elected and appointed officers of the city shall take and sign an oath of office based on those prescribed for
state elective and appointive offices, respectively, in the Constitution of the State of Texas.
Sec. 11.04 Severability
If any section or part of this Charter is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not
invalidate or impair the validity, force or effect of any other section or part of this Charter.
Sec. 11.05 Wording interpretation
The gender of the wording throughout this Charter shall always be interpreted to mean either sex. All singular
words shall include the plural and all plural words shall include the singular. All references to the state law or
laws of the State of Texas, however expressed in this Charter, shall mean “as presently enacted or as may be
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/684
amended or superceded”. The use of the word “city” in this Charter shall mean the City of Frisco, Texas, and the
use of the word “Charter” shall mean this Home Rule Charter.
Sec. 11.06 Amendment of Charter
Amendments to this Charter may be framed and submitted to the qualified voters of the city in the manner
provided by the Constitution and the laws of the State of Texas as presently enacted or hereafter amended;
including upon petition by five percent of the qualified voters or 20,000 qualified voters, whichever is less; but,
no more often than once every two years, as provided by the laws of the State of Texas.
Sec. 11.07 Charter review commission
(1) The city council shall appoint a Charter review commission at least once every six years. The Charter
review commission shall consist of ten citizens of the city who shall:
(A) Inquire into the operation of the city government under the Charter and determine whether any
provisions require revision. To this end, public hearings may be held. The commission may compel
the attendance of any officer or employee of the city and require submission of any city records;
(B) Propose any recommendations it deems desirable to insure compliance with the Charter of the
city government; and
(C) Report its findings and present its recommendations to the city council.
(2) The City Council shall receive and have published in at least one of the official media of communication
designated for City notices a comprehensive summary of the report presented by the Commission. The City
Council, shall consider any recommendations made by the Commission and may order any amendments
suggested to be submitted to the voters of the City in the manner provided by state law as now written or
hereafter amended.
(3) The term of office of the commission shall be for not more than six months, at the end of which time a
report shall be presented to the city council and all records of proceedings of the commission shall be filed with
the city secretary and become a public record.
(Ordinance 19-05-38, prop. R, adopted 5/14/19)
Sec. 11.08 City depository
The provisions of the laws of the State of Texas, governing the selection and designation of the city depository
are hereby adopted as the law governing the selection and designation of a depository of and for the city.
Sec. 11.09 Nonsubstantive revisions
(1) The City Council may, without approval of the voters, adopt an ordinance that makes the following types
of revisions to this Charter:
(A) Renumbering, revising headings and rearranging parts thereof; and
(B) Correcting errors in spelling, grammar, cross-references and punctuation.
(2) A revision adopted under this section is not intended to and is not to be interpreted as making any
substantive change in any Charter provision.
(Ordinance 19-05-38, prop. AB, adopted 5/14/19)
ARTICLE XII. LEGAL PROVISIONS
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/684
Sec. 12.01 Assignment, execution and garnishment
(1) Property, real and personal, belonging to the city shall not be liable to be sold or appropriated under any
writ of execution or cost bill. Funds belonging to the city in the hands of any person, firm or corporation, shall
not be liable to garnishment, attachment or sequestration; nor shall the city be liable to garnishment, attachment
or sequestration; nor shall the city be liable to garnishment on account of any debt it may owe or funds or
property it may have on hand owing to any person. Neither the city nor any of its officers or agents shall be
required to answer any such writ of garnishment on any account whatsoever.
(2) The city shall not be obligated to recognize any assignment of wages or funds by its employees, agents or
contractors, except as provided by the laws of this state or the United States of America.
Sec. 12.02 Security and bond
It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceeding in which the city is a party for any bond, undertaking
or security to be demanded or executed by or on behalf of the city. All such actions shall be conducted in the
same manner as if such bond, undertaking or security had been given as required by law.
Sec. 12.03 Notice of claim
The city shall not be held liable on account of any claim for the death of any person or injuries to any person or
damage to any property unless the person making such complaint or claiming such damages shall, within 90
days after the time at which it is claimed such damages were inflicted upon such person or property, file with the
city a written statement, under oath, stating the nature and character of such damages or injuries, the extent of
the same, the place where same happened, the circumstances under which same happened and the condition
causing same, with a detailed statement of each item of damages and the amount thereof, giving a list of any
witnesses known by affiant to have seen the accident.
Sec. 12.04 Power to settle claims
The city council shall have the power to compromise and settle any and all claims and lawsuits of every kind
and character, in favor of, or against, the city, including suits by the city to recover delinquent taxes.
Sec. 12.05 Service of process against the city
All legal process against the city shall be served upon either the city secretary or the city manager.
Sec. 12.06 Judicial notice
This Charter shall be deemed a public act, may be read in evidence without pleading or proof, and judicial notice
shall be taken thereof in all courts and places.
Sec. 12.07 Pending matters
All rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue except as
modified pursuant to the provisions of this Charter and in each case shall be maintained, carried on or dealt with
by the city department, office or agency appropriate under this Charter.
Sec. 12.08 Property not exempt from special assessments
No property of any kind, by whomsoever owned or held or by whatsoever institution, agency, political
subdivision or organization, owned or held, whether in trust or by nonprofit organization, or corporation, or by
foundation, or otherwise, (except property of the city), shall be exempt in any way from any of the special taxes,
charges, levies and assessments, authorized or permitted by this Charter, for local improvements, for the public
welfare.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/684
Sec. 12.09 City council may require bonds
In addition to any provisions contained herein, the city council may require any city official, department director,
or city employee, before entering upon his duties, to execute a good and sufficient bond with a surety company
doing business in the State of Texas and approved by the city council. The premium of such bond shall be paid
by the city.
Sec. 12.10 Disaster clause
In case of disaster when a legal quorum of the City Council cannot otherwise be assembled due to multiple
deaths or injuries, the surviving members of the City Council, or highest surviving City official, if no elected
official remains, must, within twenty-four (24) hours of such disaster, appoint a commission with a membership
equal to the number of persons necessary to make a quorum, composed of the surviving members of the City
Council, if any, and the most recent, formerly elected Councilmembers and Mayors of Frisco who are residents
of Frisco, the highest-ranking elected member of the Frisco Independent School District who is a resident of
Frisco, and the highest-ranking members of the Frisco Economic Development Corporation, the Frisco
Community Development Corporation and the Frisco Planning and Zoning Commission, all in that order. The
commission shall act as the City Council during the disaster and call a City election within fifteen (15) days of
such disaster, or as provided in the Texas Election Code, for election of a required quorum, if for good reasons it
is known that a quorum of the present City Council will never again meet. The commission's authority to act
shall cease once a quorum of City Council is elected and inducted into office. (Ordinance 19-05-38, prop. AC,
adopted 5/14/19)
ARTICLE XIII. TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 13.01 Effective date
This Charter or any amendments hereto shall take effect immediately following adoption by the voters, as
prescribed by state law.
Sec. 13.02 Continuation of elective offices
Upon adoption of this Charter, the present persons filling elective offices on the city council will continue to fill
those offices for the terms for which they were elected. Persons who, on the date this Charter is adopted, are
filling appointive positions with the city which are retained under this Charter, may continue to fill these
positions for the term for which they were appointed, unless removed by the city council or by other means
provided in this Charter.
Sec. 13.03 Continuation of operation
All city ordinances, bonds resolutions, rules and regulations in force on the effective date of this Charter shall
remain in force until altered, amended, or repealed by the city council, and all rights of the city under existing
franchises and contracts are preserved in full force and effect.
Sec. 13.04 Reserved
Editor's note–Ordinance 10-05-28, sec. 3(ex. B) adopted May 18, 2010, following the election of May 8, 2010, repealed sec. 13.04
which pertained to officers and employees and derived from the original Charter.
ARTICLE XIV. NEPOTISM, PROHIBITIONS AND PENALTIES
Sec. 14.01 Nepotism
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/684
No person related within the second degree by affinity or within the third degree by consanguinity to the mayor
or any councilmember or the city manager shall be employed by or contracted with for the city. This shall not
apply to the following:
(1) Any person employed by the city prior to the person related in the above degree filing to run for
elective office or being nominated for an appointment, or
(2) Any person who is a seasonal employee or intern of the city.
Sec. 14.02 Equality of rights
Equality of rights under state and federal law shall not be denied or abridged with respect to appointment to or
removal from any position.
Sec. 14.03 Wrongful influence
No person who seeks appointment or promotion with respect to any city position shall, directly or indirectly,
give, render or pay any money, service, or other valuable thing to any person for, or in connection with, his test,
appointment or promotion.
Sec. 14.04 Wrongful interference
No person shall willfully make any false statement, certificate, mark, rating or report in regard to any test,
certification or appointment or attempt to commit any fraud preventing the impartial execution of the personnel
provisions, rules and regulations of this Charter.
Sec. 14.05 Employee's political activities
No person who holds any compensated non-elective city position shall make, solicit or receive any contribution
for any candidate for councilmember or mayor, or take part in the management, affairs or political campaign of
such candidate. Such person may exercise his or her rights as a citizen to express his or her opinion and cast his
or her vote. (Ordinance 10-02-13 adopted 3/16/2010; Ordinance 10-05-28, sec. 2, ex. B, adopted 5/18/2010)
Sec. 14.06 Penalties
Any person who willfully engages in and is found in violation of any of the activities prohibited in sections
14.02, 14.03, 14.04 or 14.05 of this article shall be ineligible for appointment or election to a position in the city
for a period of five years from that time. If the person is an officer or employee of the city at the time of the
violation, he shall immediately forfeit his office or position, if found in violation.
Sec. 14.07 Indebtedness to city
No person who, after notice of any delinquency, shall be in arrears in the payment of taxes or any other liabilities
due the city, shall be qualified to hold an appointive or compensative position of the city.
Sec. 14.08 Conflict of interest
No officer, whether elected or appointed, or any employee, whether full-time or part-time, of the city shall have
a substantial financial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract, other than employment contracts, with the city;
or have a substantial financial interest, direct or indirect in the sale to the city of any land, materials, supplies or
services, except on behalf of the city as an officer or employee, except as allowed by state law. Any willful
violation of this section shall constitute malfeasance in office and any officer or employee found guilty thereof
shall thereby forfeit his office or position. Any violation of this section with the knowledge, express or implied,
of the person or the corporation contracting with the governing body of the city shall render the contract
involved voidable by the city manager or the city council shall appoint by the affirmative vote of a majority of
the full membership of the city council.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/684
Sec. 14.09 No officer to accept gifts, etc.
(1) A city official shall not solicit, accept or agree to accept any gift or benefit except as authorized in
subsection (3) below.
(2) For purposes of this section, the words/phrases “city official”, “gift”, “matter”, “official” and “official
action” shall have the same definition as set forth in Ordinance No. 09-04-25, as it exists on the effective date of
this Charter amendment.
(3) It is not a violation of subsection (a) for a city official to accept the following:
(A) A gift to a city official relating to a special occasion, such as a wedding, anniversary,
graduation, birth, illness, death, or holiday, provided that the value of the gift is fairly commensurate
with the occasion and the relationship between the donor and recipient;
(B) Payment by third parties for travel related expenses of a city official previously authorized by
the city council;
(C) A public award or reward for meritorious service or professional achievement, provided that
the award or reward is reasonable in light of the occasion;
(D) A loan from a lending institution made in its regular course of business on the same terms
generally available to the public;
(E) A scholarship or fellowship awarded on the same terms and based on the same criteria that are
applied to other applicants;
(F) Admission to an event in which the city official is participating in connection with official
duties;
(G) Lawful campaign contributions;
(H) attending social functions, ground breakings, or civic events pertinent to the public relations
and operations of the city, including the receipt of a gift commensurate with the occasion;
(I) A city official giving or receiving gifts with his family and relatives;
(J) A city official giving or receiving gifts at church functions;
(K) A city official giving or receiving gifts at city parties;
(L) A city official giving or receiving gifts at functions where only city officials and their
employees are invited or in attendance;
(M) Giving or receiving gifts or receiving a bonus from the city official's place of employment;
(N) Admission or ticket(s) (including parking) to a city official to an event held at any venue
owned in whole or in part by the city;
(O) Reasonable expenses paid by non-profit organizations, the Frisco Community Development
Corporation or Frisco Economic Development Corporation for attendance of a city official at a fund
raising event or other meeting;
(P) Reasonable expenses paid by other governments or governmental entities for attendance of a
city official at a convention, fact finding mission or trip or other meeting;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/684
(Q) A city official giving or receiving a gift whose value does not exceed $50.00;
(R) A city official giving or receiving a gift in excess of $50.00 from a friend, client or customer if
it cannot be reasonably inferred that the gift was intended to influence the city official. If the gift is in
excess of $50.00 and received within one year of the date the donor, either personally or on behalf of
another person or entity, seeks official action from the city in which the city official is in a position to
take official action, the city official shall acknowledge the receipt of the gift to the city; immediately
refrain from further participation in the matter, including discussions with any persons likely to
consider the matter; and remove himself from the dais or area in which the other city officials who
are voting on the measure are seated; and
(S) A city official giving or receiving a gift from a donor other than a friend, client or customer
whose value is greater than $50.00 and less than $250.01 provided the city official complies with the
recusal and disclosure process described below:
(i) The gift shall be disclosed by the city official who received it to the city secretary within
30 days of receipt of the gift. The disclosure of the gift to the city secretary shall be reported to
the public as part of the city secretary's report to the city council at the next available city
council meeting. The information to be disclosed to the city secretary is as follows:
(1) The date the gift was received and who received it;
(2) A description of the gift;
(3) The fair market value of the gift at the time of its receipt; and
(4) The name, address, phone number and employer of the person or entity who
provided the gift.
(ii) From the date that the city official knows or should have known that the donor who has
made a gift the subject of this subsection was presenting a matter, either personally or on behalf
of another person or entity, in which the city official may take official action and such request is
within one year from the date of the gift described above, the city official shall:
(1) Immediately refrain from further participation in the matter, including discussion
with any persons likely to consider the matter; and
(2) Remove himself from the dais or area in which the other city officials who are
voting on the measure are seated.
[3] [reserved.]
(4) Application of Chapter 176, Local Government Code, as amended. Notwithstanding
any gift to a city official authorized in Section 3(b), a city official shall comply with the
requirements of Chapter 176, Local Government Code, as amended.
(5) Gifts to closely related persons. A city official shall take reasonable steps to
persuade a parent, spouse, child, stepchild, or other relative within the second degree of
consanguinity or affinity not to solicit, accept, or agree to accept any gift or benefit which
would violate subsection (a) if the official solicited, accepted, or agreed to accept it.
(6) Any city official officer or employee of the city who shall violate the provisions of
this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be punished by any fine that may be
prescribed by ordinance for this offense, and may forthwith be removed from office or
employment.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/684
(Ordinance 10-02-13 adopted 3/16/2010; Ordinance 10-05-28, sec. 2, ex. B, 5/18/2010)
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 1-1 Designation and citation of Code
The ordinances embraced in this and following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the
“Code of Ordinances, City of Frisco, Texas,” and may be cited as the “Frisco Municipal Code” or as the “Frisco
City Code.”
State law reference–Authority of city to adopt a civil and criminal code of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code sec. 53.001.
Sec. 1-2 Definitions and rules of construction
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the city council, the following
rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city
council:
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance, unless the contrary is clearly
indicated.
Boards, committees, commissions, officers, employees, and departments. Any reference to city boards,
committees, commissions, officers, employees or departments shall be construed to mean the boards,
committees, commissions, officers, employees or departments, respectively, of the City of Frisco, Texas.
Charter. The term “Charter” shall mean the Charter of the City of Frisco, Texas, as printed in this volume.
City. The term “city” shall mean the City of Frisco in the Counties of Collin and Denton, in the State of Texas.
City council. Whenever the term “city council” is used, it shall mean the city council of Frisco, Texas.
Code. The term “Code” means this Code of Ordinances, City of Frisco, Texas.
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time
before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall not be
counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall be counted unless it is a
Saturday, Sunday, or a legal holiday.
State law reference–Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Government Code sec. 311.014.
County. The term “county” shall mean the Counties of Collin and Denton, Texas.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/684
Delegation of authority. Whenever a section or provision appears requiring the head of a department or some
other city officer or employee to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the head of
the department or other officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty, unless the terms of the provision or section specify otherwise.
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms,
partnerships, associations, corporations, and other legal entities, as well as to males.
Highway. The term “highway” shall include any street, alley, highway, avenue, public place or square, bridge,
viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass, and causeway within the city, dedicated or devoted to public use.
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed
as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared.
Month. The term “month” shall mean a calendar month.
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural
number shall include the singular.
Oath. The term “oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the terms
“affirm” and “affirmed.”
Or; and. The term “or” may be read “and”, and the term “and” may be read “or”, if the sense requires it.
Owner. The term “owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or
land.
Person. The term “person” shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships, other
legal entities and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals.
Preceding; following. The terms “preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.
Residence. The term “residence” means domicile that is one's fixed home and fixed place of habitation to which
one intends to return after any temporary absence. It is determined by common-law rules, as enunciated by
courts of the state, except as otherwise provided. A person does not lose his residency status by leaving to go to
another place for temporary purposes only; a person does not acquire residency status in a place by coming for
temporary purposes, within the intention of making that place the person's home. A person who is an inmate in a
penal institution, or who is involuntarily placed in a hospital or eleemosynary institution does not, under such
circumstances, acquire residence at the place where the institution is located.
Shall. The term “shall” always means mandatory and never means permissive.
Sidewalk. The term “sidewalk” shall mean any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the
roadway and the adjacent property line, intended the use of pedestrians.
Signature; subscription. The terms “signature” and “subscription” shall include a mark when a person cannot
write.
State. The term “state” shall be construed to mean the State of Texas.
Street. The term “street” shall include any highway, alley, street, avenue, public place or square, bridge, viaduct,
underpass, overpass, tunnel and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/684
Tex. Admin. Code. This term refer to the Texas Administrative Code.
Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. The term “Vernon's Ann. Civ. St.” means the latest edition or supplement or Vernon's
Annotated Civil Statutes.
V.T.C.A. The term “V.T.C.A.” refers to the latest edition or supplement of Vernon's Texas Code Annotated.
State law reference–Statutory references, V.T.C.A., Government Code sec. 312.008.
Written; in writing. The terms “written” and “in writing” shall be construed to include any representation of
words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
Year. The term “year” shall mean a calendar year.
(Ordinance 99-06-13, sec. 2, adopted 6/1/99)
State law reference–Similar definitions, V.T.C.A., Government Code sec. 311.001 et seq.
Sec. 1-3 Catchlines of sections
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to
indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part
of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including
the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
Sec. 1-4 References to chapters, articles, divisions or sections
All references in this Code to chapters, articles, divisions or sections are to the chapters, articles, divisions or
sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified.
State law reference–Construction of statutory references, V.T.C.A., Government Code sec. 311.007.
Sec. 1-5 History notes
The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any
legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section.
Sec. 1-6 References and editor's notes
References and editor's notes following certain sections of this Code are inserted as an aid and guide to the
reader, and are not controlling or meant to have any legal effect.
Sec. 1-7 Continuation of existing ordinances
The sections appearing in this Code, so far as they are substantially the same as the ordinances from which they
are drawn, and ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of this Code, shall be considered as a continuation
thereof and not as new enactments.
Sec. 1-8 Prior offenses, penalties and rights not affected by adoption of Code
(a) Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done
or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of
this Code.
(b) The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a
structure or premises in violation of any city ordinance in effect on the date of adoption of this Code.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/684
Sec. 1-9 Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language
(a) All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be
numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case
of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, the repealed
portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby and the subsequent
ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of the
subsequent ordinances until the time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are
readopted as a new Code of Ordinances.
(b) Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific
reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: “That section ____________ of the
Code of Ordinances, City of Frisco, Texas is hereby amended to read as follows:.” The new provisions shall then
be set out in full as enacted.
(c) In the event a new section not heretofore existing the Code is to be added, the following language may be
used: “That the Code of Ordinances, City of Frisco, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be
numbered ____________/____________/____________, which section reads as follows:.” The new section
shall then be set out in full as enacted.
(d) In lieu of the foregoing paragraph, when the governing authority desires to enact an ordinance of a general
and permanent nature embracing a subject not previously existing in the Code, but which the governing
authority desires to incorporate into the Code, a provision in substantially the following language may be made a
part of the ordinance: “It is the intention of the council, and it is hereby ordained, that the provisions of this
ordinance shall become and be made part of the Code of Ordinance, City of Frisco, Texas, and the sections of
this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish that intention.”
(e) All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed
by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be.
Sec. 1-10 Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinance
(a) The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance
repealed took effect.
(b) The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took
effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or
cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed.
State law reference–Repeal of a repealing statute, V.T.C.A., Government Code sec. 311.030.
Sec. 1-11 Supplementing the Code
(a) By contract or by municipal personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever
authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include substantive, permanent and general
parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement, and all changes made thereby in the
Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where
necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so
prepared that when they are inserted, the Code will be current through the date of adoption of the latest
ordinance included in the supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded
from the Code by omission thereof from reprinted pages.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/684
(c) When preparing a supplement to the Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency, organization or
company authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and
parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified
code. For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the
Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and,
where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing sections or other subdivision
numbers;
(4) Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to “this chapter,” “this
article,” “this division,” etc., as the case may be, or to “sections ____________ to ____________”
(inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive
sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance
sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or
effect of the ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.
Sec. 1-12 General penalty
Whenever in this Code or in any city ordinance or in any rule, regulation or order promulgated by any city
officer or agency under authority vested in such officer or agency any act is prohibited or is made or declared to
be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided, the violation of any
provision of this Code or of any specific ordinance, regulation, rule or order that governs or regulates fire, safety,
zoning, public health or sanitation, including the dumping of refuse, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding
$2,000.00. The violation of any other provision of this Code or any other ordinance, rule, regulation or order
shall be punished by fine not exceeding $500.00, unless otherwise specifically stated in this Code. If the
maximum penalty provided by this Code for any offense is greater than the maximum penalty for such violation
provided by state law, the maximum penalty for such violation shall be that accorded under state law. Except
where provided otherwise in this Code, each day an offense shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
State law reference–Authority of city to establish penalties for violation of Code, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code sec. 54.001.
Sec. 1-13 Violations of Code or ordinance; culpable mental state
(a) In any prosecution filed under a provision of this Code or any ordinance of the city which expressly
requires proof that the actor engaged in conduct intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal
negligence, then a person does not commit an offense unless he is shown to have engaged in such conduct as the
definition of the offense requires.
(b) Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city an act or a failure to act is prohibited, or is made or
declared to be unlawful, or an offense, or a misdemeanor, and such provision does not expressly require proof of
a culpable mental state, proof of a culpable mental state is not required for conviction of such offense, it being
the intent of the city council to dispense with the requirement of any culpable mental state in prosecutions filed
under such provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city; provided, however, that if such offense is
punishable by a fine exceeding the amount authorized by V.T.C.A., Penal Code sec. 12.23, a person does not
commit such offense unless he is shown to have recklessly engaged in such conduct as the definition of the
offense requires.
(c) Proof of a higher degree of culpability than that charged constitutes proof of the culpability charged.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/684
Sec. 1-14 Severability of parts of Code
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause,
sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of
a court of competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses,
sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code.
Sec. 1-15 Certain ordinances, rights, etc., not affected by Code
Nothing in this Code, or the ordinance adopting this Code, shall affect:
(1) Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or
right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code;
(2) Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or
authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any
contract or obligations assumed by the city;
(3) The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict with the provisions of
the Code;
(4) Any ordinance or resolution fixing salaries of officers or employees of the city, unless
superseded;
(5) Any appropriation ordinance, budget adoption, or similar resolution;
(6) Any right of franchise granted by the council to any person, firm or corporation;
(7) Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, closing,
opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city;
(8) Any ordinance or resolution establishing and prescribing the street grades of any city streets;
(9) Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor;
(10) Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city, or
providing regulations for the same;
(11) Any ordinance annexing property to the city, or expanding or relinquishing extraterritorial
jurisdiction;
(12) Any ordinances or amendments thereto concerning zoning, subdivisions, or land development,
including granting of variances, rezoning specific property parcels, issuing special permits, or
establishing planned development districts;
(13) Any otherwise valid and effective ordinance regarding impact fees assessed by the city and
establishing procedures and regulations regarding impact fees;
(14) Any ordinance or resolution regulating the erection, alteration, repair, demolition, moving or
removal of buildings or other structures;
(15) Ordinances or resolutions prescribing traffic regulations including but not limited to those for
specific locations, prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way
traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones, establishing or rescinding school zones;
establishing or altering speed limits; and establishing load limits; establishing fire lanes, or
establishing stop signs;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/684
(16) Any ordinance or resolution fixing utility rates and charges, or any other ordinances or
resolution establishing fees;
(17) Any ordinance of agreement with another political subdivision;
(18) Any ordinance concerning issuance of tax anticipation notes; authorizing the issuance of
bonds, or authorizing issuance and sale of combination tax and revenue certificates of obligation;
(19) Any current ordinance concerning personnel benefits and eligibility including, but not limited
to, participation in the Texas Municipal Retirement System or the Texas Municipal League
intergovernmental employee benefits pool;
(20) Any ordinance abandoning or vacating easements, alleys, etc.;
(21) Any ordinance in effect which establishes a requirement or procedure to obtain a municipal
permit or license to conduct any commercial activity, construct or alter a building or structure, or
otherwise obtain municipal permission or sanction as a precondition;
(22) Any ordinance approving or disapproving rates, charges, fees, adjustments, or clauses
concerning TXU gas distribution;
(23) Any ordinance adopting or amending engineering, design, or construction standards for the
water system, sanitary sewer system, or paving and drainage facilities;
(24) Any ordinance, resolution or order of the governing body accepting the designation by a state
or federal entity to administer or enforce state or federal laws, regulations, or orders;
(25) Any ordinance establishing or concerning reinvestment zones;
(26) Any ordinance establishing or revising fees, charges or deposit requirements, and criteria used
to determine said fee, charge or deposit amounts, required for provision of any service or acquisition
of any permit or license from the city.
(27) Any other ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent
nature; or which is referred to elsewhere in this Code as continuing in effect;
and all such ordinances and resolutions are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same
extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances and resolutions are on file in the city clerk or
secretary's office.
Sec. 1-16 Ordinances repealed by adoption of this Code
The following ordinances have been repealed:
281 Burning of solid wastes.
80-10-02 Brush collection.
152 Creation of court and operation of court.
152(a) Appointment of MH Mitchell Judge and MI McCullough Recorder.
186 Police reserve.
94-04-04 Personnel policy by city manager.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/684
94-07-03 Rogers Lake ordinance.
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 2-1 Electronic signatures
(a) Electronic signatures, an automated function that replaces a handwritten signature with a system-generated
signature statement, and electronic records can be used as a means for authentication of city documents,
computer-generated city documents and electronic city entries, among other uses. System-generated electronic
signatures used in accordance with this section and state and federal law are considered legally binding as a
means to identify the author of record for entries and confirm the content and intent of the author. City
departments and staff will be allowed to utilize electronic signatures in accordance with this section, city
policies, state laws and regulations and federal regulations regarding same.
(b) The following list sets forth the acceptable usages of electronic signatures:
(1) For city policies, laws, ordinances, regulations and rules requiring a signature;
(2) For transactions where the parties agree to conduct the transaction electronically. Consent may
be implied from the circumstances, except where information is required by law to be in paper or
hardcopy form; and
(3) When the electronic signature contains the elements required by law, if any.
(c) The use of an electronic signature shall have the same force and effect as the use of a “wet” or manual
signature if:
(1) The signature is capable of verification;
(2) The signature is under the sole control of the person using it; and
(3) The signature is linked to the data in such a manner that it is readily ascertainable if the data is
changed after the signature is applied.
(d) The city manager may determine the programs, rules, protocols and elements that are required for
compliance with subsection (c).
(Ordinance 2020-05-28 adopted 5/19/20)
Secs. 2-2–2-18 Reserved
ARTICLE II. CITY COUNCIL
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 2-19 Rules of procedure for the conduct of public testimony at meetings
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/684
The following rules of procedure shall govern all meetings of the boards, commissions and committees of the
city that are subject to the Texas Open Meetings Act, and the conduct of all members and other persons in
attendance at such meetings. Right to be heard:
(1) Any member of the public shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard at any and all
meetings of the boards, commissions and committees of the city that are subject to the Texas Open
Meetings Act regarding any and all matters to be considered at each such meeting. A time shall be set
aside at the beginning of each meeting for the board, commission or committee to hear from
members of the public. Each member of the public wishing to address the board, commission or
committee shall be entitled to speak for up to five (5) minutes for each agenda item about which the
individual desires to speak; provided, however, that a member of the public who addresses the board,
commission or committee through a translator shall be entitled to speak for up to ten (10) minutes for
each agenda item about which the individual desires to speak in order to ensure that non-English
speakers receive the same opportunity to address the board, commission or committee.
(2) Members of the public who request additional time to speak on a specific agenda item must
present their request, in writing, to the board, commission or committee staff liaison by 4:00 p.m. on
the Monday immediately preceding the board, commission or committee meeting at which the
agenda item is scheduled to be considered, discussed or acted on.
(3) The board, commission or committee may, in its sole discretion and by majority vote, reduce
the above-referenced time limits from five (5) minutes to three (3) minutes or from ten (10) minutes
to six (6) minutes, respectively, if ten (10) or more members of the public present a request to speak
on a single agenda item in order to ensure that as many people as possible have an opportunity to
speak.
(4) Nothing in these rules of procedure is intended or shall be interpreted to prohibit public
criticism of the board, commission or committee, including criticism of any act, omission, policy,
procedure, program or service. The board, commission or committee or the presiding officer thereof
may, however, disallow public criticism that is prohibited by law.
(5) The foregoing rules of procedure shall not apply to meetings of the city council, which are
governed by a separate set of rules of procedure. In the event of a conflict between the foregoing
rules of procedure and a rule, bylaw, order or other practice adopted by a board, commission or
committee subject to these rules, the foregoing rules of procedure shall control and supersede any
such conflicting rule, bylaw, order or other practice.
(Ordinance 01-04-29, sec. 2, adopted 4/3/01; Ordinance 19-10-86 adopted 10/1/19; Ordinance 19-10-87 adopted
10/1/19)
Sec. 2-20 Establishment of date and time for regular meetings
The regular meetings of the city council are hereby set for the first and third Tuesdays of each month,
commencing at 5:30 p.m. (“regular meetings schedule”). If the city council determines, at a duly called and
posted meeting, that an alternative date (and time, if necessary) would better assist the city council in transacting
the business of the city during any given month, the city council may change the regular meetings schedule to
the alternative date upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the city council present (“alternative date”). After
holding any regular meeting on an alternative date as provided herein, the city council shall return to the regular
meetings schedule. (Ordinance 09-06-31, sec. 2, adopted 6/16/09)
Sec. 2-21 Purchasing
The city manager or his/her designee is authorized to contract for expenditure without further approval of the
city council for all budgeted items not exceeding $50,000.00. All contracts for expenditures or purchases
involving more than $50,000.00 must be expressly approved and awarded in advance by the city council in
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/684
accordance with applicable law, except as otherwise exempted by applicable law. (Ordinance 17-02-06 adopted
2/7/17)
Secs. 2-22–2-40 Reserved
DIVISION 2. LEGAL DEFENSE
Sec. 2-41 Application
The division applies to city councilmembers (as defined herein) and the mayor (as defined herein). This division
shall also apply to city councilmembers and mayors after they cease to serve on the city council or as mayor if
the litigation relates to public duties performed while the individual was a city councilmember or the mayor.
(Ordinance 01-04-36, sec. 3, adopted 4/17/01)
Sec. 2-42 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
City means the City of Frisco, Texas, a municipal corporation organized under the laws of the State of Texas.
City Charter means the Home Rule Charter for Frisco as it currently exists or may be amended in the future.
City council means the city council of the city as described, established and set forth in article III of the city
Charter.
City councilmember means any person who is a member of the city council as of the effective date of the
ordinance from which this article is derived, or any person who shall become a member of the city council in
accordance with the applicable provisions of the city Charter after the effective date of this article.
Mayor means the mayor of Frisco as described, established and set forth in article III of the city Charter.
Notice shall have the definition set forth in section 2-43(a).
Public duties means a good faith showing that the individual sued was acting within the scope of his authority as
a city councilmember or mayor in the performance of duties and obligations customarily performed and
expected of an individual holding such position, but does not include acts outside of or beyond the scope of the
city councilmember's or mayor's legal powers. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, an example of a
duty customarily performed would be casting a vote in regards to items on the agenda of a city council meeting.
Request shall have the definition set forth in section 2-43(d).
Timeliness regulations shall have the definition set forth in section 2-43(c).
(Ordinance 01-04-36, sec. 4, adopted 4/17/01)
Sec. 2-43 Payment of legal fees for defense of individual city councilmembers and the mayor when sued
in their individual capacity for performance of public duties
(a) Notice of lawsuit to the city. A city councilmember or mayor who is sued in a court of law in his
individual capacity, when the suit involves an action taken within the scope of the city councilmember's public
duties, must notify the city manager, or his designee, in writing by providing a copy of the complaint or petition
within five days of service thereof on the city councilmember or mayor (“notice”), if such city councilmember
or mayor intends to submit a request for the payment of legal fees in accordance with subsection (b) herein.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/684
(b) Time for submitting a request. A request must be submitted to the city secretary, or his designee, within 12
days of service of the complaint or petition on the city councilmember or mayor. The city secretary shall place
the request as an agenda item for the next regularly scheduled city council meeting, or call a special meeting if
warranted by the circumstances. An example of a special meeting being warranted by the circumstances would
include the situation where the city councilmember or mayor seeks approval of the request before the date an
answer to the lawsuit is required to be filed with the court.
(c) Appeal from failure to timely submit notice and/or a request. A city councilmember or mayor who fails to
timely submit notice and/or a request may make an appeal for relief from the regulations in subsections (a)
and/or (b) requiring notice or a request within five or 12 days (“timeliness regulations”), respectively, and such
appeal shall be considered by the city council. An appeal must be submitted in writing. The city councilmember
or mayor has the burden of proof to establish, by clear and convincing evidence, that they should be excused
from the timeliness regulations. The city council shall have the right to grant relief from the timeliness
regulations by a super-majority vote in favor thereof. The decision of the city council is final. If the city
councilmember is a member of the council considering the appeal he shall abstain from voting on the appeal. If
the appeal is from the currently acting mayor, the mayor shall abstain from voting in the event of a tie.
(d) Contents of request. A city councilmember or mayor who is sued in a court of law in his individual
capacity, when the suit involves an action taken within the scope of the city councilmember's or mayor's public
duties, may submit a request to the then existing city council for the payment of legal fees related to defense of
the lawsuit by the city councilmember or mayor (“request”). The request shall be in writing and include:
(1) The name of the attorney or law firm that the city councilmember or mayor has selected to
defend the lawsuit;
(2) A proposed retainer agreement between the city councilmember or mayor and the attorney or
law firm which shall set forth the fee agreement or billing rate of any attorney expected to work
defending the lawsuit, expenses that the attorney or law firm will bill to the city councilmember or
mayor, and when payment will be expected;
(3) An estimate made by the attorney or law firm of the total cost or number of hours reasonably
expected to be necessary to diligently defend the lawsuit;
(4) Any legal fees or expenses already incurred; and
(5) A description of the nature of the lawsuit, the public duties performed by the city
councilmember or mayor to which the lawsuit relates, and how the defense of the lawsuit relates to
the public interest and the interest of the city.
(e) Consideration of the request by city council. A request may be approved by majority vote of the city
council. If the city councilmember is a member of the council considering the request he or she shall abstain
from voting on the request. If the request is from the currently acting mayor, the mayor shall abstain from voting
in the event of a tie. The city council may approve the request as presented, approve the request with changes,
approve a portion of the request, table the request to allow suggested modifications or deny the request. If the
request includes legal fees or expenses that have already been incurred, the city council may approve them in
full, approve a partial payment or reimbursement, or deny them. Partial approval or denial of legal fees or
expenses that have already been incurred does not prohibit the city council from approving in full that part of the
request relating to future legal fees or expenses.
(f) Reconsideration of previously approved request. Upon the request of any individual who is an active city
councilmember or mayor, the city council may reconsider any previously approved, or partially approved,
request for purposes of comparing the actual costs to the original estimation of the costs and/or verifying that
continued approval is still beneficial and in the best interest of the city. Upon reconsideration the city council
may, by a majority vote, reaffirm its prior approval, revoke its prior approval, or re-approve the request with new
changes. If the vote is a tie, the prior approval shall continue unchanged.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/684
(Ordinance 01-04-36, sec. 5, adopted 4/17/01)
Sec. 2-44 Exceptions
This division does not authorize the expenditure of public funds if the lawsuit or legal matter for which the legal
fees are meant to defend involve only the personal interests of the city councilmember or mayor in which the
city has no interest or may have an adverse interest. (Ordinance 01-04-36, sec. 6, adopted 4/17/01)
Sec. 2-45 Penalty provision
Any person, firm, corporation or business entity violating this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction thereof shall be fined a sum not exceeding $500.00, and each and every day that such
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense; provided, however, that such penal provision shall not
preclude a suit to enjoin such violation. The city retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to
local, state and federal law. (Ordinance 01-04-36, sec. 7, adopted 4/17/01)
Secs. 2-46–2-60 Reserved
ARTICLE III. AUTHORITIES, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS*
DIVISION 1. ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
Sec. 2-61 Purpose
This directive sets forth the comprehensive process for items pertaining to appointments to the city's boards and
commissions including advertising for candidates, data sheet forms, processing information to the city council,
interviewing of candidates, appointment timetable, attendance records, and oaths of offices. (Ordinance 11-09-
46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-62 Policy
The City Council of the City of Frisco has the right to appoint citizens to various boards and commissions. It is
the stated desire and intent of the city council to provide for an orderly appointment process to be followed by
city staff and to encourage participation by interested citizens. All appointments and removals are made at the
discretion of the city council. This policy is intended to create consistency for all boards and commissions of the
city, therefore, any portion of an ordinance or policy which conflicts with this policy, as amended, is repealed.
All other portions of said ordinances or policies shall remain in full force and effect. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec.
5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-63 Procedures
Current ordinances and bylaws governing appointments to boards and commissions of the city shall be amended
in such a manner so that the appointments shall be effective on one uniform date each year, October 1st,
excluding the one annual board member appointment to the North Texas Municipal Water District. (Ordinance
11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11; Ordinance 14-08-41, sec. 2, adopted 8/5/14)
Sec. 2-64 Applications
(a) The city secretary shall advertise that applications for appointment to boards and commissions are being
accepted, at the appropriate times.
(1) Any person interested in being appointed or reappointed to a board or commission must submit
a completed application and meet the following requirements:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/684
a. Reside within the city for one (1) year prior to applying, except as otherwise provided in
this article; and
b. Be a qualified voter.
(2) The completed application and supplementary materials must consist of:
a. Application form (Attachment 1) ranking in numeric order the top five (5) boards and
commissions the citizen wishes to serve on;
b. Essay questions (Attachment 2);
c. An updated personal resume; and
d. A current photograph for recognition purposes at interviews.
(b) Completed application packets shall be submitted to the city secretary's office beginning the first business
day of July through the last business day of July at 5:00 p.m.
(c) All application packets submitted to the city secretary shall be date-stamped received and shall be
considered for one (1) year in making mid-term appointments as vacancies occur.
(d) After appointment or reappointment, each board/commission member must submit a completed affidavit
of residence (Attachment 3), the consent for felony background history (Attachment 4) and acknowledgment of
reading and understanding the code of ethics (Attachment 5) not later than the first meeting of the board or
commission to which each such board/commission member was appointed or reappointed.
(e) No member of a board or commission shall serve on the same board or commission for more than three (3)
consecutive terms or six (6) consecutive years, whichever is less, unless extended by a super majority vote of the
city council.
(f) The city secretary shall send a letter and/or email to each board or commission member with an expiring
term of office to determine if the member wants to be considered for reappointment. If he or she desires
reappointment, the board/commission member must update the information on file by filing a new application.
Except for a board/commission member whose tenure has been extended by a super majority vote of the city
council as provided above, a board/commission member who has served three (3) consecutive terms or six (6)
consecutive years, whichever is less, on the same board or commission may be reappointed to serve on that
board or commission after being off the board or commission for at least one (1) year, and upon reappointment,
the member is eligible to serve another three (3) consecutive terms or six (6) consecutive years, whichever is
less. Such member is eligible, however, for appointment to a different board or commission without waiting.
(Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11; Ordinance 14-08-41, sec. 2, adopted 8/5/14; Ordinance 14-
09-58, sec. 2, adopted 9/16/14; Ordinance 15-12-91, sec. 2, adopted 12/1/15)
Editor's note–It should be noted that Attachments 1-5 above are not set out at length herein, but are on file and available for inspection
in the office of the city secretary.
Sec. 2-65 Appointment process and timeline
(a) June.
(1) The city council may determine the best method for appointment each year based on the needs
of each board and commission and shall inform the city secretary of any changes to the process in
June of each year.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/684
(2) The city secretary will advertise positions/places on boards and commissions with expiring
terms of office.
(b) July. Applications will be accepted during the month of July.
(c) August and September. By the second regular city council meeting in August of each year, the city
secretary will provide the city council back-up materials to include a list of the positions/places on the boards
and commissions with expiring terms of office, the incumbents, date of original appointment, last appointment
date, the new applicant, copies of the application packages, and a copy of the most current attendance report for
each board and commission.
(d) The city council shall hold a boards and commissions planning work session after the city council has had
the opportunity to review the applications. The purpose of the planning work session is to determine if applicant
interviews should be scheduled and who should be interviewed. The city council may or may not interview any
or all applicants depending on previous knowledge of the applicant's qualifications and/or the number of
vacancies on each board or commission. An invitation to interview does not ensure appointment, and an
applicant is not disqualified if he or she does not receive an invitation to interview.
(e) The selected applicants will have the opportunity to interview directly with the city council and express his
or her ideas, concerns and desires to serve directly to the council. Applicants should be prepared for questions;
and arrive 10 minutes before their scheduled interview time. If a majority of the city council does not wish to
interview an applicant, councilmembers may interview applicants individually. If an additional interview work
session is needed to conduct applicant interviews, the city secretary shall notify the selected applicants of the
interview dates and times.
(f) After applicant interviews are completed, the city council shall hold a review work session to discuss and
review the applicants' qualifications. The city council may conduct a closed meeting to deliberate the
appointment of individual applicants if the applicants would, if appointed, qualify as public officers under
section 551.074 of the Texas Open Meetings Act, as it exists or may be amended, or other law.
(g) If the city council has not reached a consensus at the conclusion of the review work session, all
councilmembers present shall present nominations for open positions/places to the city secretary by paper ballot.
The city secretary shall tally the ballots and present the top two (2) nominees for each open position/place to the
mayor, who will ask for a vote between the two (2) nominees. The first nominee to receive the majority of votes
shall be added to a slate of nominees to be presented for appointment for that open position/place. A full slate of
nominees for all boards and commissions shall be presented to the city secretary before the deadline to prepare
and post a city council meeting agenda for board and commission appointments.
(h) Appointments to all boards and commissions shall be made by the city council in September of each year,
excluding the board member appointment to the North Texas Municipal Water District. The mayor shall open
the floor for a motion and a second for each slate of members for each board or commission. The city council
agenda shall list the board or commission appointments in the following order:
(1) Economic development corporation.
(2) Community development corporation.
(3) Planning and zoning commission.
(4) Parks and recreation board.
(5) The remaining boards and commissions shall be listed in alphabetical order.
(i) Appointments are effective on October 1st of each year, excluding the board member appointment to the
North Texas Municipal Water District.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/684
(j) Officers of each of the city's boards and commissions will be elected in accordance with the ordinances,
bylaws and home rule charter. All newly elected officers shall be reported to the city secretary for inclusion in
the boards and commissions database and for public record.
(k) The boards and commissions database will be maintained and updated by the city secretary's office. City
staff support to the boards and commissions will be responsible for providing updated information to the city
secretary's office.
(Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11; Ordinance 14-08-41, sec. 2, adopted 8/5/14)
Sec. 2-66 Mid-term appointments
(a) Occasionally, a board or commission member may be unable to finish his or her term or will be removed
by the city council prior to the term ending. In such cases, the vacant position must be filled by a “mid-term
appointment” that will serve out the remainder of the term of the individual they are replacing.
(b) An appointment to fulfill an unexpired member term shall be computed as follows:
(1) If 50 percent or more of the term is remaining, it shall be included in the computation of term
limits and shall be considered a completed term; or
(2) If less than 50 percent of the term is remaining, it shall not be included in the computation of
term limits and shall not be considered a completed term.
(c) In these cases, upon receipt of letter of resignation, the city secretary shall notify the city council. There
shall be placed on the next regular city council agenda two items:
(1) Consider and act upon acceptance of letter of resignation of individual resigning; and
(2) Consider and act upon preferred procedure to fill vacancy. The use of the current pool of
applicants, who have selected the vacated board as their first or alternate choice, shall be considered
first. If a majority of the city council votes to reopen the application process, a new solicitation
campaign will take place in the same manner as the typical appointment process.
(d) The appointment nomination and voting shall be the same as per the normal process.
(Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-67 Emergency appointments
For the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Frisco, an emergency process may be deemed necessary by
the city council should a majority of any board or commission become vacant. Temporary appointments will be
made by the city council to serve until the regular and/or mid-term appointments may be made. Emergency
(temporary) appointments shall not exceed 90 days. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-68 Attendance records
All city staff providing support to the various city boards and commissions shall maintain attendance records
that shall be provided to the city secretary on a quarterly basis. The city secretary or designee shall make the
records available to the city council. Potential board members and commissioners will be made aware of the
attendance policy as outlined in the Home Rule Charter. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-69 Absences
Board member absences shall be controlled by the City's Home Rule Charter as it currently exists or may be
amended. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/684
Sec. 2-70 Resignations, vacancies
(a) Any member may resign at any time. Such resignation shall be made in writing and shall take effect at the
time specified therein, or, if no time being specified, at the time of its receipt by the city council. The acceptance
of a resignation shall not be necessary to make it effective, unless expressly so provided in the resignation.
(b) When vacancies occur on a board or commission, the city council shall appoint, by majority vote, a
replacement to serve the remainder of the term, in accordance with this division, as amended.
(Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-71 Removal
Each board member serves at the pleasure of the city council and may be removed at the discretion of the city
council. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-72 Compensation
Each member shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual expenses approved by the
city. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-73 Committees
The city secretary shall be apprised of any and all committees that are created by various departments and or
boards/commissions and the representatives on these committees, the dates and times of meetings, copies of
agendas, and meeting minutes. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-74 Standing committees and ad hoc committees
Occasionally the need may arise for the appointment of an ad hoc committee, defined as a committee that will
meet for a particular purpose, for a limited time or a standing committee defined as a committee which usually
functions throughout the year and meets on a regularly scheduled basis. In these instances, the mayor shall have
the exclusive right, with input from other councilmembers, to appoint these committees. Standing committee
appointments shall be made at the time of the election of the mayor pro-tem and deputy mayor pro-tem.
(Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11; Ordinance 14-08-41, sec. 2, adopted 8/5/14)
Secs. 2-75–2-80 Reserved
DIVISION 2. HOUSING AUTHORITY
Sec. 2-81 Establishment of housing authority
There is hereby created and established within the city a housing authority (the “Frisco Housing Authority”).
(Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-82 Area of operation, jurisdiction
The Frisco Housing Authority's area of operation is the corporate limits of the city and the area that is within
five miles of the corporate limits of the city provided said area is not within the territorial boundaries of another
municipality. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-83 Appointment of commissioners, tenant representative; general requirement
The Frisco Housing Authority may consist of up to seven commissioners appointed by the mayor, but no less
than five appointments shall be made. At least one appointed commissioner shall be a tenant of a public housing
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/684
project over which the Frisco Housing Authority has jurisdiction. A commissioner may not be an officer or
employee of the city. Members shall be designated as places number one through seven. (Ordinance 11-09-46,
sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-84 Terms of office; term limits; vacancies
The term of office shall be for two years. Places one, three, five and seven shall be appointed to two-year terms
ending on September 30th in odd-numbered years. Places two, four and six shall be appointed to two-year terms
ending on September 30th in even-numbered years. Except as provided herein, no commissioner shall serve
more than three consecutive terms or six consecutive years, whichever is more; provided, however, any
appointed commissioner who is a tenant of a public housing project over which the Frisco Housing Authority
has jurisdiction (the “tenant representative commissioner”) may not serve more than two consecutive two-year
terms. The city council may, by majority vote, authorize the mayor to extend the term of a commissioner whose
appointment has exceeded or will exceed the term limits set forth herein, except for the tenant representative
commissioner. Any vacancies occurring on the Frisco Housing Authority shall be filled for the unexpired term.
Except for commissioners whose terms are extended as set forth herein and tenant representative commissioners,
a commissioner may be reappointed to serve on the board after being off the board for at least one full year.
Upon reappointment, the commissioner may then be eligible to serve another three consecutive terms or six
consecutive years, whichever is more, unless extended as provided herein. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A,
adopted 9/20/11; Ordinance 19-10-88 adopted 10/1/19)
Sec. 2-85 Additional provisions relating to a tenant representative's term
If a tenant representative commissioner ceases to reside in a housing unit operated by the Frisco Housing
Authority during the commissioner's term, a majority of the other commissioners shall decide whether to request
that a new commissioner be appointed. A majority of the commissioners may decide to allow a tenant
representative commissioner to serve the remaining portion of the commissioner's term. If a tenant representative
commissioner fails to attend three consecutive regularly called meetings of the Frisco Housing Authority during
the commissioner's term, a majority of the commissioners shall decide whether to declare the position vacant and
request that a new commissioner be appointed. A majority of the commissioners may decide to allow a tenant
representative commissioner to serve the remaining portion of the commissioner's term. (Ordinance 11-09-46,
sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-86 Chairman, vice-chairman
The mayor shall designate one of the initial commissioners of the Frisco Housing Authority as chairman.
Subsequently, when the office of chairman becomes vacant, the Frisco Housing Authority shall select one of the
commissioners as chairman. The Frisco Housing Authority shall select one of the commissioners as vicechairman.
(Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-87 Other officers and employees; legal services
The Frisco Housing Authority may employ a secretary, who shall serve as executive director, and may employ
technical experts and other officers, agents and employees, permanent or temporary, that the Frisco Housing
Authority deems necessary. The Frisco Housing Authority shall determine the qualifications, duties and
compensation of the persons employed. The Frisco Housing Authority may request needed legal services from
the city attorney or it may employ its own counsel and legal staff. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted
9/20/11)
Sec. 2-88 Quorum; vote required for action
When all seven seats have been appointed, four commissioners shall constitute a quorum of the Frisco Housing
Authority for the purpose of conducting its business, exercising its powers and for all other purposes. Until all
seven seats have been appointed, three commissioners shall constitute a quorum for the purpose provided herein.
Unless the Frisco Housing Authority's bylaws require a larger number, when a quorum is present, the Frisco
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/684
Housing Authority may take action on a vote of a majority of the commissioners present. (Ordinance 11-09-46,
sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-89 Powers and duties
The Frisco Housing Authority shall exercise public and essential governmental functions and has the powers
necessary or convenient to accomplish the purposes and provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch.
392, as it exists or may be amended. The powers of the Frisco Housing Authority are vested in the
commissioners. The Frisco Housing Authority may, as it deems proper, delegate a power or duty to an agent or
employee. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-90 Removal of a commissioner
At any time, the mayor may remove any commissioner of the Frisco Housing Authority for inefficiency, neglect
of duty or misconduct in office. Before a commissioner may be removed, the commissioner must be given a
copy of the charges before the tenth day before the date of a hearing on the charges; and an opportunity to be
heard in person or by counsel at the hearing. If a commissioner of the Frisco Housing Authority is removed, as
provided herein, a record of the proceedings with the charges and findings shall be filed in the office of the city
secretary. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Secs. 2-91–2-95 Reserved
DIVISION 3. SOCIAL SERVICES AND HOUSING BOARD; HOUSING TRUST FUND PROGRAM
Sec. 2-96 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Applicant. The recipient of funding under a program created and managed by the board and approved by the city
council.
Board. The Frisco Social Services and Housing Board.
Board member. The members of the social services and housing board, excluding the city manager, or his
designee, who shall serve as an ex officio member of the board.
City. The City of Frisco, Texas.
Grant funds. The nonfederal funds provided to the board by the city under the program.
Program. The Frisco Housing Trust Fund Program described in this division.
Program policies. The program policies that govern the qualification for and selection and distribution of funds,
as developed by the board and approved by the city council.
Workforce household. A household as defined by the program policies.
(Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11; Ordinance 13-08-40, sec. 2, adopted 8/6/13)
Sec. 2-97 Establishment of Frisco Housing Trust Fund Program
The program is hereby created in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code sec. 380.001. (Ordinance
11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-98 Purpose of the program
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/684
The program is designed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code sec. 380.001, to, among other
things, promote local economic development, stimulate business and commercial activity in the city, and create
housing opportunities for persons working in the city that are not currently addressed by federal funding or the
housing market. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-99 Program goal
The program will provide, among other things, resources to the board to develop a housing trust fund which the
board shall create and manage in accordance with this division and shall use the proceeds of any revenues
generated from the trust fund to assist applicants by preserving and/or creating reasonably priced housing
opportunities in the city. The program will improve, among other things, the quantity and quality of housing
opportunities for families through housing and economic development programs designed and implemented by
the board and approved by the city council. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-100 Compliance with legal requirements
All applicable rehabilitation and new construction activities undertaken with program funds shall be in
compliance with, and maintain appropriate documentation for, all federal, state and local laws, regulations and
authorities, and any amendments thereto. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-101 Administration of grant funds
(a) The funds granted by the city under this division shall be derived from any source lawfully available to the
city under its Charter or other law, other than from the proceeds of bonds or other obligations of the city payable
from ad valorem taxes. The city manager, or his designee, is responsible for the administration of the transfer of
grant funds available under the program to the board. The city manager, or his designee, shall make available the
funds appropriated as set forth below and other funds to be specified in the future, for creation of a housing trust
fund in accordance with the program. Initially, the following funds will be made available to the program and
the board and may only be used as provided herein:
(1) An amount up to $500,000.00 for the purpose of providing funds as authorized in program
policies.
(2) An amount up to $100,000.00 for the purpose of providing down payment and closing cost
assistance to workforce households, of which one or more members is an employee of the city.
(b) The board shall make recommendations regarding the above-mentioned use of the funds to the city
manager, or his designee, who shall be responsible for, among other things, granting or denying any loan and/or
award made under the program.
(Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-102 Establishment of social services and housing board
There is hereby created and established within the city the board for the purpose of, among other things,
administering and managing the housing trust fund and program. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted
9/20/11; Ordinance 13-08-40, sec. 2, adopted 8/6/13)
Sec. 2-103 Number of board members; appointment; terms
The members of the board shall consist of seven members, to be appointed by the city council. Members shall be
designated as places number one through seven. The term of office shall be for two years. Places one, three, five,
and seven shall be appointed to two-year terms ending on September 30th in odd numbered years. Places two,
four, and six shall be appointed to two-year terms ending on September 30th in even numbered years. No board
member shall serve for more than three consecutive terms or six consecutive years (whichever is less); provided,
however, should a board member's replacement not be qualified upon the expiration of any term of a board
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/684
member, then that board member shall holdover on the board until a qualified replacement board member has
been appointed. In addition to the seven board members, the city manager, or his/her designee, shall serve as an
ex officio member of the board, but shall have no right to vote on any matter before the board. (Ordinance 11-
09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-104 Board member's qualifications
Each board member shall be a qualified voter of the city and shall not be employees of the city. Each board
member shall have any other qualification as the city council deems necessary and appropriate. (Ordinance 11-
09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-105 Meetings
The board shall have its regular meeting on the second Wednesday of each month. Special meetings may be
called by the chairman or by written request sent to the chairman or vice-chairman by three members of the
board. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-106 Quorum; voting
Three board members shall constitute a quorum of the board for the purpose of conducting its business,
exercising its powers and for all other purposes. No action of the board shall be valid or binding unless adopted
by the affirmative vote of a majority of those board members present and voting. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5,
ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-107 Officers
The board shall have a chairman, vice-chairman and secretary whose terms shall be one year. The chairman,
vice-chairman and secretary shall be elected by the board members. The chairperson shall preside over meetings
and shall be entitled to vote upon each issue. The vice-chairman shall assist the chairman in directing the affairs
of the board. In the absence of the chairman, the vice-chairman shall assume all duties of the chairman. The
secretary shall keep the minutes of all meetings, and in the secretary's absence, the chairman shall designate
another member to act as secretary. The secretary shall submit a written report of all proceedings of the board to
the city council no more than three weeks following each meeting. The secretary may accept the assistance of
city personnel in taking and transcribing minutes, when available, but shall sign same officially before
presenting to the board for approval. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-108 Powers and duties
(a) The board shall act principally in an advisory capacity to the city staff and the city council in any matter
pertaining to a program created and managed by the board.
(b) The board may solicit, on behalf of the city, gifts, revenues, bequests or endowments of money and/or
property as donations and/or grants from persons, firms or corporations, subject to the guidance, approval and
acceptance by the city council.
(c) The board, through its chairperson, shall make both an oral and written report annually to the city council
concerning its activities during the past year and its proposals for the coming year.
(d) The board's authority shall not extend to the direction, supervision, employment or termination of the city
employees. No supervisory power of the board is created.
(e) The board will develop, for city council approval, a set of bylaws governing rules of procedure for their
meetings and operation.
(f) The board shall not have the power to obligate the city for funds and/or expenditures or incur any debt on
behalf of the city.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/684
(g) All powers and duties prescribed and delegated herein are delegated to the board, as a unit, and all action
hereunder shall be of the board acting as a whole. No action of an individual board member is authorized, except
through the approval of the board or city council.
(h) The board shall advise and make recommendations to the city council pertaining to the execution of the
program.
(i) The board shall advise and make recommendations to the city council pertaining to, among other things,
program policies to facilitate the successful implementation of the program. The city council will approve the
program policies and any amendments thereto, prior to implementation.
(j) The board shall advise and make recommendations to the city manager, or his designee, pertaining to,
among other things, execution of the program policies.
(k) The board shall have any other power and/or duty as prescribed and authorized by the city council.
(Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Secs. 2-109–2-115 Reserved
DIVISION 4. CONVENTION AND VISITORS BUREAU BOARD
Sec. 2-116 Definitions
For the purposes of this division, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
meaning given herein:
Board when used herein shall mean the city convention and visitors bureau board.
City manager when used herein shall mean the City Manager of the City of Frisco, Texas, or his/her designee.
Director when used herein shall mean the members of the convention and visitors bureau board of directors,
excluding ex-officio members of the board.
Executive director when used herein shall mean the executive director of the city convention and visitors bureau,
or the person designated by the city manager to serve in such capacity.
Frisco when used herein shall mean the City of Frisco, Texas.
Local hotel occupancy tax when used herein shall mean the local hotel occupancy tax authorized by V.T.C.A.,
Tax Code ch. 351, as it currently exists or may be amended and levied by the city by Ordinance Nos. 94-08-13
and 00-08-04, respectively, as they currently exist or may be amended.
(Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-117 Establishment
There is hereby created and established a Convention and Visitors Bureau Board of the City of Frisco, which
shall serve in an advisory capacity to the city council and city staff in the administration and operation of the city
convention and visitor bureau. It shall function according to the laws of the state, the City Charter, and the
provisions of this division. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/2011)
Sec. 2-118 Purpose and objectives
(a) Purpose. The purpose of the city convention and visitors bureau board is to enhance the economic vitality
of the area by advising the city council and city staff on the sales and marketing of Frisco, Texas to the
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/684
convention, meeting and leisure travel markets using funding generated from the local hotel occupancy tax fund.
(b) Objectives. The objectives of the board shall be:
(1) To foster cooperative efforts with tourism-related organizations and businesses;
(2) To enhance special events and local features in Frisco, Texas;
(3) To further the promotion of tourism and publicity for the area;
(4) To raise the public visibility/awareness of local features and activities throughout the state,
regionally, nationally, and internationally;
(5) To generate maximum hotel/motel occupancy for the city by attracting and securing overnight
and lodging visitors; and
(6) To enhance the economic impact of visitors to the city.
(Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-119 Board of directors
The board shall consist of nine active directors (the “directors”) and five ex-officio members (as described in
section 2-121), with the following composition:
(1) Lodging sector representatives. Two directors shall be representatives of the lodging sector.
The lodging sector representatives shall be designated as places number one and two. The lodging
sector representatives must be employees of a lodging establishment located in the city but are not
required to be residents of the city.
(2) At-large representatives. Two directors shall be representatives of the citizens at-large. The atlarge
representatives shall be designated as places number three and four. The at-large representatives
must be residents of the city.
(3) General retail sector representative. One director shall be a representative of the general retail
sector. The general retail representative shall be designated as place number five. The general retail
sector representative must be an employee of a general retail establishment located in the city but is
not required to be residents of the city.
(4) Restaurant/hospitality sector representative. One director shall be a representative of the
restaurant/hospitality sector. The restaurant/hospitality representative shall be designated as place
number six. The restaurant/hospitality representative must be an employee of a restaurant/hospitality
establishment located in the city but is not required to be a resident of the city.
(5) Downtown CBD/Frisco Square retail sector representative. One director shall be a
representative of the Downtown CBD/Frisco Square retail sector. The Downtown CBD/Frisco Square
retail representative shall be designated as place number seven. The Downtown CBD/Frisco Square
retail sector representative must be an employee of a Downtown CBD/Frisco Square retail
establishment located in the city but is not required to be a resident of the city.
(6) Professional sports teams representative. One director shall be a representative of a
professional sports team having its main office within the city. The professional sports teams
representative shall be designated as place number eight. The professional sports teams representative
is not required to be a resident of the city.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/684
(7) Chamber of commerce representative. One director shall be a representative of the city
chamber of commerce. The chamber of commerce representative shall be designated as place number
nine. The chamber of commerce representative is not required to be a resident of the city.
(Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11; Ordinance 15-12-91, sec. 3, adopted 12/1/15; Ordinance
16-07-56 adopted 7/1/16)
Sec. 2-120 Nominations, appointments and terms
(a) The directors may be nominated in the following manner:
(1) Lodging sector representatives. Any entity currently collecting and remitting to the city the
local hotel occupancy tax may nominate up to two qualified persons to serve on the board. Each
person nominated in this manner shall submit an application through the city's standard board
application procedure;
(2) At-large representatives. Any qualified person may submit an application for the at-large
representative seats through the city's standard board application procedure;
(3) General retail sector representative. Any business within the city offering retail goods or
services may nominate up to two qualified persons to serve on the board. Each person nominated in
this manner shall submit an application through the city's standard board application procedure;
(4) Downtown CBD/Frisco Square retail sector representative. Any business within the City Old
Town District or Frisco Square Municipal Management District offering retail goods or services may
nominate up to two qualified persons to serve on the board. Each person nominated in this manner
shall submit an application through the city's standard board application procedure;
(5) Restaurant/hospitality sector representative. Any restaurant or hospitality business within the
city may nominate up to two qualified persons to serve on the board. Each person nominated in this
manner shall submit an application through the city's standard board application procedure;
(6) Professional sports teams representative. Any professional sports team having its main office
within the city may nominate up to two qualified persons to serve on the board. Each person
nominated in this manner shall submit an application through the city's standard board application
procedure; and
(7) Chamber of commerce representative. The city chamber of commerce may nominate up to two
qualified persons to serve on the board. Each person nominated in this manner shall submit an
application through the city's standard board application procedure.
(b) All directors shall be appointed by and serve at the discretion of the city council. Each director shall be
appointed to represent one particular subsection of section 2-119, and shall be directly and verifiably connected
to such represented group. No director shall serve for more than three (3) consecutive two (2) year terms or six
(6) consecutive years, whichever is less, unless extended by a super majority vote of the city council. Except for
directors whose terms are extended by a super majority vote of the city council, a director may be reappointed to
serve on the board after being off the board for at least one (1) full year. A director may then be eligible to serve
another three (3) consecutive terms or six consecutive years, whichever is less, unless extended by a super
majority vote of the city council.
(Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11; Ordinance 14-08-41, sec. 3, adopted 8/5/14)
Sec. 2-121 Ex-officio members
(a) The board shall have five ex-officio members of the board that may attend all meetings of the board of
directors or committees, including executive, private, or public. The ex-officio members of the board shall not
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/684
have the power to vote in meetings; however, each shall have the right to take part in any discussion. The exofficio
members of the board shall be:
(1) The executive director;
(2) The city manager;
(3) The president of the city chamber of commerce or his/her designee;
(4) At-large representative No. 1 (two-year term); and
(5) At-large representative No. 2 (two-year term).
(b) In addition to the rules/requirements for ex-officio members set forth in this division, the ex-officio
members serving in the at-large positions shall be appointed by and serve at the discretion of the city council.
The ex-officio members serving in the at-large positions are not required to be residents of Frisco.
(Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-122 Qualifications
Each director shall be qualified by experience and/or training to consider and vote on matters within the
jurisdiction of the board and shall not be employees of the city. Each director shall be a qualified and registered
voter of the city in which the director resides and shall have any other qualifications as the city council deems
necessary and appropriate. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11; Ordinance 15-12-91, sec. 3,
adopted 12/1/15; Ordinance 16-07-56 adopted 7/1/16)
Sec. 2-123 Officers
(a) The officers of the board shall be a chair, a vice-chair, a secretary and such other officers as the board may
from time to time elect or appoint. Terms of office shall be one year with the right of an officer to be reelected.
All officers shall be elected by and from the board and shall be subject to removal from office at any time by a
vote of a majority of the entire board or by action of the majority of the city council. A vacancy in the office of
any officer shall be filled for the remaining term by a vote of a majority of the board.
(b) The chair shall be the presiding officer of the board with the following authority:
(1) Shall preside over all meetings of the board;
(2) Shall vote on all matters coming before the board;
(3) Shall have the authority, upon reasonable notice to the members of the board, to call a special
meeting of the board when in the chair's judgment such a meeting is required;
(4) Shall have the authority to appoint, with board approval, standing committees to aid and assist
in its business undertakings or other matters incidental to the operations and function of the board;
(5) Shall have the authority to appoint, with board approval, ad hoc committees which may address
issues of a temporary nature of concern or which have a temporary affect on the business of the
board; and
(6) Shall report monthly to the city council concerning the board's activities and proposals.
(c) The vice chair shall assist the chair in directing the affairs of the board. In the absence or the inability to
act of the chair, the vice-chair shall exercise the powers of the chair.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/684
(d) The secretary shall keep the minutes of all meetings of the board, and in the secretary's absence, the chair
shall designate another member to act as secretary. The secretary may accept the assistance of city personnel in
taking and transcribing minutes, when available, but shall sign name officially before presenting same to the
board for approval.
(Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-124 Vacancies
When vacancies occur on the board, the city council shall appoint, by majority vote, a replacement to serve the
remainder of the term. Any replacement shall be appointed to represent the group that the vacated seat
previously represented. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-125 Meetings
(a) All meetings and deliberations of the board shall be called, convened, held, and conducted, and notice shall
be given to the public, in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act, as it currently exists or may be
amended.
(b) Regular meetings of the board shall take place monthly at a regular time and place to be determined by the
board. The initial regular meeting shall be called by the city manager and held within 30 days of the appointment
of the board of directors.
(c) Special meetings of the board may be held at any time or place upon proper notice. Special meetings may
be called by the chairman, the city manager, the executive director, or upon the request of three members.
(Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-126 Quorum and voting
(a) A majority of the duly appointed directors shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The
affirmative vote of a majority of the board at a meeting in which a quorum is present shall be the act of the board
of directors. In the event that a quorum is not present at any meeting, the directors present may adjourn the
meeting without further notice until a quorum can be properly assembled.
(b) Each director is entitled to one vote. Only duly appointed directors shall be allowed to vote. No proxies or
substitutions will be allowed.
(Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-127 Powers and duties
(a) The board shall develop for city council review the rules and regulations of the board as may be prescribed
by the city council for the conduct of its business;
(b) The board shall make any other recommendations to the city council on the sales and marketing of the city
to the convention, meeting and leisure travel markets that it considers advisable;
(c) The board may, from time to time, recommend to the city council amendments or changes to this division;
(d) The board, through its chairman, shall report monthly to the city council concerning its activities and
proposals;
(e) The board's authority shall not extend to the direction, supervision, employment or termination of
employees of the city, including without limitation, the executive director and any future staff of the city
convention and visitors bureau;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/684
(f) The board and executive director will develop the proposed budget for the convention and visitors bureau
each shall make any recommendations to the city council it deems necessary. The city council shall approve the
annual budget of the convention and visitors bureau with any modifications the city council deems necessary;
(g) The board shall not have the power to obligate the city for any funds or expenditures or incur any debt on
behalf of the city;
(h) The board shall advise the executive director on the creation of a strategic marketing communications and
public relations plan targeting the convention, meeting, and leisure travel markets. The strategic action plan shall
include timelines, proposed methods of execution and associated costs of implementation. The plan shall include
both short-term and long-term goals to increase convention, meeting and leisure travel business for the city. The
plan shall be approved by the board annually and shall be implemented by the executive director;
(i) The board shall keep and maintain minutes of any and all proceedings held and submit a written report of
such proceedings to the city council not more than three weeks following the approval of such minutes by the
board; and
(j) All powers and duties prescribed and delegated herein are delegated to the board as a unit and all action
hereunder shall be of the board acting as a whole. No action of an individual member is authorized except
through the board or city council.
(Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Secs. 2-128–2-135 Reserved
DIVISION 5. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
Sec. 2-136 Bylaws of economic development corporation approved
The city council of the city hereby approves the bylaws of the Frisco Economic Development Corporation, a
copy of which is attached as Exhibit A to the ordinance from which this section is derived and incorporated
herein for all purposes. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Editor's note–It should be noted that attachment Exhibit A above is not set out at length herein, but is on file and available for
inspection in the office of the city secretary.
Secs. 2-137–2-139 Reserved
DIVISION 6. FRISCO ARTS BOARD AND PUBLIC ARTS PROGRAM
Sec. 2-140 Findings incorporated
The findings set forth above are incorporated into the body of this division as if fully set forth herein. (Ordinance
11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-141 Definitions
For the purposes of this division, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivation shall have the meaning
given herein:
Art or artwork when used herein shall mean works in any permanent medium or combination of media produced
by a professional practitioner in the arts, including architecture and landscape architecture, generally recognized
as possessing serious intent and substantial ability. For the purposes of this division, the terms art and artwork do
not include performing or literary arts such as dance, music, drama, or poetry unless expressed in a manner
defined above.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/684
Board when used herein shall mean the Frisco Public Art Board of the City of Frisco, Texas.
Board member when used herein shall mean the members of the Frisco Public Art Board, excluding the city
manager who shall serve as an ex-officio member of the board.
Capital improvement project or CIP when used herein shall mean projects that are funded by the City of Frisco.
Capital project fund when used herein shall mean funds used for the acquisition of fixed assets or construction
of major capital projects not being financed by proprietary or nonexpendable trust funds.
City manager when used herein shall mean the City Manager of the City of Frisco, Texas, or his/her designee.
Frisco when used herein shall mean the City of Frisco, Texas.
Frisco public art collection when used herein shall mean all works of art owned by the City of Frisco, Texas.
Public art workplan when used herein shall mean the annual workplan developed by staff in conjunction with
the public art board, detailing the public art projects and funding levels recommended for the upcoming year.
The public art workplan shall be submitted to city council for approval as part of the annual budget.
Public art master plan or plan when used herein shall mean the Public Art Master Plan of the City of Frisco,
Texas, as it exists or may be amended. The public arts master plan shall provide a strategy and vision for the
systematic selection of pieces of art and locations of art to be included in public spaces.
Public art program when used herein shall mean the public art program of the City of Frisco, Texas continued
by this division.
Public art annual plan when used herein shall mean the annual plan developed by staff, detailing the public art
projects and funding levels recommended for the upcoming year. The public art annual plan shall be submitted
to city council for approval as part of the annual budget.
(Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11; Ordinance 18-08-43 adopted 8/21/18)
Sec. 2-142 Continuation of public art program
The public arts program is hereby continued to, among other things, promote and encourage public and private
art programs, to further the development and awareness of, and interest in, the visual arts, to create an enhanced
visual environment for Frisco residents, to commemorate Frisco's rich cultural and ethnic diversity, to integrate
the design work of artists into the development of Frisco's capital infrastructure improvements and to promote
tourism and economic vitality in Frisco through the artistic design of public spaces. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5,
ex. A, adopted 9/20/11; Ordinance 18-08-43 adopted 8/21/18)
Sec. 2-143 Funding for the public art program
(a) Funding for the public art program shall be accomplished by annually designating up to two (2%) percent
but not less than one (1%) percent of CIP funding for the acquisition of public art, which may be derived from
Frisco's Capital Project Fund, project partners and/or grants as provided herein. The allocation shall be
calculated based on the total construction costs, excluding all costs for demolition and real property acquisition
for any given CIP. In addition, the appropriation for the public art program will be calculated only on the original
appropriation for design and construction services, excluding any subsequent amounts appropriated for
amendments and change orders. The allocation required by this subsection shall not be made for capital
improvement projects located outside Frisco city limits. All capital improvement projects qualify except the
following: regular road maintenance, underground infrastructure and underground utility projects with no aboveground
components other than roads. Capital improvement projects with underground infrastructure including
utility projects should be included only when there are visual elements of the project above ground. The total
budget of the capital improvement project shall include all underground components.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/684
(b) Acquisition funds provided by subsection (a) of this section shall be used for artist fees and costs related to
the production of artwork.
(1) Permissible expenditures include:
a. The cost of the artwork and its installation;
b. Waterworks, electrical and mechanical devices and equipment which are an integral part of
the artwork; and
c. Bases or foundations necessary for the proper presentation of the artwork.
(2) Inappropriate expenditures include:
a. Reproductions by mechanical or other means of original artwork (however, limited
editions controlled by the artist, or original prints, cast sculpture or photographs may be
included);
b. Decorative ornamental or functional elements which are designed by the architect or
consultants engaged by the architect;
c. Vegetative materials, pool(s), paths, benches, receptacle, fixtures, planters, etc., except
when designed by artists;
d. Art objects which are mass-produced or of standard design, such as playground sculpture
or directional fountains or other functional elements, except when designed by artists;
e. Walls, pools or other architectural elements on or in which the artwork is placed or affixed;
f. Preparation of the site necessary to receive the artwork; electrical, water or mechanical
service for activation of the artwork;
g. Exhibitions and educational programs relative to the artwork before or after installation,
including lighting, registration, dedication, unveiling, insurance, security and publicity or
publications;
h. Consultant or designer costs related to public art projects unless deemed necessary by the
artist; and
i Professional graphics, mass-produced work or work not produced by a Board-approved
artist.
Due to funding restrictions associated with general obligation bonds and certificates of
obligation, a separate maintenance and operations account will be established from the general
fund.
(c) Appropriations for art shall be made through the approval of the public art annual plan as submitted in the
annual budget. This annual plan will show the funding from that year's CIP and identify appropriate projects to
be pursued for the upcoming year, along with recommended funding levels by project of not more than two (2%)
percent and not less than one (1%) percent. Any funds not expended at the conclusion of the fiscal year will
rollover into the following fiscal year.
(d) For all grants sought by Frisco for CIPs in the amount of $1,000,000.00 or more, Frisco departments shall
include, when allowable by the funding entity, a request that two (2%) percent of the grant amount be authorized
for art in keeping with the established public art master plan.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/684
Likewise, when Frisco is not a CIP's sole funding entity, the art allocation shall apply only to Frisco's portion of
the project cost, though all project partners are encouraged to participate.
(Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11; Ordinance 18-08-43 adopted 8/21/18)
Sec. 2-144 Continuation of Frisco Public Art Board
The Frisco Public Art Board is hereby continued for the purpose of, among other things, promoting art, selecting
works of art and artists for commissioned pieces of art and implementing the public art master plan. The public
art board will, among other things, advise staff on the public art program and act in an advisory capacity to the
city council. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11; Ordinance 18-08-43 adopted 8/21/18)
Sec. 2-145 Number of members/appointment/terms
The members of the board shall consist of seven (7) members, to be appointed by the city council. Members
shall be designated as place numbers one (1) through seven (7). The term of office shall be for two (2) years.
Places one (1), three (3), five (5) and seven (7) shall be appointed to two (2) year terms ending on September
30th in odd-numbered years. Places two (2), four (4) and six (6) shall be appointed to two (2) year terms ending
on September 30th in even-numbered years. No board member shall serve for more than three (3) consecutive
terms or six (6) consecutive years (whichever is less); provided, however, should a board member's replacement
not be qualified upon the expiration of any term of a board member, then that board member shall holdover on
the board until a qualified replacement board member has been appointed. In addition to the seven (7) board
members, the city manager, or his/her designee, shall serve as an ex officio member of the board, but shall have
no right to vote on any matter before the board. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11; Ordinance
18-08-43 adopted 8/21/18)
Sec. 2-146 Board member qualifications
Each board member shall be a qualified voter of Frisco and shall not be employees of Frisco. Each board
member shall have any other qualification(s) as the city council deems necessary and appropriate. (Ordinance
11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11; Ordinance 18-08-43 adopted 8/21/18)
Sec. 2-147 Meetings
The board shall have its regular meeting on the first Monday of each month. Special meetings may be called by
the chair or by written request sent to the chair or vice-chair by three (3) members of the board. (Ordinance 11-
09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11; Ordinance 18-08-43 adopted 8/21/18)
Sec. 2-148 Quorum and voting
Four (4) board members shall constitute a quorum of the board for the purpose of conducting its business,
exercising its powers and for all other purposes. No action of the public art board shall be valid or binding unless
adopted by the affirmative vote of a majority of those board members present and voting. (Ordinance 11-09-46,
sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11; Ordinance 18-08-43 adopted 8/21/18)
Sec. 2-149 Officers
The board shall have a chair, vice-chair and secretary whose terms shall be one (1) year. The chair, vice-chair
and secretary shall be elected by the public art board members. The chairperson shall preside over meetings and
shall be entitled to vote upon each issue. The vice-chair shall assist the chair in directing the affairs of the public
art board. In the absence of the chair, the vice-chair shall assume all duties of the chair. The secretary shall keep
the minutes of all meetings, and in the secretary's absence, the chair shall designate another member to act as
secretary. The secretary shall submit a written report of all proceedings of the public art board to the city council
no more than three (3) weeks following each meeting. The secretary may accept the assistance of city personnel
in taking and transcribing minutes, when available, but shall sign establishing accuracy, before officially
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/684
presenting to the public art board for approval. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11; Ordinance
18-08-43 adopted 8/21/18)
Sec. 2-150 Powers and duties
(a) The public art board shall act principally in an advisory capacity to Frisco staff and the city council in any
matter pertaining to art.
(b) The public art board's authority shall not extend to the direction, supervision, employment or termination
of city employees. No supervisory power of the board is created.
(c) The public art board will develop for city council approval a set of bylaws governing rules of procedure
for their meetings and operation.
(d) The public art board shall not have the power to obligate Frisco for funds and/or expenditures or incur any
debt on behalf of the city.
(e) All powers and duties prescribed and delegated herein are delegated to the public art board, as a unit, and
all action hereunder shall be of the public art board acting as a whole. No action of an individual board member
is authorized, except through the approval of the public art board or city council.
(f) The public art board shall advise and make recommendations to city council pertaining to the execution of
the public arts master plan.
(g) The public art board shall advise and make recommendations to the city council pertaining to, among other
things, policies and procedures as identified in the public arts master plan; CIP public art locations; artist
selection juries and process; commission and placement of artworks; and maintenance and removal of artworks.
(h) The public art board shall have any other power and/or duty as prescribed and authorized by the city
council.
(Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 5, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11; Ordinance 18-08-43 adopted 8/21/18)
Secs. 2-151–2-159 Reserved
DIVISION 7. COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
Sec. 2-160 Bylaws of community development corporation approved
The city council of the city hereby approves the bylaws of the community development corporation, a copy of
which is attached hereto as Exhibit A to the ordinance from which this section is derived and incorporated herein
for all purposes. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 6, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Editor's note-–It should be noted that attachment Exhibit A above is not set out at length herein, but is on file and available for
inspection in the office of the city secretary.
DIVISION 8. PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD
Sec. 2-161 Established
There is hereby created and established within the city a parks and recreation advisory board. (Ordinance 11-09-
46, sec. 6, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-162 Number of board members/appointments/terms
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/684
The members of the board shall consist of seven members, to be appointed by the city council. Members shall be
designated as places number one through seven. The term of office shall be for two years. Places one, three, five,
and seven shall be appointed to two-year terms ending on September 30th in odd number years. Places two, four,
and six shall be appointed to two-year terms ending on September 30th in even number years. No board member
shall serve for more than three consecutive terms or six consecutive years (whichever is less); provided,
however, should a board member's replacement not be qualified upon the expiration of any term of a board
member, then that board member shall holdover on the board until a qualified replacement board member has
been appointed. In addition to the seven board members, the parks and recreation director shall serve as an ex
officio member of the board, but shall have no right to vote on any matter before the board. (Ordinance 11-09-
46, sec. 6, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-163 Qualifications
Each board member shall be a qualified voter of the city and shall not be employees of the city. Each board
member shall have any other qualifications as the city council deems necessary and appropriate. (Ordinance 11-
09-46, sec. 6, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-164 Meetings
The board shall establish the regular meeting place which shall be a public place with public notice as prescribed
by law. Special meetings may be called by the chairman or by written request sent to the chairman or vicechairman
by three members of the board. All meetings shall be open to the public in accordance with applicable
law. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 6, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-165 Quorum and voting
Four members, excluding the parks and recreation director, shall constitute a quorum of the board for the
purpose of conducting its business, exercising its powers and for all other purposes. All questions presented for
vote of the board shall be decided by a simple majority of those voting members present. Only those voting
members present can vote. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 6, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-166 Officers
The board shall have a chair, vice-chair and secretary whose terms shall be one year. The chair, vice-chair and
secretary shall be elected by board members. The chairman shall preside over meetings and shall be entitled to
vote upon each issue. The vice-chairman shall assist the chairman in directing the affairs of the board. In the
absence of the chairman, the vice-chairman shall assume all duties of the chairman. The secretary shall keep the
minutes of all meetings and in the secretary's absence the chairman shall designate another member to act as
secretary. The secretary shall submit a written report of all proceedings of the board to the city council no more
than three weeks following each meeting. The secretary may accept the assistance of the city personnel in taking
and transcribing minutes, when available, but shall sign same officially before presenting same to the board for
approval. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 6, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-167 Powers and duties
The board shall have the following powers and perform the following duties:
(1) Provide advice and counsel to the parks and recreation director and the city manager, as
requested, in matters relating to the parks and recreation department.
(2) Assist in informing citizens of policies and functions of the parks and recreation department.
(3) Assist in the promotion of park related bond programs and to encourage donations of land,
equipment and resources in support of parks and recreation activities.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/684
(4) The board shall act principally in an advisory capacity to the city staff and the city council in
all matters pertaining to parks and recreation, shall acquaint itself with and make a continuous study
and review of the complete parks and recreation services of the city; and shall advise with the staff
and city council from time to time as to the present and future maintenance, operation, planning,
acquisition, development, enlargement, and use policies of the city park and recreation services.
(5) The board shall study and encourage the development of parks and recreation areas and study
and encourage the development of wholesome recreation for all residents of the city.
(6) The board shall advise with the parks and recreation director on problems of development of
areas, facilities, programs, and improved recreation services.
(7) The board shall recommend the adoption of standards on areas, facilities, programs and
financial support.
(8) The members of the board shall study and review the master planning guide for parks and
recreation and become familiar with such plan and its relation to existing and proposed facilities and
shall become aware of any revision or updating thereof.
(9) The board shall advise and recommend to the parks and recreation director on the development
of long-range capital improvement programs and, when in its opinion, the need exists for additional
park and recreational facilities, grounds, or premises, it shall make appropriate recommendations to
the city council. It shall also recommend the acquisition of additional parks, park and recreational
equipment and supplies.
(10) The board shall develop for city council review the rules and regulations as may be prescribed
by the city council for the conduct of its business.
(11) The board shall develop for city council review rules and regulations and policies governing
the use of park and recreational facilities.
(12) The board shall make any other recommendations to the city council regarding park and
recreation matters that it considers advisable.
(13) The board may solicit for the city gifts, revenues, bequests, or endowments of money or
property as donations or grants from persons, firms or corporations, subject to the guidance,
approval, and acceptance by the city council.
(14) The board may, from time to time, recommend to the city council amendments or changes to
this article.
(15) The board, through its chairman, shall make both an oral and written report annually to the
city council concerning its activities during the past year and its proposals for the coming year.
(16) The board's authority shall not extend to the direction, supervision, employment, or
termination of employees of the parks and recreation department. No supervisory power of the board
is created.
(17) The board will review the proposed budget for the parks and recreation department and make
any recommendations to the city council it deems necessary. However, the board is not authorized to
add, delete or change in any way the budget as prepared by the parks and recreation staff.
(18) The board shall not have the power to obligate the city for any funds or expenditures or incur
any debt on behalf of the city.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/684
(19) All powers and duties prescribed and delegated herein are delegated to the board as a unit and
all action hereunder shall be of the board acting as a whole. No action of an individual member is
authorized except through the board or city council.
(Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 6, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
DIVISION 9. URBAN FORESTRY BOARD
Sec. 2-168 Establishment of the urban forestry board
The members of the board shall consist of seven members, to be appointed by the city council. Members shall be
designated as places number one through number seven. The term of office shall be for two years. Places one,
three, five, and seven shall be appointed to two-year terms ending on September 30th in odd numbered years.
Places two, four, and six shall be appointed to two-year terms ending on September 30th in even numbered
years. For the purposes of incorporating necessary amendments to the overall appointment process, the place six
representative shall serve an initial one-year term. This initial one-year shall not count towards the place six
representative's six-year limit. No board member shall serve for more than three consecutive terms or six
consecutive years (whichever is less); provided, however, should a board member's replacement not be qualified
upon the expiration of any term of a board member, then that board member shall holdover on the board until a
qualified replacement board member has been appointed. In addition to the seven board members, the city
manager, or his/her designee, shall serve as an ex officio member of the board, but shall have no right to vote on
any matter before the board. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 6, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-169 Officers
The board shall have a chair, vice-chair and secretary whose terms shall be one year. The chair, vice-chair and
secretary shall be elected by board members. The chairman shall preside over meetings and shall be entitled to
vote upon each issue. The vice-chairman shall assist the chairman in directing the affairs of the board. In the
absence of the chairman, the vice-chairman shall assume all duties of the chairman. The secretary shall keep the
minutes of all meetings and in the secretary's absence the chairman shall designate another member to act as
secretary. The secretary shall submit a written report of all proceedings of the board to the city council no more
than three weeks following each meeting. The secretary may accept the assistance of the city personnel in taking
and transcribing minutes, when available, but shall sign same officially before presenting same to the board for
approval. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 6, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-170 Powers and duties
The urban forestry board shall have the task of promoting, improving and protecting the urban forest, including
all trees, plants and shrubs located within street right-of-ways, parks and public places owned or controlled by
the city, and is granted the following powers and duties in furtherance thereof:
(1) The board shall act principally in an advisory capacity to the city staff and the city council in
matters pertaining to the promotion, improvement and protection of the urban forest.
(2) The board may solicit for the city gifts, revenues, and bequests, of endowments of money or
property as donations or grants from persons, firms or corporations, subject to the guidance,
approval, and acceptance by the city council.
(3) The board, through its chairman, shall make both an oral and written report annually to the city
council concerning its activities during the past year and its proposals for the coming year.
(4) The board's authority shall not extend to the direction, supervision, employment, or termination
of employees of the parks and recreation department. No supervisory power of the board is created.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/684
(5) The board may develop a set of bylaws governing rules of procedure for their meetings and
operation, which shall be approved by city council.
(6) The board shall not have the power to obligate the city for funds or expenditures or incur any
debt on behalf of the city.
(7) All powers and duties prescribed and delegated herein are delegated to the board, as a unit and
all action hereunder shall be following a vote in approval by a majority of a quorum of the board. No
action of an individual member is authorized except through the board or city council.
(Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 6, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-171 Meetings
The urban forestry board shall establish the regular meeting day, time and place, which shall be a public place.
Special meetings may be called by the chairman or by written request sent to the chairman or vice-chairman by
three members of the board. All meetings shall be open to the public in accordance with applicable law and
public notice of all meetings shall be provided as prescribed by law. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 6, ex. A, adopted
9/20/11)
Sec. 2-172 Quorum and voting
Three board members shall constitute a quorum of the board for the purpose of conducting its business,
exercising its powers and for all other purposes. All questions presented for vote of the urban forestry board
shall be decided by the affirmative vote of a majority of those voting members present. Only those voting
members present may vote. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 6, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Secs. 2-173–2-175 Reserved
DIVISION 10. DOWNTOWN ADVISORY BOARD
Sec. 2-176 Definitions
For the purposes of this division, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivation shall have the meaning
given herein:
Board when used herein shall mean the Downtown Advisory Board of the City of Frisco, Texas.
City manager when used herein shall mean the City Manager of the City of Frisco, Texas, or his/her designee.
Downtown when used herein shall mean historic downtown Frisco bordered by the BNSF Railroad to the west;
North/South County Road to the east; Walnut Street to the north; and Hickory Street to the south.
Frisco when used herein shall mean the City of Frisco, Texas.
Member when used herein shall mean the members of the downtown advisory board of members, excluding exofficio
members of the board.
Staff liaison when used herein shall mean the staff liaison of the Frisco Downtown Advisory Board, or the
person designated by the city manager to serve in such capacity.
(Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 6, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-177 Establishment
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/684
There is hereby created and established a Downtown Advisory Board of the City of Frisco, which shall serve in
an advisory capacity to the city council and Frisco Staff in the implementation, administration and operation of
the plan. It shall function according to the laws of the State of Texas, the Charter of the City of Frisco, Texas,
and the provisions of this Code. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 6, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-178 Purpose and objective
(a) The purpose of the Frisco Downtown Advisory Board is to enhance the economic vitality of the area and
to assist with determining the best use of city-owned buildings in downtown Frisco (“buildings”) by advising the
city council and Frisco staff on the plan and use of the buildings.
(b) The objectives of the board shall be:
(1) To foster cooperative efforts between downtown businesses, citizens and Frisco;
(2) To enhance and preserve the historical and architectural aspects and features of downtown and
the buildings;
(3) To further the promotion of economic growth and publicity for the area;
(4) To raise the public visibility/awareness of local features and activities throughout the State of
Texas, regionally, nationally, and internationally;
(5) To provide advice to Frisco regarding implementation, administration and operation of the
plan; and
(6) To ensure the financial feasibility of the city's investment in the city-owned buildings within
the downtown, working to assure a long-term sustained loss is not incurred.
(Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 6, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-179 Members
The board shall consist of seven active members, with the following composition:
(1) Downtown property or downtown business owner representatives: Three members shall be
representatives who own property in downtown Frisco and/or own a business located in downtown
Frisco. Downtown property or downtown business owner representatives shall be designated as
places number one through three.
(2) At-large representatives: Four members shall be representatives of the citizens of Frisco atlarge
who ideally have special skills or professional talents which could enhance the downtown
district such as, but not limited to, architecture, banking, economic development and/or marketing.
At-Large representatives shall be designated as places number four through seven.
(Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 6, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-180 Appointments and terms
(a) Downtown property or downtown business owner representatives: Any owner of property located in
downtown or the owner of a business located in downtown who is otherwise qualified to serve on a Frisco Board
may apply for a position on the board under this category of members through Frisco's standard board
application procedure.
(b) At-large representatives: Any qualified voter of Frisco may submit an application for the at-large
representative seats through Frisco's standard board application procedure.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/684
(c) The term of office shall be for two years. Places one, three, five, and seven shall be appointed to two-year
terms ending on September 30th in odd numbered years. Places two, four, and six shall be appointed to two-year
terms ending on September 30th in even numbered years. No member shall serve for more than three
consecutive terms or six consecutive years, whichever is less. The city council shall determine the time for the
annual appointment of members.
(d) All members shall be appointed by and serve at the discretion of the city council. Each member shall be
appointed to represent one particular subsection section 2-179 [sic], and shall be directly and verifiably
connected to such represented group.
(Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 6, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-181 Qualifications
Each member shall be qualified by experience and/or training to consider and vote on matters within the
jurisdiction of the board and shall not be employees of the City of Frisco. Each member shall be a qualified voter
of Frisco and shall have any other qualifications(s) as the city council deems necessary and appropriate and as
required by the City Charter. If a member of the board no longer possesses the qualifications for the seat to
which they are appointed they shall resign or be deemed to have resigned. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 6, ex. A,
adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-182 Officers
The officers of the board shall be a chair, a vice-chair, a secretary and such other officers as the board may from
time to time elect or appoint. Terms of office shall be one year with the right of an officer to be reelected. All
officers shall be elected by and from the board and shall be subject to removal from office at any time by a vote
of a majority of the entire board or by action of the majority of the city council. A vacancy in the office of any
officer shall be filled for the remaining term by a vote of a majority of the board. The chair shall be the presiding
officer of the board with the following authority: Shall preside over all meetings of the board; shall vote on all
matters coming before the board; shall have the authority, upon reasonable notice to the members of the board,
to call a special meeting of the board when in the chair's judgment such a meeting is required; and shall report
quarterly to the city council concerning the board's activities and proposals. The vice-chair shall assist the chair
in directing the affairs of the board. In the absence or the inability to act of the chair, the vice-chair shall exercise
the powers of the chair. The secretary shall keep the minutes of all meetings of the board, and in the secretary's
absence, the chair shall designate another member to act as secretary. The secretary may accept the assistance of
city personnel in taking and transcribing minutes, when available, but shall sign name officially before
presenting same to the board for approval. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 6, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-183 Vacancies
When vacancies occur on the board, the city council shall appoint, by majority vote, a replacement to serve the
remainder of the term. Any replacement shall be appointed to represent the group that the vacated seat
previously represented. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 6, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-184 Meetings
(a) All meetings and deliberations of the board shall be called, convened, held, and conducted, and notice shall
be given to the public, in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act, as it currently exists or may be
amended.
(b) Regular meetings of the board shall take place monthly at a regular time and place to be determined by the
board. The initial regular meeting shall be called by the city manager or his/her designee and held within 30 days
of the appointment of the board of members.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/684
(c) Special meetings of the board may be held at any time or place upon proper notice. Special meetings may
be called by the chairman, the city manager, the staff liaison, or upon the request of three members.
(Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 6, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-185 Quorum and voting
A majority of the duly appointed members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The
affirmative vote of a majority of the board at a meeting in which a quorum is present shall be the act of the board
of members. Each member is entitled to one vote. Only duly appointed members shall be allowed to vote. No
proxies or substitutions will be allowed. (Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 6, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Sec. 2-186 Powers and duties
(a) The board shall develop for city council review the rules and regulations of the board as may be prescribed
by the city council for the conduct of its business.
(b) The board shall make recommendations to the city council on the sales and leasing of city-owned
buildings in downtown Frisco that it considers advisable.
(c) The board shall make recommendations to the city council on implementing the plan and on making
amendments or changes to the plan.
(d) The board, through it's chairman, shall report quarterly to the city council concerning its activities and
proposals.
(e) The board's authority shall not extend to the direction, supervision, employment or termination of
employees of the City of Frisco, including without limitation, the staff liaison.
(f) The board may, from time to time, recommend to the city council amendments or changes to this division.
(g) The board shall not have the power to obligate Frisco for any funds or expenditures or incur any debt on
behalf of Frisco.
(h) The board shall advise the staff liaison on strategic marketing communications and public relations
targeting downtown.
(i) The board shall keep and maintain minutes of any and all proceedings held and submit a written report of
such proceedings to the city council not more than three weeks following the approval of such minutes by the
board.
(j) All powers and duties prescribed and delegated herein are delegated to the board as a unit and all action
hereunder shall be of the board acting as a whole. No action of an individual member is authorized except
through the board or city council.
(Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 6, ex. A, adopted 9/20/11)
Secs. 2-187–2-210 Reserved
ARTICLE IV. RECORDS MANAGEMENT
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY*
Sec. 2-211 Title and purpose
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/684
This division shall be known and may be cited as the “Records Management Ordinance of the City of Frisco,
Texas,” providing for the proper and efficient management of the municipal records of the city. It is the policy of
the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization,
maintenance, use, and disposition of all municipal records through a comprehensive system of integrated
procedures for their management from creation to ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the
Texas Local Government Records Act and standard records management practice. The process for managing
records in the city shall be called the records management program. (Ordinance 10-02-11, sec. 3, adopted
2/2/10)
Sec. 2-212 Definitions
City means the City of Frisco, Texas.
City auditor means the certified public accountant hired by the city to perform audits upon request by the city.
City personnel means other employees of the city designated, according to the records management program,
with additional duties pursuant to records management.
City records or record means all documents, papers, electronic mail, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or
video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media, or other information recording media, regardless
of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to them is open or restricted under the
laws of the state, created or received by the city, or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law, including an
ordinance, or in the transaction of public business. The term does not include:
(1) Extra identical copies of documents created only for convenience of reference of research by
officers or employees of the city;
(2) Notes, journals, diaries, and similar documents created by an officer or employee of the city for
the officer's or employee's personal convenience;
(3) Blank forms;
(4) Stocks of publications;
(5) Library and museum materials acquired solely for the purposes of reference or display;
(6) Copies of documents in any media furnished to members of the public to which they are
entitled under V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 552 or other state law; and
(7) Any records, correspondence, notes, memoranda or documents, other than a final written
agreement described by V.T.C.A., Government Code sec. 2009.054(c), associated with the city's
participation as a party, facilitation as an impartial third party, or facilitation as the administrator of a
dispute resolution system or organization.
Department head means the officer who by ordinance or administrative policy is in charge of a department of
the city that creates or receives records.
Essential or vital record means any record of the city necessary for the resumption or continuation of the city's
operations in an emergency or disaster, to the re-creation of its legal and financial status, or to the protection and
fulfillment of obligations to the citizens of the city.
Legal hold means a hold in the destruction of a city record involved in a pending request under the Texas Public
Information Act, pending litigation, the anticipation of litigation, or a pending audit, even if the destruction of
the city record is authorized by the records retention schedule.
Local Government Records Act means V.T.C.A., Local Government Code title 6, subtitle C, as amended.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/684
Permanent record means any record of the city for which the retention period on a records retention schedule is
given as permanent.
Records liaison means person(s) designated by department head to apply records management to departmental
records.
Records management means the application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance,
retention, preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the
efficiency of recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records retention schedules, the management
of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical
and space-effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and
correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems.
Records management officer is the person designated to oversee the operations of “records management.”
Records management program means the program (“program”) developed as required by V.T.C.A., Local
Government Code sec. 203.026 to provide methods and procedures to enable the city council and city secretary
to fulfill duties required by law, identify records series for each department, storage location and associated
retention period and destruction, as amended and maintained by the city secretary.
Records retention schedule means a document issued by the state library and archives commission under
authority of V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 441, subch. J, establishing mandatory retention periods for city
records.
Retention period means the minimum time that must pass after the record lifecycle completion including
creation, recording, receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is
eligible for destruction.
(Ordinance 10-02-11, sec. 4, adopted 2/2/10)
Sec. 2-213 Municipal records declared public property
All city records are declared to be the property of the city. No city official or employee has, by virtue of his or
her position, any personal or property right to such records even though he or she may have developed or
compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. A city
record exempted from public disclosure under state or federal law is not made subject to disclosure by its
designation as city property under this section. (Ordinance 10-02-11, sec. 5, adopted 2/2/10)
Sec. 2-214 Designation of records management officer
The city secretary shall be designated as the records management officer for the city. In the event of the
resignation, retirement dismissal or removal of the city secretary, the position of city secretary shall be refilled as
provided by the City Charter, and that person shall be the records management officer for the city. As provided
by state law, each successive holder of the office of “records management officer” shall file his or her name with
the director and librarian of the state library and archives commission within 30 days of the initial designation or
of taking up the office, as applicable. As the designated records management officer, the city secretary shall
oversee the operations of the records management office and give direction and executive support to ensure the
integrity and disposition of city records. (Ordinance 10-02-11, sec. 6, adopted 2/2/10)
Sec. 2-215 Records management program to be developed; approval of program; authority of program
(a) The records management office under the direction of the city secretary shall develop a records
management program for the city. The program must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the
costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the city,
properly preserve those records of the city that are of historical value and comply with applicable state law. The
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/684
program must be designed to enable the records management officer to effectively carry out the duties
prescribed by state law and this division.
(b) Once created, the program shall be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions,
bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city and records shall be created, maintained, stored,
microfilmed, or disposed of in accordance with the program, as amended.
(c) The program shall:
(1) Adequately protect the essential records of the city;
(2) Reduce the cost and improve the efficiency of record-keeping;
(3) Enable the records management officer to perform the duties prescribed by this division;
(4) Identify the duties and responsibilities of the records management officer;
(5) Identify the duties and responsibilities of the records management office;
(6) Designate city personnel to assist the records management office in carrying out the purposes
of this division and the program;
(7) Establish criteria for city-wide and departmental records management compliance, including
requirements for conducting departmental records inventories, preparing retention and disposition
schedules, and certifying retention and disposition schedules and electronic record-keeping systems;
(8) Create polices to address records management requirements and needs as technology evolves;
and
(9) Preserve city records that are of historical value.
(d) State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or record-keeping requirements of city employees do
not exempt the city employees or the records in the city employee's care from the application of this division and
the program adopted pursuant to it, and may not be used by the city employee as a basis for refusal to participate
in the program of the city.
(Ordinance 10-02-11, sec. 7, adopted 2/2/10)
Sec. 2-216 Records management office established
The city secretary's office shall be the records management office for the city. The program shall establish the
duties and responsibilities of the records management office. (Ordinance 10-02-11, sec. 8, adopted 2/2/10)
Sec. 2-217 Additional city personnel
The city secretary and records management office may designate additional city personnel to assist in the duties
and requirements established by the records management program, this division and state law. (Ordinance 10-
02-11, sec. 9, adopted 2/2/10)
Sec. 2-218 “Legal hold” of records
The “legal hold” of a record is a process to provide for the preservation of records involved in reasonably
anticipated, present and/or future litigation, public information requests, pending audits or any other legal
process in compliance with federal and state regulations, even if the destruction of the city record is authorized
by the records retention schedule. Any personnel aware of the possibility of litigation, threat of litigation, a
public information request or other legal action, must immediately notify the city secretary. The city secretary, or
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/684
designee, in coordination with the city attorney's office, will determine the necessity of the legal hold on city
records.
(1) The city secretary, in coordination with records management office, will initiate legal holds on
all associated records by notifying affected city personnel, employees or officials in writing,
including the subject and confirmation of the legal hold. The notice will inform affected personnel of
their obligation to identify and preserve all records and evidence that may be relevant to the legal
hold regardless of the form of the record.
(2) Upon receipt of “legal hold notification”, city employees or officials must:
a. Immediately suspend the release, deletion, overriding, or any other destruction of records
relevant to the legal hold, without written approval from the city secretary's office.
b. Acknowledge receipt, understanding and compliance with a legal hold without undue
delay by responding in writing to the city secretary.
c. Contact the records management office for assistance in securing and preserving the
records.
(3) The city secretary, in coordination with the records management office will determine and
communicate when a legal hold may be lifted and the record(s) no longer need(s) to be preserved.
(Ordinance 10-02-11, sec. 10, adopted 2/2/10)
Sec. 2-219 Adopted records retention schedules
The city council hereby adopts the state library and archives commission records retention schedules for local
governments. (Ordinance 10-02-11, sec. 11, adopted 2/2/10)
Sec. 2-220 Implementation of records retention schedules; destruction of records under schedule
(a) The records retention schedule that has been adopted by the city council shall be implemented and
followed by city personnel and other city staff according to the policies and procedures of the program.
(b) Periodic audits will be conducted by the records management office to ensure compliance with records
retention schedules issued by the state and that the schedule continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures
and needs of the city.
(c) Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records retention schedule, authorization for
destruction must be approved by the department head and the records management officer.
(d) The records management office will maintain a schedule of all records destroyed under the guidelines
established by this division.
(Ordinance 10-02-11, sec. 12, adopted 2/2/10)
Sec. 2-221 Destruction of unscheduled records
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records retention schedule may only be destroyed if its
destruction has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the
records management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian of the state
library and archives commission an approved destruction authorization request. (Ordinance 10-02-11, sec. 13,
adopted 2/2/10)
Sec. 2-222 Electronic storage of city records
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/684
The creation, maintenance, preservation, electronic document imaging, and storage of the electronic records of
the city must comply with the records management program, this division and state law. (Ordinance 10-02-11,
sec. 14, adopted 2/2/10)
Sec. 2-223 Right of recovery
The city may demand and receive from any person any city record in private possession that was created or
received by the city, the removal of which was not authorized by law. (Ordinance 10-02-11, sec. 15, adopted
2/2/10)
Sec. 2-224 Penalty provision
Any person, firm, entity or corporation who violates any provision of this division, as it exists or may be
amended, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction therefore, shall be fined in a sum not
exceeding $500.00. Each continuing day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. The penal provisions
imposed under this division shall not preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin the violation. The city retains all
legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state, and federal law. (Ordinance 10-02-11, sec. 16,
adopted 2/2/10)
Secs. 2-225–2-240 Reserved
DIVISION 2. FEES FOR REQUESTS UNDER THE TEXAS PUBLIC INFORMATION ACT
Sec. 2-241 General regulations
To the extent allowed by law, the city shall recover the full costs of responding to requests for disclosure of
public information made pursuant to the Texas Public Information Act except when the public information
officer or his/her designee determines that waiver or reduction of applicable fees is in the public interest because
furnishing the information primarily benefits the general public. The public information officer or his/her
designee shall impose charges in responding to requests under the Texas Public Information Act in accordance
with the then current guidelines and rates established by the office of the Texas Attorney General, which are set
forth at title 1, part 3, chapter 70, rule 70.1 et seq. of the Texas Administrative Code, as amended. Such
guidelines and rates shall be posted on the city's website, and a copy of such guidelines and rates shall be made
available for public inspection at the city secretary's office. (Ordinance 95-08-08 adopted 8/15/95; Ordinance 06-
11-119, sec. 14, adopted 11/7/06; Ordinance 16-09-78, sec. 5, adopted 9/20/16)
Secs. 2-242–2-260 Reserved
DIVISION 3. PROCEDURES FOR RESPONDING TO PUBLIC INFORMATION REQUESTS
Sec. 2-261 Statement of purpose
Employees of the city have an obligation to make records available for public examination unless the state
attorney general (the “AG”) determines that the record(s) fall(s) into one of the exceptions authorized in the
Texas Public Information Act (the “Act”). Once the city has received a written request for a record, the city has a
reasonable time to release the record. In the event a determination is made to seek an AG's opinion, the city has
ten business days following the date the city received the request to seek the opinion. All requests for AG
opinions, except for the city police department, shall be made through the office of the city secretary.
The purpose of this directive is to provide procedures for responding to requests for public information. The Act
contains critical deadlines for the city; therefore, time is of the essence in evaluating and responding to any
request.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/684
(Resolution 07-03-42R, sec. 1, ex. A, adopted 3/6/07)
Sec. 2-262 Scope
This policy applies to all of the city departments, excluding the police departments records management division
and the communications and media relations department. This policy may be revised from time to time based on
any changes and/or amendments in the Act and/or applicable law. (Resolution 07-03-42R, sec. 1, ex. A, adopted
3/6/07)
Sec. 2-263 Employees responsibilities
It is the responsibility of every employee of the city to:
(1) Respond to a verbal request for public information by asking the requestor to submit their
request in writing. If the individual requesting the information is at the public place and requests the
information, ask the requestor to fill out the standard form for the “release of public records request
for copies” exhibit “B”. This form is to be used by all departments within the city, excluding the
police department records division and the media and communications department. There shall be no
change to this form.
(2) All written requests for public information received by any department, excluding the police
department and media and communications department, must be submitted to the city secretary
within 24 hours of receipt.
(3) Each department shall be responsible for assisting the city secretary, and/or her designee, in
locating records responsive to the request.
(4) Each department shall submit an itemization of personnel time spent in locating and providing
the records to the city secretary.
(5) The office of the city secretary will retain the original request and a copy of the responsive
documents.
(6) Each department shall use the “request for public information” unless the request is submitted
via email or per letter on own individual's paper.
(7) Department head/managers are responsible for consistent enforcement of this policy.
(Resolution 07-03-42R, sec. 1, ex. A, adopted 3/6/07)
Editor's note–It should be noted that Exhibit B, “request for public information”, is not set out herein but is on file and available for
inspection in the office of the city secretary.
Secs. 2-264–2-280 Reserved
ARTICLE V. PERSONNEL POLICY
Sec. 2-281 Adoption of personnel policies
The personnel policies are hereby adopted by the city council to enhance the orderly management of the city and
can be found in the office of the city manager. The city manager is hereby authorized to implement the personnel
policies.
(Ordinance 08-08-72 adopted 8/5/08; 09-09-50 adopted 9/1/09; 10-01-02 adopted 1/19/10; Ordinance 10-02-07
adopted 2/2/10; Ordinance 11-12-56 adopted 12/6/11; Ordinance 13-08-41 adopted 8/6/13; Ordinance 14-03-10
adopted 3/4/14; Ordinance 14-09-51 adopted 9/16/14; Ordinance 15-01-01 adopted 1/6/15; Ordinance 15-04-21
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/684
adopted 4/21/15; Ordinance 16-02-08 adopted 2/2/16; Ordinance 16-03-23 adopted 3/15/16; Ordinance 16-09-71
adopted 9/20/16; Ordinance 16-08-57 adopted 8/2/16; Ordinance 16-10-80 adopted 10/3/16; Ordinance 17-01-05
adopted 1/17/17; Ordinance 17-03-12 adopted 3/13/17; Ordinance 17-04-28 adopted 4/18/17; Ordinance 17-09-
60 adopted 9/5/17; Ordinance 17-09-65 adopted 9/19/17; Ordinance 18-01-01 adopted 1/2/18; Ordinance 18-04-
17 adopted 4/3/18; Ordinance 19-03-15 adopted 3/19/19; Ordinance 19-07-52 adopted 7/2/19; Ordinance 19-11-
91 adopted 11/5/19)
Secs. 2-282–2-290 Reserved
ARTICLE VI. CODE OF ETHICS*
DIVISION 1. DECLARATION OF POLICY
Sec. 2-291 Statement of purpose
It is essential in a democratic system that the public have confidence in the integrity, independence, and
impartiality of those who act on their behalf in government. Such confidence depends not only on the conduct of
those who exercise Official power, but on the availability of aid or redress to all persons on equal terms and on
the accessibility and dissemination of information relating to the conduct of public affairs. The Frisco City
Council adopts this code of ethics in order to promote confidence in the government of Frisco, and thereby
enhance the city's ability to function effectively. The code of ethics establishes standards of conduct, disclosure
requirements, and enforcement mechanisms relating to city officials. The code of ethics also covers other
individuals whose actions inevitably affect public faith in city government, such as former city officials,
candidates for public office, and persons doing business with the city. By prohibiting conduct incompatible with
the city's best interests and minimizing the risk of any appearance of impropriety, this code of ethics will further
the legitimate interests of democracy. (Ordinance 09-04-25, pt. A, sec. 1, adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 2-292 Definitions
As used in this code of ethics, the following words and phrases have the meaning ascribed to them in this
section, unless the context requires otherwise or more specific definitions set forth elsewhere in this Code apply:
Affiliated. Business entities are “affiliated” if one is the parent or subsidiary of the other or if they are
subsidiaries of the same parent business entity.
Affinity. Relationship by “affinity” is defined in V.T.C.A., Texas Government Code secs. 573.024 and 573.025 of
the Texas Government Code or as amended. (See attachments “A” and “B”).
Editor's note–It should be noted that attachments A and B referenced above are not set out at length herein, but are on file and
available for inspection in the office of the city clerk.
Before the city. Representation or appearance “before the city” means before the city council or a board,
commission, or other city entity.
Board. A board, commission, or committee:
(1) Which is established by city ordinance, city charter, inter-local contract between the city and
another party, or state law; or
(2) Any part of whose membership is appointed by the city council, but does not include a board,
commission, or committee that is the governing body of a separate political subdivision of the state;
or
(3) The Frisco Community Development Corporation and the Frisco Economic Development
Corporation are considered boards for the purposes of this code of ethics.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/684
Business entity. “Business entity” means a sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership, firm,
corporation, limited liability company, holding company, joint-stock company, receivership, trust,
unincorporated association, or any other business entity recognized by law.
City. “City” or “Frisco” means the City of Frisco, Texas.
City council or City Council of Frisco. “City council” or “City Council of Frisco” means the elected governing
body of the City of Frisco, Texas.
Code of ethics. “Code of ethics,” “ethics code,” “this code,” or “the code” means article II of this chapter.
Confidential government information. “Confidential government information” is all information held by the city
that is not available to the public under the Public Information Act, (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 552,
or as amended, “the Act”); any information from a meeting closed to the public pursuant to the Texas Open
Meetings Act, (V.T.C.A.., Local Government Code ch. 551 or as amended) regardless of whether disclosure
violates the Act and/or the Texas Open Meetings Act; and any information deemed confidential by law.
Consanguinity. Relationship by “consanguinity” is defined in V.T.C.A., Texas Government Code secs. 573.022
and 573.023, or as amended. (See attachment “B”).
Editor's note–It should be noted that attachment B referenced above is not set out at length herein, but is on file and available for
inspection in the office of the city clerk.
Discretionary contract. “Discretionary contract” means any contract other than those which by law must be
awarded on a qualified bid basis.
Economic interest. “Economic interest” is a legal or equitable property interest in land, chattels, and intangibles,
and contractual rights having a value of more than $50,000.00. Service by a city official as an officer, director,
advisor, or otherwise active participant in an educational, religious, charitable, fraternal, or civic organization
does not create for that city official an “economic interest” in the property of the organization. “Economic
interest” does not include the contract and/or business relationship that the city manager, city secretary, city
attorney and/or his law firm, and/or the municipal court judges and magistrates and/or their respective law firms
have with the city.
Ownership of an interest in a mutual or common investment fund that holds securities or other assets is not an
economic interest in such securities or other assets, unless the person in question participates in the management
of the fund.
Gift. A voluntary transfer of property (including the payment of money) or the conferral of a benefit having
monetary value (such as the rendition of services or the forbearance of collection on a debt), unless
consideration of equal or greater value is received by the donor as quid pro quo.
Indirect ownership. A person “indirectly owns” an equity interest in a business entity where the interest is held
through a series of business entities, some of which own interests in other business entities.
Matter. “Matter” is defined as the events or circumstances of a particular situation.
Official. The term “official” or “city official” is defined as the following persons:
(1) The mayor.
(2) Members of the city council.
(3) Municipal court judges and magistrates.
(4) The city manager.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/684
(5) The city secretary.
(6) The city attorney.
(7) Members of the temporary or standing, current or future boards, commissions, governing
bodies, and boards of directors when those boards, commissions, governing bodies, and boards of
directors are appointed in their entirety or partially by the city council of the city.
Official action. “Official action” is defined as:
(1) Any affirmative act (including the making of a recommendation) within the scope of, or in
violation of, an official's duties; or
(2) Any failure to act, if the official is under a duty to act and knows that inaction is likely to affect
substantially an economic interest of the official or any person or entity listed in section 2-301(a)(2)
through (8).
Official information. “Official information” is information gathered pursuant to the power or authority of city.
Partner. “Partner” is defined as partners in general partnerships, limited partnerships, limited liability
partnerships, joint ventures, and any other partnership allowed by law.
Personally and substantially participated. The requirement of having “personally and substantially participated”
in a matter is met only if the individual in fact exercised discretion relating to the matter. The fact that the person
had responsibility for a matter does not by itself establish that the person “personally and substantially
participated” in the matter.
Representation. “Representation” is defined as all forms of communication and personal appearances in which a
person, not acting in performance of official duties, formally or informally, serves as an advocate for private
interests, regardless of whether the representation is compensated. Lobbying, even on an informal basis, is a
form of representation. Representation does not include appearance as a fact witness or uncompensated expert
witness in litigation or other official proceedings.
Solicitation. “Solicitation” of subsequent employment or business opportunities is defined as all forms of
proposals and negotiations relating thereto.
(Ordinance 09-04-25, pt. A, sec. 2, adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 2-293 Wording interpretation
The gender of the wording throughout this article shall always be interpreted to mean either sex. All singular
words shall include the plural, and all plural words shall include the singular. All references to the laws of the
State of Texas or the Home Rule Charter, Ordinances, or Resolutions of the City of Frisco Texas shall mean “as
presently enacted or hereafter amended”. (Ordinance 09-04-25, pt. A, sec. 3, adopted 4/21/09)
Secs. 2-294–2-300 Reserved
DIVISION 2. PRESENT CITY OFFICIALS
Sec. 2-301 Improper economic benefit
(a) General rule. A city official shall not take any official action that benefits the economic interests of:
(1) The official;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/684
(2) His parent, child, stepchild, spouse, or other family member within the second degree of
consanguinity or affinity;
(3) His outside client and/or customer with any transaction outstanding;
a. Client. A client is someone with whom the official has a contractual relationship; a
commitment to provide goods and/or professional services from the official to the client over a
period of time. The contract could be either short-term or long-term in nature. The person
receiving the services or goods would be considered a client of the official only during the
period covered in the contract.
b. Customer. A customer is someone who simply purchases a product/service from an
official's business. Customer relationships are transactional; they rarely require a contract to
complete the sale and the actual business transaction is completed within minutes. For example,
the sale of an automobile is an example where a contract is signed but the purchase is
transactional in nature, and so the purchaser would be considered a customer.
(4) The outside employer of the official;
(5) A business entity in which the official knows, or should know, that he or his parent, child,
stepchild, spouse, or other family member within the second degree of consanguinity or affinity holds
an economic interest;
(6) A business entity which the official knows, or should know, is an affiliated business or partner
of a business entity in which he or his parent, child, stepchild, spouse, or other family member within
the second degree of consanguinity or affinity holds an economic interest;
(7) A business entity or nonprofit entity for which the city official serves as an official or director
or in any other policy making position; or
(8) A person or business entity from whom the official, directly or indirectly:
a. Has received and not rejected an unsolicited offer of employment or business
opportunities; or
b. Has accepted and received and not rejected an unsolicited offer of employment.
(b) Recusal and disclosure. A city official whose conduct would otherwise violate subsection (a) must recuse
himself. From the time that the conflict is, or should have been recognized, he shall:
(1) Disclose the conflict and immediately refrain from further participation in the matter, including
discussions with any persons likely to consider the matter; and
(2) Remove himself from the dais or area in which the other city officials who are voting on the
measure are seated; and
(3) Promptly file with the city secretary the appropriate form for disclosing the nature and extent of
the prohibited conduct.
(Ordinance 09-04-25, pt. B, sec. 1, adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 2-302 Unfair advancement of private interests
(a) General rule. A city official may not use his official position to grant or secure, or attempt to grant or
secure, for any person (including himself) any form of special consideration, treatment, exemption, or advantage
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/684
beyond that which is lawfully available to other persons. This rule does not apply to actions taken by a city
official in the legislative process.
(b) Special rules. The following special rules apply in addition to the general rule:
(1) Acquisition of interest in impending matters. A city official shall not acquire an interest in, or
be affected by, any contract, transaction, zoning decision, or other matter (the “interest”), if the
official knows, or has reason to know, that the interest will be directly or indirectly affected by
impending official action by the city.
(2) Reciprocal favors. A city official may not enter into an agreement or understanding with any
other person that official action by the official will be rewarded or reciprocated by the other person,
directly or indirectly.
(3) Appointment of relatives. A city official shall not nominate, appoint or vote to nominate or
appoint any relative within the third degree of consanguinity or affinity to any position of the city.
(4) Land matters. In any land matter which comes before the city council, planning and zoning
commission, or board of adjustments and in which any member of the city council or aforementioned
boards and commissions has a financial interest in any property within 200 feet of the matter before
it, such member shall disclose the existence of the interest by filing a statement with the record
keeper. The member of the city council, planning and zoning commission, or board of adjustments
may speak on the item and, thereafter, remove himself from the dais or area in which the other
members of the city council, planning and zoning commission or board of adjustments who are
voting on the land matter are seated. In addition, any state law provision regarding a conflict of
interest shall also be followed.
It is the intention of this provision that the term “land matter” shall be interpreted broadly to
include zoning, permit requests, variances, etc.
(5) Nonprofit organization board membership. No city councilmember who is on the board of a
nonprofit organization may vote on any funding request by that nonprofit organization, unless the
nonprofit organization has a board of directors or trustees appointed in whole or in part by the city
council.
(c) Recusal and disclosure. A city official whose conduct would otherwise violate subsection (b)(3) of this
section shall adhere to the recusal and disclosure provisions stated in the recusal and disclosure provision in
section 2-301(b).
(Ordinance 09-04-25, pt. B, sec. 2, adopted 4/21/09; Ordinance 09-10-62, sec. 3, adopted 10/20/09)
Sec. 2-303 Gifts
(a) General rule. A city official shall not solicit, accept, or agree to accept any gift or benefit:
(b) Special applications, subsection (a) does not include:
(1) A gift to a city official relating to a special occasion, such as a wedding; anniversary,
graduation, birth, illness, death, or holiday, provided that the value of the gift is fairly commensurate
with the occasion and the relationship between the donor and recipient;
(2) Reimbursement of reasonable expenses for travel authorized in accordance with city policies;
(3) A public award or reward for meritorious service or professional achievement, provided that
the award or reward is reasonable in light of the occasion;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/684
(4) A loan from a lending institution made in its regular course of business on the same terms
generally available to the public;
(5) A scholarship or fellowship awarded on the same terms and based on the same criteria that are
applied to other applicants;
(6) Admission to an event in which the city official is participating in connection with official
duties;
(7) Lawful campaign contributions;
(8) Attending social functions, ground breakings, or civic events pertinent to the public relations
and operations of the city;
(9) Exchanging gifts with his family and relatives;
(10) Exchanging gifts at church functions or city parties or functions where only city officials and
their employees are invited or attend;
(11) Exchanging gifts or receiving a bonus from their place of fulltime employment.
(c) Gifts to closely related persons. A city official shall take reasonable steps to persuade a parent, spouse,
child, stepchild, or other relative within the second degree of consanguinity or affinity (see attachment “B”) not
to solicit, accept, or agree to accept any gift or benefit which would violate subsection (a) if the official solicited,
accepted, or agreed to accept it.
Editor's note–It should be noted that attachment B referenced above is not set out at length herein, but is on file and available for
inspection in the office of the city clerk.
(Ordinance 09-04-25, pt. B, sec. 3, adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 2-304 Confidential information
(a) Improper access. A city official shall not use his position to secure official information about any person or
entity for any purpose other than the performance of official responsibilities.
(b) Improper disclosure or use. A city official shall not disclose confidential government information or use
such information to further or impede anyone's personal interests.
This rule does not prohibit:
(1) Any disclosure or use that is authorized or required by law;
(2) The confidential reporting of illegal or unethical conduct to authorities designated by law.
(Ordinance 09-04-25, pt. B, sec. 4, adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 2-305 Representation of private interests
(a) Representation by a member of the board. A city official who is a member of a city board shall not serve
as a representative before that board or body any person, group, or entity.
(b) Representation before the city. A city official shall not represent any person, group, or entity, other than
himself, or his spouse or minor children, before the city.
(c) Representation in litigation adverse to the city.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/684
(1) Salaried officials. A salaried city official shall not represent any person, group, or entity, other
than himself, or his spouse or minor children, in any litigation to which the city is a party, if the
interests of that person, group, or entity are adverse to the interests of the city.
(2) Non-salaried officials. A non-salaried official shall not represent any person, group, or entity,
other than himself, or his spouse or minor children, in any litigation to which the city is a party, if the
interests of that person, group, or entity are adverse to interests of the city and the matter is
substantially related to the non-salaried official's duties to the city.
(Ordinance 09-04-25, pt. B, sec. 5, adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 2-306 Public property and resources
A city official shall not use, request, or permit the use of city facilities, personnel, equipment, or supplies for
private purposes (including political purposes), except:
(1) Pursuant to duly adopted city policies; or
(2) To the extent and according to the terms that those resources are lawfully available to the
public.
(Ordinance 09-04-25, pt. B, sec. 6, adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 2-307 Political activity
Limitations on the political activities of city officials are imposed by state law, the city charter, and city
personnel rules. In addition, the following ethical restrictions apply:
(a) Influencing subordinates. A city official shall not, directly or indirectly, induce or attempt to
induce any subordinate of the official:
(1) To participate in an election campaign, contribute to a candidate or political committee, or
engage in any other political activity relating to a particular party, candidate, or issue; or
(2) To refrain from engaging in any lawful political activity, except as prohibited by the city
charter.
(b) Paid campaigning. A city official shall not accept any thing of value, directly or indirectly, for
political activity relating to an item pending on the ballot, if he participated in, or provided advice
relating to, the exercise of discretionary authority by the city council or a board that contributed to
the development of the ballot item.
(c) Official vehicles. A city official shall not display or fail to remove campaign materials on any
city vehicle under his control.
Limitations on the use of public property and resources for political purposes are imposed by section 2-306 of
this article.
A general statement merely encouraging another person to vote does not violate this rule.
(Ordinance 09-04-25, pt. B, sec. 7, adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 2-308 Actions of others
(a) Violations by other city officials. A city official shall not knowingly assist or induce, or attempt to assist or
induce, another city official to violate any provision in this code of ethics.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/684
(b) Using others to engage in forbidden conduct. A city official shall not violate the provisions of this code of
ethics through the acts of another.
(Ordinance 09-04-25, pt. B, sec. 8, adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 2-309 Interaction with city staff
(a) City councilmembers' and board members' interaction with the city manager or city staff must recognize
the lack of authority in any individual city councilmember, board member or group of city councilmembers or
board members except when explicitly authorized by the city council or board.
(b) City councilmembers and board members will not make public individual judgments of the performance
of the city manager, his staff, the city attorney, the city secretary, or the municipal judge except as authorized by
city policy, ordinance, or the city charter.
(c) City councilmembers and board members may not attempt to coerce or intimidate city employees,
interfere with city employees' duties, or otherwise circumvent the authority of the city manager.
(Ordinance 09-04-25, pt. B, sec. 9, adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 2-310 City council interaction with general public
City councilmembers and board members who interact with the public, press or other entities must recognize the
same limitation as expressed in [section 2-309] and the inability of any city councilmember or board member or
group of city councilmembers or board members to speak for the city council or board except when explicitly
authorized by the council, board, or city charter. (Ordinance 09-04-25, pt. B, sec. 10, adopted 4/21/09)
Secs. 2-311–2-320 Reserved
DIVISION 3. FORMER CITY OFFICIALS
Sec. 2-321 Continuing confidentiality
A former city official shall not use or disclose confidential government information acquired during service as a
city official. This rule does not prohibit:
(1) Any disclosure or use that is authorized or required by law; or
(2) The confidential reporting of illegal or unethical conduct to authorities designated by law.
(Ordinance 09-04-25, pt. C, sec. 1, adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 2-322 Subsequent representation
(a) Representation by a former board member. A person who was a member of a board shall not represent
before that board any person, group, or entity for a period of one year after the termination of his official duties.
(b) Representation before the city. A former city official shall not represent any person, group, or entity, other
than himself, or his spouse or minor children, before the city for a period of one year after termination of his
official duties, unless hired by the city under the authority granted within the charter.
(c) Representation in litigation adverse to the city. A former city official shall not, absent consent from the
city, represent any person, group, or entity, other than himself, or his spouse or minor children, in any litigation
to which the city is a party, if the interests of that person, group, or entity are adverse to the interests of the city
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/684
and the matter is one in which the former city official “personally and substantially participated” prior to
termination of his official duties.
(Ordinance 09-04-25, pt. C, sec. 2, adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 2-323 Discretionary contracts
(a) Within one year of the termination of official duties, a former city official may not be an employee of the
city nor shall the former city official have a financial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract or sales made
with the city that are not awarded based upon a competitive bid.
(b) A former city official may enter into a consulting contract with the city to provide personal services.
(c) In this section, “financial interest” means a contract with the city or a sale to the city of land, materials,
supplies or services made on a discretionary basis and that are not awarded based upon a competitive bid if any
of the following individuals or entities is a party to the contract or sale:
(1) The former official;
(2) His parent, child, stepchild, or spouse;
(3) A business entity in which the former official directly or indirectly owns:
a. Ten percent or more of the voting stock or shares of the business entity; or
b. Ten percent or more of the fair market value of the business entity; or
(4) A business entity of which any individual or entity listed in subsections (c)(1) or (c)(3) of this
section is:
a. A subcontractor on a city contract; or
b. An affiliated business or partner.
(d) Definitions. For purposes of subsection (a) of this section:
A “former city official” is any person who, immediately prior to termination of official duties,
was:
a. The mayor or a member of city council;
b. A municipal judge or magistrate; or
c. A member of a board which is more than advisory in function. The term “former city
official” does not include a former member of the board of another governmental entity even if
some or all of its members were appointed by the city council.
(Ordinance 09-04-25, pt. C, sec. 3, adopted 4/21/09)
Secs. 2-324–2-330 Reserved
DIVISION 4. MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC AND OTHERS
This division applies to current and former city officials, persons doing business with the city, and lobbyists, as
well as to members of the public and any other person (including business entities and nonprofit entities).
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/684
Sec. 2-331 Forms of responsibility
No person shall induce, attempt to induce, conspire with, aid or assist, or attempt to aid or assist another person
to engage in conduct violative of the obligations imposed by this code of ethics. (Ordinance 09-04-25, pt. D, sec.
1, adopted 4/21/09)
Secs. 2-332–2-340 Reserved
DIVISION 5. ETHICS REVIEW PROCESS
Sec. 2-341 Definitions
As used in this division, the term “ethics laws” is defined as this article, article XIV of the city charter, and
V.T.C.A., Local Government Code secs. 171 and 176. The term “ethical violation” is defined as violations of any
of these enactments. (Ordinance 09-04-25, pt. E, sec. 1, adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 2-342 City attorney opinions
The city attorney is authorized to issue to any city official, upon reasonable request, formal written opinions
regarding the applicability of the provisions of the ethics laws to an action the city official is considering taking
in the future. (Ordinance 09-04-25, pt. E, sec. 2, adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 2-343 Complaints
(a) Filing. Any person who believes that there has been a violation of the ethics laws may file a sworn
complaint with the city secretary. The “complaint” shall:
(1) Identify the person or persons who allegedly committed the violation;
(2) Provide a statement of the facts on which the complaint is based;
(3) To the extent possible, identify the rule or rules allegedly violated; and
(4) Be sworn to in the form of an affidavit and be based on personal knowledge of the affiant and
be subject to the laws of perjury.
The complainant may also recommend other sources of evidence that the city attorney should consider and may
request a hearing.
(b) Confidentiality. No city official shall reveal information relating to the filing or processing of a complaint
except as required for the performance of official duties. All papers relating to a pending complaint are
confidential.
(c) Notification. A copy of a complaint meeting, subsection (a), shall be promptly forwarded by the city
secretary to the city attorney and to the person charged in the complaint. The person charged in the complaint
shall also be provided with a copy of the ethics rules and shall be informed that:
(1) Within 14 days of receipt of the complaint, he may file a sworn response with the city
secretary;
(2) Failure to file a response does not preclude the city attorney from processing the complaint;
(3) A copy of any response filed by the person charged in the complaint will be provided by the
city secretary to the complainant, who may within seven days reply to said sworn response by sworn
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/684
writing filed with the city secretary, a copy of which shall be provided by the city secretary to the
person charged in the complaint;
(4) The person charged in the complaint may request a hearing; and
(5) City officials have a duty to cooperate with the city attorney, pursuant to this section.
(d) Assistance. The city secretary shall provide information to persons who inquire about the process for filing
a complaint.
(Ordinance 09-04-25, pt. E, sec. 3, adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 2-344 Procedure for complaints against city officials
(a) Review by city attorney.
(1) Within seven business days after the city attorney receives the complaint, the city attorney (or a
person designated by the city council if the complaint is made against the city attorney) shall make an
initial assessment of the complaint. The city attorney (or person designated by the city council if the
complaint is made against the city attorney) shall assume that all facts alleged in the complaint are
true and determine if the facts alleged constitute a violation of the ethics laws.
(2) After the initial assessment of the complaint is completed, the city attorney (or person
designated by the city council if the complaint is made against the city attorney) shall meet with the
city council at its next regularly scheduled meeting to present a written report describing in detail the
nature of the complaint and the assessment of the city attorney (or person designated by the city
council if the complaint is made against the city attorney) whether the facts as alleged constitute a
violation of the ethics laws. This report will be made in executive session if allowed by law.
(3) In an open session of a city council meeting, a majority of those city councilmembers not
implicated by the complaint may:
a. Dismiss the complaint based on any of the following grounds:
1. The complaint does not allege facts sufficient to constitute a violation of the ethics
laws; or
2. The failure of the complainant to cooperate in the review and consideration of the
complaint; or
3. The complaint does not comply with the requirements of filing a complaint; or
4. The city attorney (or person designated by the city council if the complaint is made
against the city attorney) concludes that the conduct of the city official referred to in the
complaint was made in good faith reliance on a written opinion by the city attorney that
concluded the conduct was not a violation of the ethics laws; or
b. Determine that the complaint on its face does not state a violation of the ethics laws; or
c. Determine that the complaint alleges facts that, if true, are sufficient to constitute a
violation of the ethics laws and refer it for investigation as described in subsection (b) below.
(b) Investigation of the complaint.
(1) If a majority of the city council not implicated by the allegations in the complaint vote that the
complaint alleges facts sufficient to constitute a violation of the ethics laws:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/684
a. The city attorney (or person designated by the city council if the complaint is made against
the city attorney) will, within five business days of such vote by the city council, appoint an
attorney from a list of five attorneys previously selected by the city council for these purposes,
to investigate the allegations in the complaint;
b. The investigating attorney will have all of the powers of investigation given to the city
council in section 3.17 of the city charter; and
c. The investigating attorney will have 30 business days (or longer, if extended by a majority
vote of the city council) to conduct the investigation and report back to the city council.
(2) After investigating the allegations in the complaint, the investigating attorney will submit to the
city council and the city official accused of the alleged violation of the ethics laws a comprehensive
report detailing the investigating attorney's opinion as to whether a violation of the ethics laws has
occurred and the basis for the opinion.
(c) Hearing.
(1) Within five calendar days after receipt of the report by the investigating attorney, the person
accused of the alleged violation of the ethics laws will give written notice to the investigating
attorney if he wants a hearing before the city council.
(2) If the city official accused of the alleged violation does not timely request a hearing, the city
council will consider and act upon the investigating attorney's report in open session at a city council
meeting.
(3) If the city official accused of the alleged violation wants a hearing before the city council, the
hearing will be heard before the city council within 20 business days of the date the city official
accused of the alleged violation of the ethics laws. At the hearing each side (a) may be represented by
legal counsel; (b) may present documentary evidence relevant to the matter being heard; and (c) may
solicit testimony from witnesses and cross examine witnesses presented. To the extent permitted by
law, the hearing will be held in open session. The city council will prescribe the rules of the conduct
of the hearing.
(4) The investigating attorney will represent the city against the person accused of the alleged
violation of the ethics laws and has the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence at the
hearing.
(5) After presentation of the evidence, the city council may retire into executive session to
deliberate its decision. The decision of the city council will be made in open session and the decision
is final.
(d) Punishment.
(1) In the event the city council determines that a city official or former city official has violated
the code of ethics, the city council may impose the remedies available under section 2-351 of this
article.
(2) The city council may not assess a civil fine for an alleged violation of the code of ethics or
assess punishment for perjury under the laws of the state.
(Ordinance 09-04-25, pt. E, sec. 4, adopted 4/21/09)
Secs. 2-345–2-350 Reserved
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/684
DIVISION 6. ENFORCEMENT MECHANISMS
In addition to other remedies provided by law, the following remedies are available with respect to violations of
this code of ethics:
Sec. 2-351 Disciplinary action
City officials who engage in conduct that violates this code of ethics may be notified, warned, reprimanded,
suspended, or removed from office or employment by the city council. Disciplinary action under this section
may be imposed in addition to any other penalty or remedy contained in this code of ethics or any other law.
(Ordinance 09-04-25, pt. F, sec. 1, adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 2-352 Civil fine
Any city official or former city official violating this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof shall be fined a sum not exceeding $500.00. Each continuing days' violation under this article
shall constitute a separate offense. This section shall not preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin the violation.
The city retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law. (Ordinance
09-04-25, pt. F, sec. 2, adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 2-353 Prosecution for perjury
Any person who files a false sworn complaint under section 2-343 of this code of ethics is subject to criminal
prosecution for perjury under the laws of the State of Texas. (Ordinance 09-04-25, pt. F, sec. 3, adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 2-354 Voiding or ratification of contract
If an ethics review finds that there has been a violation of any provision in sections 2-301 through 2-310 of
division 2; sections 2-321 through 2-323 of division 3; or division 4 that is related to the awarding of a contract,
the city council must vote on whether to ratify or void the contract. Such action shall not affect the imposition of
any penalty or remedy contained in this code of ethics or any other law. (Ordinance 09-04-25, pt. F, sec. 4,
adopted 4/21/09)
Secs. 2-355–2-370 Reserved
DIVISION 7. ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
Sec. 2-371 Other obligations
This code of ethics is cumulative of and supplemental to applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
Compliance with the provisions of this code shall not excuse or relieve any person from any obligation imposed
by state or federal law regarding ethics, financial reporting, lobbying activities, or any other issue addressed
herein.
Even if a city official is not prohibited from taking official action by this code of ethics, action may be
prohibited by duly promulgated personnel rules, which may be more stringent.
(Ordinance 09-04-25, pt. G, sec. 1, adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 2-372 Effective date
This code of ethics shall take effect on April 21 of 2009. (Ordinance 09-04-25, pt. G, sec. 2, adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 2-373 Review of ethics code
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/684
The city council shall appoint an ethics subcommittee every five years to review the code of ethics, who shall
report its findings and present its recommendations to the city council. (Ordinance 09-04-25, pt. G, sec. 3,
adopted 4/21/09)
Sec. 2-374 Distribution and training
(a) At the time of application for a position of city official, every applicant shall be furnished with a copy of
this code of ethics. No application shall be considered complete without a signed acknowledgement of receipt
and understanding of this code of ethics by the applicant.
(b) The city attorney or ethics compliance officer as designated by the city council shall develop educational
materials and conduct educational programs for the city officials on the provisions of this code of ethics, article
XIV of the city charter, and V.T.C.A., Local Government Code secs. 171 and 176. Such materials and programs
shall be designed to maximize understanding of the obligations imposed by these ethics laws.
(Ordinance 09-04-25, pt. G, sec. 4, adopted 4/21/09)
CHAPTERS 3–5
RESERVED
CHAPTER 6
ALARM SYSTEMS*
Sec. 6-1 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter and shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Act of God. An extraordinary interruption by natural causes (such as flood, earthquake, or severe weather) of the
usual course of events that experience, foresight, or care cannot reasonably foresee or prevent.
Alarm administrator. A person or persons designated by the chief of police to administer, control, and review
false alarm reduction efforts and administer the provisions of this chapter including the alarm administrator's
authorized designee.
Alarm company. Any person who is in the business to sell, install, service, or monitor an alarm system located at
an alarm site.
Alarm dispatch request. A notification to the communications center that an alarm, whether manual or
automatic, has been activated for a particular alarm site.
Alarm permit or permit. A certificate, license, permit, registration, or other form of permission from the alarm
administrator that authorizes a person to operate an alarm system at an alarm site.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/684
Alarm site. A single fixed premises or location served by an alarm system or systems that is under the control of
one owner or tenant. Each unit if served by a separate alarm system in a multi-unit building or complex shall be
considered a separate alarm site and is further defined by the following categories:
(1) Residential site. A single-family residence and each residential unit of a multifamily unit
building which is served by an alarm system.
(2) Commercial site. Every premises or location where any business activity is regularly conducted
and which is served by an alarm system. For any business within the premises that is served by a
separate alarm system, shall be considered a separate alarm site.
(3) Educational site. Every premises or location of a public or private school and their
administrative offices.
(4) Governmental site. Every premises or location of any federal, state, county, or local
government office.
Alarm system. A device or system that transmits or relays a signal intended to summon emergency services of
the city. Alarm system does not include:
(1) An alarm installed on a vehicle unless the vehicle is used for habitation at a permanent site;
(2) An alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants of a premises; nor
(3) An alarm installed upon premises occupied by the city.
Alarm user. Any person who has contracted for monitoring, repair, installation, or maintenance services from an
alarm company for an alarm system, or a person who owns or operates an alarm system that is not monitored,
maintained, or repaired under contract with an alarm company.
Alarm user awareness training. In-person or online training conducted for the purpose of educating alarm users
about the responsible use, operation, and maintenance of alarm sites and systems and the problems created by
false alarms.
Arming station. A device that allows control of an alarm system.
ANSI standard. The American National Standards Institute, an independent organization that approves standards
that have been through an approval process and are accepted as a standard.
Automatic voice dialer. Any electrical, electronic, mechanical, or other device capable of being programmed to
send a prerecorded voice message, when activated, over a telephone line, radio, or other communication system
to the communications center requesting dispatch to an alarm site.
Burglar alarm notification. The notification intended to summon the police, which is initiated or triggered
manually or by an alarm system designed to respond to a situation characteristic of an unauthorized intrusion.
Cancellation. The process where the public safety response is terminated when an alarm company notifies the
communications prior to the public safety response arrival at the alarm site.
Communications center. The City of Frisco public safety response dispatch center.
Conversion. The transaction or process by which one alarm company begins monitoring an alarm system
previously monitored by another alarm company.
CP-01 ANSI/SIA control panel standard. An alarm control panel that is listed and approved by Underwriters
Laboratories as compliant with the standard.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/684
Day(s). Calendar days.
Director. The chief of police or fire chief of Frisco, or his/her authorized representative.
ECV. The ANSI/CSAA CS-V-01 standard for the telephonic verification of intrusion alarms.
Emergency medical assistance alarm. An alarm system which summons emergency medical assistance.
False alarm or false alarm notification. An alarm notification to summon a public safety response and there is
no evidence of a need for a public safety response.
False burglar alarm notification. A burglar alarm notification to the police, and when the responding police
officer finds no evidence of unauthorized intrusion or attempted unauthorized intrusion.
False emergency medical assistance alarm notification. An emergency medical assistance alarm notification to
the communications center and the responding public safety personnel find there is no evidence of a need for
medical assistance.
False fire alarm notification. A fire alarm notification to the fire department, and the responding fire personnel
find no evidence of fire.
False panic alarm notification. An emergency alarm notification has been made to the communications center,
and the responding public safety personnel find no evidence or circumstances requiring an emergency response.
False robbery alarm notification. A robbery alarm notification to the police, and the responding police officer
finds no evidence of a robbery.
Fire alarm notification. A notification to summon the fire department initiated or triggered by smoke or fire, fire
sprinkler activation or other situations that are characteristic of a fire.
Late fee. The fee charged for failing to pay the original fee owed for a false alarm, permit renewal fee, or other
allowable fee that is not paid on time. The late fee is in addition to the amount originally owed.
Panic alarm notification. Is an emergency alarm notification that is manually triggered and relayed to the
communications center for the purpose of summoning a public safety response.
Permit holder. A person issued an alarm permit.
Person. An individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization or other entity.
Public safety response. A response by City of Frisco police, fire, and/or emergency medical services personnel.
Responder. An individual capable of reaching the alarm site within thirty (30) minutes and has access to the
alarm site, including the code, and is able to disarm the false alarm, and to authorize repairs to the alarm system.
Robbery alarm notification. A silent alarm system signal generated by the entry of a designated code into an
arming station in order to signal that the alarm user is being forced to turn off the alarm system and requires a
law enforcement response. It also includes a silent alarm generated by the manual activation of a device to signal
a robbery in progress or immediately after it occurred.
Takeover. The transaction or process which an alarm user takes control of an existing alarm system that was
previously controlled by another alarm user.
Verify. An attempt by the alarm company to contact the alarm site or alarm user by telephone, including text
message, whether or not actual contact is made.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/684
(Ordinance 16-11-91 adopted 11/15/16. See end of chapter for full history of this chapter)
Sec. 6-2 Permit and fee required; application, duration, renewal transferability
(a) Permit required. Any person owning or operating an alarm system must apply for a permit within thirty
(30) days of installation of the alarm system. A person commits an offense if he fails to apply for a permit within
thirty (30) days after installation of the alarm system and/or if he thereafter operates or causes to be operated an
alarm system without a valid permit issued pursuant to this chapter. A separate permit application is required for
each alarm site and each type of alarm system. It is a defense to prosecution if the permit application has been
submitted to the alarm administrator in accordance with this chapter and the alarm administrator is processing
the permit application.
(b) Fees.
(1) An annual, nonrefundable fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) is required for each residential
alarm permit or renewal of a permit. The annual nonrefundable fee for each commercial permit is one
hundred dollars ($100.00), including renewal of a permit.
(2) A permit is valid for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of issuance. Permits must be
renewed within ten (10) days of the expiration of the previously issued permit. An updated
application and registration renewal fee must be submitted for renewal.
(3) Governmental and public educational sites are exempt from all permit fees, false alarm charges,
service fees and fines that are assessed under this chapter as long as the entity has a valid alarm
permit, but shall comply with all other requirements of this chapter.
(c) Late fee for renewal. A failure to renew within the ten-day period shall incur a late fee of twenty-five
dollars ($25.00) for each alarm system that was not renewed in the applicable period.
(d) Authority for city to enter and deactivate alarm. Application for a permit under the provisions of this
section constitutes a grant of approval to the city to deactivate an alarm system that sounds an alarm signal for
longer than thirty (30) minutes after being notified, including entry onto and into the premises of the alarm site
for this purpose. The right of entry includes a waiver of any damages incurred to the premises or the alarm
system as a result of this access and deactivation.
(e) Permit requirements. Each permit application must contain the following information and be complete,
true and accurate in its entirety:
(1) Name, address, and telephone number(s) of the permit holder who will be responsible for the
proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees assessed under this
chapter; the mailing address if different than the address of the permit holder or the alarm site;
(2) The classification of the alarm site as either residential or commercial including the building
number and the apartment number;
(3) For each alarm system located at the alarm site, the classification of the alarm system (i.e.
burglary, robbery, panic alarms or other) and for each classification, whether such alarm is audible or
silent;
(4) Any dangerous, hazardous, or special conditions present at the alarm site;
(5) The name and telephone number of the alarm company that has agreed to receive calls for the
permitted alarm system, if applicable;
(6) Provide at least two (2) names of responders and their telephone numbers who are able to
receive notification of an alarm system activation and respond to the alarm site within thirty (30)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/684
minutes of being notified with a key or other means of access to the premises and, if needed, can
deactivate the alarm system. Preference should be given to the use of cellular phone numbers as
backup contact to the primary alarm site number; or
(7) Signed certification from the alarm user that includes the following:
a. The date of the installation, conversion, or takeover of the alarm system;
b. The name, address, and telephone number of the alarm installation company or companies
performing the installation, conversion, or takeover;
c. The name, address and telephone number of the alarm company that performs the
monitoring service if different than subsection b. above;
d. That a set of written operating instructions for the alarm system that include guidelines on
how to avoid false alarms, have been left with the applicant by the alarm company;
e. That the applicant has been trained by the alarm company in the proper use of the alarm
system, including instructions on how to avoid false alarms;
f. That in consideration for the ability to have an alarm permit, the applicant is authorized to
and grants to the city the right to enter onto the alarm site, including the right to enter into a
residence or building for the purpose of disarming a false alarm if the alarm user or responder is
not present or is unable to deactivate the false alarm. The right of entry includes a waiver of any
damages incurred to the premises or the alarm system as a result of this access and deactivation;
and
g. Any other information required by the alarm administrator that is necessary for the
enforcement of this chapter.
(f) A city resident who has a valid permit that is more than sixty (60) days from expiration may transfer said
permit to a new location within the city.
(g) Upon receipt of a completed alarm permit application and the alarm permit fee including any past due
fees, penalties and fines, the alarm administrator shall register the applicant and issue a permit number unless the
applicant has:
(1) Failed to pay a fine, penalty or fee assessed under this chapter;
(2) Had an alarm permit for the alarm site suspended or revoked, and the violation that resulted in
a suspension or revocation has not been corrected; or
(3) Made any false statement or misrepresentation of a material fact for the purpose of obtaining an
alarm permit or renewal, or while making a change thereto.
(Ordinance 16-11-91 adopted 11/15/16. See end of chapter for full history of this chapter)
Sec. 6-3 Revocation of permit
(a) The alarm administrator may revoke or refuse to renew an alarm system permit for failure to meet the
standards and requirements set out in this chapter.
(b) The alarm administrator may revoke or refuse to renew an alarm permit if the alarm administrator
determines, in his/her sole discretion, that the alarm system in question has a history of unreliability, which
unreliability shall be presumed upon the occurrence, in the immediately preceding twelve (12) month period, of:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/684
(1) Eight (8) false burglar alarms;
(2) Five (5) false robbery alarms;
(3) Five (5) false fire alarms;
(4) Five (5) false medical emergency assistance alarms; or
(5) Five (5) false panic alarms.
(c) The alarm administrator may revoke a permit for a false robbery alarm activated by a single action,
nonrecessed button.
(d) A revoked permit may be reissued upon the payment of a twenty-five dollars ($25.00) reinstatement fee
and upon:
(1) Determination by the alarm administrator that the applicant has made a sufficient showing that
the conditions which caused the false alarms have been corrected and that the alarm system is likely
to be maintained and operated in a responsible manner in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter;
(2) Payment of all outstanding fees, penalties and fines; and
(3) If required by the alarm administrator, a certification from an alarm company, stating that the
alarm system at the alarm site has been repaired or adjusted in a manner to attempt to eliminate false
alarms and describes the actions that occurred to make that certification, and that the alarm user has
been made aware of the issues that resulted or may result in false alarms, including but not limited to
the impact of pets, home decorations, changes in the environment, need to train responders who have
access to the premises by providing the responders the code(s) to deactivate the alarm system and
passwords to identify the responders to the alarm company in an alarm situation.
(e) A person may appeal a revocation or refusal to renew a permit in accordance with the procedures set forth
in section 6-4.
(f) A person commits an offense if he operates an alarm system after the alarm administrator revokes or
refuses to issue or renew a permit for that alarm system.
(Ordinance 16-11-91 adopted 11/15/16. See end of chapter for full history of this chapter)
Sec. 6-4 Appeal from denial, revocation or nonrenewal of a permit
(a) If the alarm administrator refuses to issue or renew a permit, or revokes a permit, the alarm administrator
shall send to the applicant or permit holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the alarm
administrator's decision and a statement of the right to an appeal. The applicant or permit holder may appeal the
decision of the alarm administrator to the director by filing with the director a written request for a hearing,
setting forth the reasons for the appeal, within ten (10) calendar days after the receipt of the notice from the
alarm administrator. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing with the director stays the action of the alarm
administrator until the director makes the final decision. If a request for an appeal hearing is not made within the
ten (10) day period, the action of the alarm administrator is final. An alarm permit holder with an existing
permit, must have thirty days' notice before the nonrenewal is effective.
(b) The director shall serve as hearing officer at an appeal hearing and consider evidence offered by any
interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply at any appeal hearing and the director shall make
his final decision on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing. The director must
render a decision within thirty (30) days after the request for an appeal hearing is filed. The director shall affirm,
reverse, or modify the action of the alarm administrator, and his decision is final.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/684
(Ordinance 16-11-91 adopted 11/15/16. See end of chapter for full history of this chapter)
Sec. 6-5 Other types of alarms
(a) It shall be unlawful for a person to install or maintain an alarm system that summons a public safety
response from the city for the purpose of eliciting responses to burglaries, robberies, fires, panic or medical
emergencies unless specifically authorized by this chapter.
(b) If innovations in alarm systems or other types of alarm devices adversely affect emergency services in the
city, the director may promulgate other rules and regulations in order to protect the city's emergency services.
(Ordinance 16-11-91 adopted 11/15/16. See end of chapter for full history of this chapter)
Sec. 6-6 False alarm and service charges
(a) If false alarm notifications are received for an alarm site, the alarm administrator shall assess the permit
holder in control of that alarm site a fee for false alarms emitted from the alarm site in the following amounts:
(1) Fifty dollars ($50.00) if the alarm site has had more than three (3), but less than six (6) false
burglar alarm notifications in the immediately preceding twelve (12) month period;
(2) Seventy-five dollars ($75.00) if the alarm site has had more than five (5), but less than eight (8)
false burglar alarm notifications in the, immediately preceding twelve (12) month period;
(3) One hundred dollars ($100.00) if the alarm site has had eight (8) or more false burglar alarm
notifications in the immediately preceding twelve (12) month period;
(4) If, within any twelve (12) month period, two (2) false robbery alarm notifications are emitted
from an alarm site, the alarm administrator shall assess the permit holder in control of that alarm site
a fee for each subsequent false robbery alarm notification emitted from the alarm site. The fee for
each false robbery alarm notification under this subsection shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00);
(5) If, within any twelve (12) month period, two (2) false fire alarm notifications are emitted from
an alarm site, the alarm administrator shall assess the permit holder in control on that alarm site a fee
for each subsequent false fire alarm notification emitted from the alarm site. The fee for each false
fire alarm notification under this subsection shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00);
(6) If, within any twelve (12) month period, two (2) false panic alarm notifications are emitted
from an alarm site, the alarm administrator shall assess the permit holder in control on that alarm site
a fee for each subsequent false panic alarm notification emitted from the alarm site. The fee for each
false panic alarm notification under this subsection shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00); or
(7) If, within any twelve (12) month period, two (2) false emergency medical assistance alarm
notifications are emitted from an alarm site, the alarm administrator shall assess the permit holder in
control of that alarm site a fee for each subsequent false emergency medical assistance alarm
notification emitted from the alarm site. The fee for each false medical emergency alarm notification
under this subsection shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00).
(b) If the permit holder or responder fails to respond to the scene within thirty (30) minutes to reset the alarm
system and provide access to the alarm site, the alarm system may be silenced by authorized city personnel and a
fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), in addition to the actual expenses incurred in securing the alarm site, will be charged
to the permit holder. All costs of the city in disabling such an alarm system shall be assessed to the permit holder
of the alarm site and shall be paid to the city within thirty (30) days after the permit holder has received notice
that the costs have been assessed.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/684
(c) If a public safety response takes longer than thirty (30) minutes to respond to the alarm dispatch request or
cancellation is received by the communication center before the arrival of public safety response personnel to
the alarm site, no false alarm fee shall be assessed.
(d) A permit holder shall pay a fee assessed under this section within thirty (30) days after receipt of notice
that it has been assessed. A failure to pay the fee within thirty (30) days will result in an additional ten percent
late fee. Failure of the permit holder to pay the assessed fee and any applicable late fee will result in the permit
being revoked.
(e) All persons assessed a fee shall have a right to appeal the same using the process set forth in section 6-4 of
this chapter. A right to appeal will be included in the notice of the fee.
(f) The permit holder will be exempt from any fees charged for a false alarm notification which is later shown
to have been in the alarm administrator's sole determination, justified or which was due to a natural or manmade
catastrophe or other situation specifically exempted by the director.
(g) For the purposes of this chapter, a permit holder shall be considered to be in control of the alarm site for
all purposes and at all times, regardless of whether the permit holder is physically present when an alarm is
activated and regardless of whether the alarm dispatch is activated by a third person, including but not limited to,
another resident of the premises, a family member, a service worker, a guest or an invitee, unless the third party
is a trespasser of the alarm site.
(h) Alarm permit holders for governmental or public educational sites are exempt from the payment of false
alarm fees.
(Ordinance 16-11-91 adopted 11/15/16. See end of chapter for full history of this chapter)
Sec. 6-7 Unlawful reporting of alarm signals
(a) It is unlawful for an alarm permit holder to report alarm signals through a relaying intermediary that:
(1) Does not meet the requirements of this chapter and any rules and regulations promulgated by
the alarm administrator; or
(2) Is not licensed by the Texas Board of Private Investigators and Private Security Agencies
except for a personal emergency response alarm system that does not include a burglar or fire system.
(b) A person commits an offense if the person operates any alarm system without having a valid permit for the
alarm system and shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00). Each and
every day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. This provision shall not apply to a person
operating a personal emergency response system that is not part of a combination of a burglar or fire alarm
system.
(Ordinance 16-11-91 adopted 11/15/16. See end of chapter for full history of this chapter)
Sec. 6-8 Offense for improper alarm system operation and maintenance
It is unlawful for an alarm user to:
(1) Fail to cause an adjustment to be made to the sensory mechanism of his/her alarm system in
order to suppress false indications of force so that the alarm system will not be activated by impulses
due to:
a. Transient pressure changes in water pipes;
b. Flashes of light;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/684
c. Wind noise caused by the rattling or vibrating of doors or windows;
d. Vehicular noise adjacent to the installation; or
e. Other forces unrelated to actual emergencies.
(2) Fail to maintain the premises containing an alarm system in a manner that ensures proper
operation of the alarm system;
(3) Fail to comply with state law and install only Underwriters Listed CP-01 Alarm Control Panels
on all new installations and service replacements;
(4) Allow an inside sounder to be installed or operated so that it can be heard outside of the internal
premises of the alarm site;
(5) Allow an outside sounder be installed at the alarm site;
(6) To utilize an automatic voice dialer for purposes of notifying the communications center of an
alarm except for panic alarms; or
(7) Operate an alarm system that is manually initiated at an arming station without a double action
trigger. A double action trigger includes but is not limited to, any of the following:
a. Simultaneous depression of two (2) buttons, where if either of the buttons have multiple
functions, the two (2) buttons are nonadjacent.
b. Depression of a single button after lifting the cover that normally protects it if the cover
protects only emergency function buttons.
c. Depression of a single button for at least two (2) seconds.
(Ordinance 16-11-91 adopted 11/15/16. See end of chapter for full history of this chapter)
Sec. 6-9 Duties of the alarm user
(a) An alarm user shall:
(1) Operate the alarm site and the alarm system in a manner that minimizes or eliminates false
alarms;
(2) Make every reasonable effort to have a responder to the alarm site within thirty (30) minutes
when requested by the communications center in order to:
a. Deactivate the alarm;
b. Provide access to the alarm site and alarm system;
c. Provide alternative security to the alarm site.
(b) Not activate an alarm system for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system
was designed to report.
(c) Adjust the mechanism of an inside sounder so that the alarm will sound for no longer than ten (10)
minutes.
(d) Maintain a written set of operating instructions for each alarm system at the alarm site.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/684
(e) Upon reasonable notification, allow the alarm administrator or his designee to inspect the alarm site and
alarm system of the permit holder.
(f) Not use a robbery alarm notification that is a single action, nonrecessed button.
(g) Inform the alarm administrator in writing of any changes that alter information listed on the permit
application within five (5) business days of the change. No fee will be assessed for such changes.
(Ordinance 16-11-91 adopted 11/15/16. See end of chapter for full history of this chapter)
Sec. 6-10 Duties of alarm company
(a) All alarm companies shall be licensed through the Texas Department of Public Safety Private Security
Bureau as required by the Texas Occupation Code, chapter 1702, as amended.
(b) An alarm company shall:
(1) Confirm with the alarm administrator that a valid alarm permit has been issued by the city for
an alarm site before performing any alarm system conversion at the alarm site.
(2) Send a certification to the alarm administrator within thirty (30) days of performing or causing
the performance of an alarm system installation or conversion. The certificate must state:
a. The date of installation or conversion of the alarm system, whichever is applicable;
b. The name, address, telephone number and current state license number of the alarm
company providing the alarm system installation or conversion;
c. The name, address, telephone number and current state license number of the alarm
company providing monitoring for the alarm system if different from the alarm company under
contract to provide installation or conversion for the alarm system;
d. That a complete set of written operating instructions for the alarm system, including,
without limitation, written guidelines on how to avoid false alarms has been left with the
applicant; or
e. That the alarm company has trained the applicant in the proper use of the alarm system,
including, without limitation, instructions on how to avoid, and through their alarm company,
how to cancel false alarms.
(3) Send notification of an alarm to the city by the means currently specified by the alarm
administrator;
(4) Communicate alarm dispatch requests and cancellations to the communication center in a
manner determined by the alarm administrator;
(5) Communicate any available information (permit number, north south, front, back, floor, etc.)
about the premises on all alarm signals related to the alarm dispatch request;
(6) Communicate the type of alarm activation (silent, audible, interior or perimeter);
(7) After making an alarm dispatch request, promptly advise the communications center if the
alarm company is aware that the alarm user and/or responder is on the way to the alarm site;
(8) Contact the alarm user or responder within twenty-four (24) hours via mail, email, fax,
telephone or other electronic means when an alarm dispatch request is made;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/684
(9) Report alarms signals and dispatch requests by using telephone numbers designated by the
alarm administrator; and
(10) Before requesting an alarm dispatch request to an alarm signal, verify every alarm signal,
except a panic, robbery, fire or emergency medical alarm activation, by making a minimum of two
(2) telephone calls to two (2) separate phone numbers as per ANSI/ CSAA C-V-01 Standard for the
telephone verification of alarm signals.
(c) An alarm company shall not install an automatic voice dialer as part of an alarm system unless it is limited
to panic alarm notifications.
(Ordinance 16-11-91 adopted 11/15/16. See end of chapter for full history of this chapter)
Sec. 6-11 Duty to maintain and provide records
Upon the effective date of this chapter, an alarm company shall:
(1) Maintain for a period of one (1) year from the date of the alarm dispatch request, records
relation to alarm dispatch requests. That include the name, address and telephone number of the
alarm user and evidence that demonstrates attempts to verify. The alarm administrator may request
copies of the records of individually named alarm users located in the city. If the request is made
within sixty (60) days of an alarm request dispatch, the alarm company shall furnish the requested
records within three (3) business days of receipt of the request. If the request is made between sixty
(60) days to one year after an alarm dispatch request, the alarm company shall furnish the records
within thirty (30) days of the request.
(2) Provide the alarm administrator with the names and telephone numbers of the alarm user's
responders maintained by the alarm company for that alarm user at the time of the alarm dispatch
request or within a reasonable time thereafter, not to exceed forty-eight (48) hours, if the
communication center requests that information.
(Ordinance 16-11-91 adopted 11/15/16. See end of chapter for full history of this chapter)
Sec. 6-12 Offenses for alarm companies
A person commits an offense if he engages in the business of relaying alarm notifications in the city without
complying fully with this chapter. This shall not apply to installation or activation of a personal emergency
response system, as defined by Texas Occupation Code, section 1702.331, as amended. (Ordinance 16-11-91
adopted 11/15/16. See end of chapter for full history of this chapter)
Sec. 6-13 Duties and authority of the alarm administrator
(a) The alarm administrator shall establish a procedure for notification to the alarm user of a false alarm. The
notice shall include the following information:
(1) Date and time of public safety response;
(2) Identification number of the public safety person; and
(3) A statement advising the alarm user to ensure that the alarm system is properly operated,
inspected and serviced in order to avoid false alarm and resulting fees and fines.
(b) The alarm administrator may implement an alarm user awareness class.
(c) The alarm administrator may require an alarm user to remove a robbery alarm that is a single action,
nonrecessed button, if a false alarm has occurred.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/684
(Ordinance 16-11-91 adopted 11/15/16. See end of chapter for full history of this chapter)
Sec. 6-14 Direct alarm reporting
It shall be unlawful for any person or business to operate or energize an alarm system or an alarm device which
activates an automatic dialing device that sends a signal to the communications center. (Ordinance 16-11-91
adopted 11/15/16. See end of chapter for full history of this chapter)
Sec. 6-15 Intentional activation unlawful
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally activate or cause to be activated any alarm system for other
than its intended purpose and with the intent of causing a public safety response. (Ordinance 16-11-91 adopted
11/15/16. See end of chapter for full history of this chapter)
Sec. 6-16 Confidentiality
To the extent allowed by law, all information contained in and gathered through the alarm registration
applications, records relating to alarm dispatch requests, and applications for appeals shall, are confidential and
shall be held in confidence by all employees or representatives of the city and by any third-party administrator or
employees of a third-party administrator with access to such information. This provision shall not prevent an
alarm company from receiving confirmation from the city that an alarm permit has been issued for an alarm site.
(Ordinance 16-11-91 adopted 11/15/16. See end of chapter for full history of this chapter)
Sec. 6-17 Termination of response
(a) Responses from the police and fire departments may be terminated to nonpermitted alarm sites after
notification to the owner or last known permit holder of the alarm site has been made by regular and certified
mail, return receipt requested.
(b) Responses will not be terminated because of excessive false burglar notifications to a residential alarm site
as long as a valid permit exists and all fees are paid in full.
(Ordinance 16-11-91 adopted 11/15/16. See end of chapter for full history of this chapter)
Sec. 6-18 Government immunity
The issuance of an alarm permit and/or the provisions set forth in this chapter are not intended to, nor do they
create a contract, duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, of a response by the city. Any and all liability
and consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed and
governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. By applying for an alarm permit, the permit holder
acknowledges that law enforcement, fire and/or emergency medical response may be influenced by factors such
as, among other things: availability, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency
conditions and staffing levels and that an alarm permit is not a guarantee of any public safety response at any
time notwithstanding the above, the city may discontinue service to an alarm site for failure to pay false alarm
fees. (Ordinance 16-11-91 adopted 11/15/16. See end of chapter for full history of this chapter)
Sec. 6-19 Violations of chapter misdemeanor
(a) Any person who violates this chapter shall be, upon conviction, deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and fined
an amount not in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) unless a lesser maximum amount has been provided
for in this chapter. Each day of violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) A person commits an offense if he violates by commission or omission any provision of this chapter that
imposes upon him a duty or responsibility.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/684
(c) In addition to prohibiting or requiring certain conduct of individuals, it is the intent of this chapter to hold
a corporation, partnership, association or other entity criminally responsible for acts or omissions performed by
an agent acting on behalf of the corporation, partnership, association, or entity and within the scope of the
agent's employment or authority.
(Ordinance 16-11-91 adopted 11/15/16. See end of chapter for full history of this chapter)
(Ordinance 96-10-10, secs. 1–15, 10/1/96; Ordinance 09-12-67, secs. 3–18, adopted 12/1/09)
CHAPTERS 7–9
RESERVED
CHAPTER 10
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 10-1 Definitions
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms as used in this article shall be construed according to
the definitions given below:
Alcoholic beverage. Any spirits, wine, beer, ales, or other liquid containing more than one-half of one percent of
alcohol by volume, which is fit for beverage purposes.
Late hours permit. Any permit, license or other authorization issued by the state that grants the holder thereof a
privilege to sell and offer for sale alcoholic beverages between midnight and 2:00 a.m. on any day.
Public place. Any place to which the public, or a substantial group of the public, has access and includes, but is
not limited to streets, alleys, highways, public parks, in the common areas of schools, hospitals, churches,
apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops.
(Ordinance 80-07-02, sec. 2, adopted 7/15/80; Ordinance 14-11-73, sec. 3, adopted 11/18/14; Ordinance 14-12-
76, sec. 2, adopted 12/8/14)
Sec. 10-2 Sale of alcoholic beverages near a church, school or public hospital
(a) No person, as defined by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended, shall sell alcoholic beverages if
the place of business is within three hundred (300) feet of a church, public or private school, or public hospital
except as provided by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended. The sale of alcoholic beverages is also
prohibited within one thousand (1,000) feet of a private school if the city council adopts by resolution a request
for the one thousand (1,000) foot separation from the governing body of a private school. The measurement of
the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the church or public hospital
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/684
shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in direct line across
intersections. The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold
and the public or private school shall be:
(1) In a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the
place of business, and in a direct line across intersections; or
(2) If a permit or license holder is located on or above the fifth story of a multistory building, in a
direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of
business, in a direct line across intersections, and vertically up the building at the property line to the
base of the floor on which the permit or license holder is located.
(b) Notwithstanding any provision in this section, subsection (a) does not affect the provisions of subsection
3.02.01 or section 7.01 of the city's zoning ordinance, as amended; provided, however, this section shall apply to
all other uses set forth in section 3.02 of the zoning ordinance, regardless of whether said uses are defined in
section 7.01 of the zoning ordinance.
(c) Variances. The procedures of this subsection must be followed to process and grant an application for a
variance to the distance regulations in subsection (a) or in subsections 3.02.01(A), (2), (24), (25), (30) and (37)
or section 7.01 of the city's zoning ordinance, as amended, pursuant to section 109.33(e) of the Texas Alcoholic
Beverage Code.
(1) Application. An applicant for a variance shall submit the following information to the city
secretary:
a. The name of the owner of the property where the business selling alcoholic beverages will
be located.
b. The name and address of the applicant for the alcoholic beverage license or permit.
c. The type of alcoholic beverage license or permit sought from the Texas Alcoholic
Beverage Commission.
d. The name and address of the church, public or private school or public hospital that creates
the need for the variance.
e. A survey showing the location and distances of the business where alcoholic beverages
will be sold; the property lines and front door of the business where alcoholic beverages will be
sold; the location of the church, public or private school or public hospital; and the property
lines and front door of the church, public or private school or public hospital.
f. A statement of why the variance meets the standards set forth in subsection (5).
g. Any other information the city secretary deems necessary.
(2) Fee. A nonrefundable fee of five hundred and no/100 dollars ($500.00) must be paid to the city
secretary when the application for a variance is filed.
(3) Notification signs.
a. Signs required to be posted. An applicant is responsible for procuring and posting signs
providing notice of the application for a variance on the property that is the subject of the
application. The city secretary shall establish the criteria for the required size and content of the
sign.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/684
b. Number and placement of signs required. The number and placement of the required signs
shall be determined by the city secretary or his/her designee.
c. Posting of signs. The applicant shall post the required number of notification signs on the
premises, as that term is defined in Section 11.49 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, within
fourteen (14) days after an application is filed. The signs must be legible and remain posted
until a final decision is made on the application. For tracts with street frontage, signs must be
evenly spaced over the length of every street frontage, posted at a prominent location adjacent
to a public street, and be easily visible from the street. For tracts without street frontage, signs
must be evenly posted in prominent locations most visible to the public. The applicant must
remove the signs within three (3) days after a final decision is made on the application or within
three (3) days after the application is withdrawn. No sign permit is required.
d. Failure to comply. The applicant must provide verification with photographs that the
required signs are posted on the premises seven (7) days prior to the scheduled public hearing
date. If the city council determines that the applicant has failed to comply with the provisions of
this subsection, it shall take no action on the application other than to postpone the public
hearing for at least four (4) weeks or deny the applicant's request. If the hearing is postponed,
the required notification signs must be posted within twenty-four (24) hours after the case is
postponed and comply with all other requirements of this subsection.
e. Illegal removal of signs. A person commits an offense if he or she intentionally or
knowingly removes a notification sign that has been posted pursuant to this subsection. It is a
defense to prosecution under this subsection that the sign was no longer required to be posted
pursuant to this subsection at the time of its removal.
(4) Hearing. The city secretary shall set a date for a public hearing before the city council within
sixty (60) days after a complete application is filed. Not less than ten (10) days before the public
hearing, the city secretary shall:
a. Publish notice of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation.
b. Provide notice of the public hearing to the church, public or private school or public
hospital that creates the need for a variance.
(5) Standard for approval. The city council may, but is not required to, grant variances to the
distance regulations set forth in subsection (a) or subsection 3.02.01 or section 7.01 of the city's
zoning ordinance, as amended, if the city council finds that enforcement of the distance regulations:
a. Is not in the best interest of the public;
b. Constitutes waste or inefficient use of land or other resources;
c. Creates an undue hardship on an applicant for an alcoholic beverage license or permit;
d. Does not serve their intended purpose;
e. Is not effective or necessary; or
f. For any other reason that the city council, after consideration of the health, safety, and
welfare of the public and the equities of the situation, determines is in the best interest of the
community.
(6) Conditions. City council may impose reasonable conditions on the granting of a variance and
may require development pursuant to a site plan.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/684
(7) Action on application. When an application has been denied by the city council pursuant to this
subsection or when the applicant has withdrawn an application after public notice of the hearing has
been given, the applicant may not submit a new application for the same variance for a period of 6
months from the date of the denial or withdrawal unless the application is denied without prejudice.
(8) Renewal and transfer. A variance granted pursuant to this subsection is valid for subsequent
renewals of the alcoholic beverage license or permit. A variance granted pursuant to this subsection
may not be transferred to another location or to another alcoholic beverage license or permit holder.
(Ordinance 12-10-74 adopted 10/23/12; Ordinance 18-10-59 adopted 10/16/18)
Sec. 10-3 Late night hours sales
The holder of a late hours permit may sell and offer for sale alcoholic beverages between midnight and 2:00 a.m.
on any day, provided that the holder complies with the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as it exists or may be
amended. (Ordinance 14-11-73, sec. 4, adopted 11/18/14; Ordinance 14-12-76, sec. 3, adopted 12/8/14)
Secs. 10-4–10-18 Reserved
ARTICLE II. PERMITS*
Sec. 10-19 Permit required and annual permit fee established
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, distill, brew, import, transport, store for purposes of sale,
distribute or sell any beer, wine or other alcoholic beverage within the city without first paying the appropriate
fee to the city secretary and obtaining a city permit to sell alcoholic beverages at a specific location. The fee
shall be equal to one-half of the fee charged by the state, as amended, for the particular license issued by the
Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission (“TABC”), except when said fee is waived according to the provisions
of the state alcoholic beverage code. Following payment of the fee and approval of the permit application, as set
forth herein, the city secretary shall issue a permit for that location for a period of one year. Such permit fee shall
be paid to the city secretary annually. (Ordinance 09-07-39, sec. 3, adopted 7/27/09)
Sec. 10-20 Permit application review/certificate of wet/dry status
Prior to issuing a city permit to applicant for the proposed location, the city secretary shall certify whether the
location is located in an area that is wet and that the sale of alcoholic beverages at this location is not prohibited
by charter and/or ordinance. The city secretary shall keep a record of all permits and certificate[s] issued under
this chapter. (Ordinance 09-07-39, sec. 4, adopted 7/27/09)
Sec. 10-21 Savings/repealing clause
All provisions of any ordinance in conflict with this article are hereby repealed, but such repeal shall not abate
any pending prosecution for violation of the repealed ordinance, nor shall the repeal prevent a prosecution from
being commenced for any violation if occurring prior to the repeal of the ordinance. Any remaining portions of
said ordinance shall remain in full force and effect. (Ordinance 09-07-39, sec. 5, adopted 7/27/09)
CHAPTERS 11-13
RESERVED
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/684
CHAPTER 14
ANIMALS*
Sec. 14-1 Findings incorporated
The findings set forth above are incorporated into the body of this chapter as fully set forth herein. (Ordinance
08-01-06, sec. 1, adopted 1/15/08)
Sec. 14-2 Repeal of ordinance 05-04-27
Ordinance No. 05-04-27 is hereby repealed in its entirety and replaced by this chapter. The effective date of the
repeal discussed in this section shall not occur until the effective date of this chapter, at which time Ordinance
No. 05-04-27 shall be repealed. Such repeal shall not abate any pending prosecution and/or lawsuit and/or
prevent any prosecution and/or lawsuit from being commenced for any violation of Ordinance No. 05-04-27
occurring before the effective date of this chapter. (Ordinance 08-01-06, sec. 2, adopted 1/15/08)
Sec. 14-3 Definitions
For the purposes of this chapter, when not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future tense, words in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular include the plural, and the use
of any gender shall be applicable to all genders whenever the sense requires. Words not defined in this section
shall be given their common and ordinary meaning.
Abandoned animal: Any animal that has not been provided one or more of the necessities of life, which includes
air, food, water or protection from the sun and other elements of nature or has been left in the custody of another
person without their consent. For the purpose of this chapter, an animal not reclaimed from the city's authorized
animal shelter agent(s), within five days of the date the city's authorized animal shelter agent came into
possession of the animal, shall also be considered abandoned.
Animal: Any live, vertebrate creature, domestic or wild, including but not limited to, dogs, cats, pigs, horses,
birds, fish, mammals, reptiles, fowl, livestock and invertebrate creatures housed, sold or adopted as pets, but
specifically excluding human beings.
Animal services: The animal services division of the police department, supervised by the chief of police, or
his/her designee, of the city, or its designee, as determined by the city manager.
Animal services officer: Any person designated by the chief of police through written agreement or otherwise, to
enforce the provisions of this chapter and who is authorized to receive reports of animal bites, investigate bite
reports, administer euthanasia, ensure quarantine of suspected rabid animals, and otherwise carry out local, state
and/or federal laws relating to animals, including, without limitation, rabies control and eradication.
Animal nuisance: Any animal which physically molests passersby or passing vehicles; attacks other animals or
persons, trespasses on school grounds; roams at large; damages public or private property; or creates a noise
disturbance in an excessive, continuous or untimely fashion.
Animal shelter: A facility operated by the City of Frisco or its agents or designees for the purpose of impounding
or caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter or state or federal laws.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/684
Animal welfare organization: A duly incorporated nonprofit organization that has tax-exempt status under
section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code whose mission is in whole or significant part
devoted to the welfare, care and adoption of stray, abandoned or surrendered animals and which does not breed
animals. A person shall not be considered an animal welfare organization if the person obtains animals from a
breeder or broker in exchange for payment or compensation or resells animals obtained from a breeder or broker
and provides payment or compensation to such breeder or broker. A person shall not be considered an animal
welfare organization if the person auctions, barters, displays for sale, offers for sale, gives away or sells animals;
however, an animal welfare organization may accept an adoption fee that does not exceed the cost of boarding,
feeding and care of the animal being adopted.
Assistance animal or therapy animal: An animal that is specially trained or equipped to help a human being that
is diagnosed by a licensed physician with a physical challenge or emotional disorder. The licensed physician
shall provide in writing to animal services that removal of the animal would be detrimental to the person who
requires the animal for assistance.
At large: An animal, including fowl or livestock, not in a secure enclosure or not completely confined by a
building, wall, pen or fence of sufficient strength of construction, to physically restrain the animal on the
premises behind the front building line of the owner or custodian, or an animal that is not under the physical
restraint of the owner or custodian or any other person authorized by the owner to care for the animal by leash,
cord, chain, or rope.
Breeder: A person who sells, exchanges or otherwise transfers only animals that were bred or raised, or both, by
the person, or sells or otherwise transfers only animals kept primarily for reproduction.
Cat: Any cat that is a member of the feline family (Felis catus).
Commercial stable: A facility or property where a fee is charged to house, pasture, board, let, or rent horses,
cattle, or other livestock and meets all other requirements of the City of Frisco Comprehensive Zoning
Ordinance, as it currently exists or may be amended.
Currently vaccinated: Vaccinated and satisfying the following criteria:
(1) The animal must have been vaccinated against rabies according to the label recommendations
of a USDA-approved rabies vaccine.
(2) At least 30 days have elapsed since the initial vaccination.
(3) The time elapsed since the most recent rabies vaccination has not exceeded the label
recommendations of the USDA-approved rabies vaccine.
Custodian: Any human being or agency which feeds, shelters, harbors, has possession or control, or has the
responsibility to control an animal.
Dangerous animal: An animal that:
(1) Makes an unprovoked attack on a person that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other
than a secure enclosure in which the animal was being kept and that was certain to prevent the animal
from leaving the secure enclosure on its own; or
(2) Commits unprovoked acts in a place other than the secure enclosure in which the animal was
being kept and was reasonably certain to prevent the animal from leaving the secure enclosure on its
own, and those acts cause a person to reasonably believe the animal will attack and cause bodily
injury to that person.
Disinfect: To free from infection by destroying harmful bacteria.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/684
Disposition: The transfer of an animal from a pet store to another location, including the sale or adoption of the
animal, the return of the animal to the person who supplied the animal to the pet store, or removal from the pet
store of an animal that is deceased for any reason, including euthanasia.
Dog: Any dog that is a member of the canine family (Canine familiaris).
Domestic: Includes all domesticated species of animals adapted to live in intimate association with human
beings or for the advantage of humans commonly accepted as being domesticated, excluding hybrids.
Euthanasia: A humane, painless method to end life for suffering, injured, contagious, or sick animals or as
required by any state or federal law, as it currently exists or may be amended.
Ferret: Any ferret (Mustela putorius furo).
Gallinaceous fowl: Fowl of or relating to an order (Galliformes) of heavy-bodied largely terrestrial birds
including pheasants, turkeys, grouse and the common domestic chicken.
Harboring: The act of keeping and caring for an animal or of providing a premises or other location to which the
animal returns for food, shelter or care for a period of three consecutive days. This excludes the feeding of local
or migratory birds (domestic or wild) on public or private property.
High risk animal: An animal that has a high probability of transmitting rabies including, but not limited to,
skunks, bats, coyotes, raccoons, and foxes.
Home quarantine: Strict isolation of a domestic animal secured within a cage, crate, pen, or other LRCA
approved isolation area, that consists of four sides, a top, and a bottom. The isolation area shall provide
sufficient space to occupy the animal. Such isolation area shall prevent escape by the animal and prohibit all
contact with other animals and any human beings by the animal (with exception of the pet owner). One pet
owner who resides with the animal will be the sole care and maintenance provider for the animal during the
home quarantine observation period.
Humane trap: Any trap designed to capture an animal without injuring the animal.
Hybrid: Any offspring of two animals of different species.
Impoundment: The seizing, taking, collecting, confining, or capturing of an animal.
Isolation: The confinement of an animal in a secure enclosure that prohibits all interaction with other human
beings or animals (except one person responsible for the care of the isolated animal) to prevent the spread of
disease or to observe an animal's health.
Kennel: Any premises wherein any person engages in providing pet care services (except veterinary) for four (4)
or more animals, such as boarding, grooming, sitting and training pets, except as prohibited by the City of
Frisco's Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, as it currently exists or may be amended. Kennels are permitted only
in zoning districts that allow that use.
Large livestock: Horses or any member of the domesticated horse family, including but not limited to, mules,
donkeys and ponies; all types and varieties of cattle; alpacas, and other animals of the same approximate size
and weight deemed by animal services to be large livestock.
Local rabies control authority (LRCA): The supervisor of animal services or his/her designee shall serve as the
local rabies control authority (LRCA). He/she shall be authorized to enforce this chapter, receive reports of
animal bites/scratches, investigate bite/scratch reports, ensure quarantine of possible rabid animals, ensure
quarantine of biting/scratching animals, and otherwise carry out provisions of the Texas Health and Safety Code,
chapter 826, as it currently exists or may be amended, to control and eradicate rabies.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/684
Low risk animals: Animals that have a low probability of transmitting rabies, including, but not limited to, rats,
mice, squirrels, gophers, beavers, prairie dogs, muskrats, nutria, jackrabbits, cottontails, swamp rabbits,
opossums, shrews, moles, armadillos, or any animals of the orders Rodentia, Lagomorpha, Didelphimorphia,
Insectivora or Xenarthra.
Microchip/microchip implant: A passive electronic device that is injected into an animal by means of a
hypodermic-type syringe device. Each microchip implant shall contain a unique and original number that can be
read by an electronic scanning device for purposes of animal identification and recovery by the animal's owner.
Microchip reader: An electronic scanner with an operating frequency that detects a microchip that has been
implanted in an animal and that displays the number of the microchip implant to its operator. The microchip
reader shall be of a type that activates and displays the number of a microchip implant manufactured by multiple
vendors.
Notice: Providing written notice by personal service, certified mail (return receipt requested), or a notice left at
the entrance to the premises where an animal is harbored.
Notify and notification: Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, a requirement to notify animal services means
to contact animal services by telephone at (972) 292-6010. Notification shall be made immediately, but only as
soon as can be done safely.
Observation period: Time following an incident that an animal's health status is monitored.
Owner: Any person, firm, entity, or corporation having ownership of any animal; or a person who has, harbors
or keeps, or causes or permits to be harbored or kept, any animal in his/her care or who permits an animal to
remain on or about his/her premises or who has custody or control of any animal. Proof that a person is in
control of a premises where an animal is usually kept, harbored or maintained shall establish a prima facie
presumption that such person is the owner of such animal.
Person: Includes an individual, partnership, firm, corporation, association, trust, estate, or other legal entity.
Pet animal: Includes domestic dogs, domestic cats, domestic ferrets, rabbits, rodents, birds, reptiles and any
other species of animal that are customarily sold or retained as a household pet, but shall not include swine and
wild animals, such as, among others, skunks, squirrels, coyotes, foxes, opossums, bats, nonhuman primates, and
any other species of wild, poisonous or carnivorous animal that may be further restricted in this chapter or
regulated by any state or federal law, as it exists or may be amended.
Pet store: A retail establishment open to the public and selling or offering for sale animals, including, but not
limited to, animals for use as pets or animals intended as food for other animals. “Pet store” does not include a
retail establishment open to the public and selling or offering for sale animals to agricultural operations for
purposes that are directly related to the raising of livestock or poultry on a farm or ranch. A person who sells,
exchanges or otherwise transfers only animals that were bred or raised, or both, by the person, or sells or
otherwise transfers only animals kept primarily for reproduction, shall be considered a breeder and not a pet
store.
Pet store operator: A person who owns or operates a pet store, or both.
Police dog: A domestic dog that is owned or employed by a governmental law enforcement agency.
Primary enclosure: Any structure used to immediately restrict an animal to a limited amount of space, including
a cage, pen, room, pet carrier or a structure approved by the LRCA, or his/her designee.
Purchaser: A person who purchases an animal from a pet store operator without the intent to resell the animal.
Quarantine: The observation period during which a biting/scratching animal or an animal suspected of rabies is
physically confined for observation as provided by local, state or federal laws, as they exist or may be amended.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/684
Rabies: An acute viral disease of human beings and animals affecting the central nervous system and
customarily transmitted by an infected/contagious warm-blooded animal.
Sanitize: To make physically clean and to destroy, to the extent practical, agents injurious to the health of
animals and humans.
Secure enclosure: A fenced area behind the front building line or inside of a structure that is:
(1) Locked;
(2) Capable of preventing any entry by the general public, including children;
(3) Capable of preventing the escape or release of an animal;
(4) Clearly identified or marked as containing a dangerous animal with a sign no less than 12
inches by 12 inches; and
(5) Secured in such a fashion to prevent an animal from exiting of its own volition through any
openings (i.e., windows, screen windows, screen doors, etc.) or other means.
Service animal: An animal qualified as a “service animal” under the federal Americans with Disabilities Act.
Shelter: A structure that is capable of providing cover and protection from the weather. At a minimum, a shelter
must have three (3) sides, a top, a bottom and must be adequately ventilated; it must have bedding material; and
it must be large enough so that the animal can enter, stand, turn around, and lie down.
Small livestock: All types of domesticated swine, sheep, lambs, goats, and other animals of the same
approximate size and weight or deemed as such by animal services to be small livestock.
Stray animal: Any animal for which there is no identifiable owner, custodian, or harborer and/or is a public
nuisance and may be impounded.
Supervisor of animal services: The person designated by the chief of police or his/her designee to supervise all
aspects and operations of animal services.
TDSHS: The Texas Department of State Health Services, Zoonosis Control Division, as it currently exists or
may be amended.
Tether: Any leash, chain, cord, rope or other means of restraining an animal or the act of chaining, tying,
fastening or otherwise securing an animal to a fixed point so that it can move or range only within certain limits.
Transfer: The release of an animal by its owner to another person by sale, gift, adoption or other disposition,
including the exchange of animals between pet stores.
USDA: The United States Department of Agriculture.
Vaccinated: Properly injected with an approved rabies vaccine licensed for use in that species by the United
States Department of Agriculture (USDA) and administered by a licensed veterinarian.
Veterinarian: A veterinarian licensed by the state board of veterinary medical examiners to practice veterinary
medicine in the State of Texas or a person who practices veterinary medicine on an installation of the armed
forces or National Guard.
Veterinary hospital/clinic: Any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for surgery,
diagnosis, and treatment of diseases and injuries of animals.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/684
Veterinary treatment: Treatment by or at the direction of a Texas-licensed veterinarian.
Wild animal: Any animal that is customarily considered dangerous, or undomesticated, including, but not limited
to:
(1) Foxes;
(2) Skunks;
(3) Opossums;
(4) Raccoons;
(5) Wolves;
(6) Bears;
(7) Squirrels;
(8) Leopards;
(9) Panthers;
(10) Tigers;
(11) Lions;
(12) Lynx;
(13) Alligators;
(14) Crocodiles;
(15) Caymans;
(16) Boa constrictors;
(17) Ocelots;
(18) Cougars;
(19) Cheetahs;
(20) Jaguars;
(21) Bobcats;
(22) Servals;
(23) Caracals;
(24) Hyenas;
(25) Coyotes;
(26) Jackals;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/684
(27) Baboons;
(28) Chimpanzees;
(29) Orangutans;
(30) Gorillas;
(31) Any member of the families, classifications or order of: Helodermatidae (venomous lizards),
Hydrophiidae (venomous snakes), Viperidae (rattlesnakes, pit vipers and true vipers), Elapidae (coral
snakes, cobras, and mambas), Columbridae-Dispholidus Typus (boomslang), Bioga Dendrophila
(mangrove snake) and Kirklandii (twig snake only), Suidae (i.e., swine), Crocodilia, Aves Order
Falconiforms (i.e., hawks, eagles, falcons & vultures), Carnivores, Felidae (i.e., lions, tigers, bobcats,
jaguars, leopards and cougars, except domestic cats), Canidae (i.e., wolves, dingos, coyotes, foxes
and jackels and any hybrid or an animal listed in the section, except domesticated dogs), Mustelidae
(i.e., weasels, skunks, martins, minks, badgers and otters, except domestic ferrets), Procyonidae (i.e.,
racoons and coati), Ursidae (i.e., bears), Marsupialia (i.e., kangaroos, opossums, koala bears,
wallabys, bandicoots, and wombats), Chiroperta (i.e., bats), Edentata (i.e., sloths, anteaters, and
armadillos), Proboscidea (i.e., elephants), Primata (i.e., monkeys, chimpanzees, orangutans and
gorillas), Rodentia (i.e., beavers and porcupines), Ungulata (i.e., antelope, deer, bison, and camels),
Amphibi (poisonous frogs, except nonpoisonous reptiles or nonpoisonous snakes);
(32) Any hybrid of an animal listed in this definition;
(33) All nonhuman primates, excluding registered therapy animals and service animals, unless
certified for medical, biological, herpetological or other scientific research or study. This definition
shall apply regardless of state or duration of captivity);
(34) Wild animal does not include small livestock, large livestock, fowl or normal household pet
animals, such as, but not limited to domestic dogs, domestic cats, domestic ferrets, cockatiels,
hamsters, guinea pigs, gerbils, rabbits, fish or nonpoisonous reptiles or small, nonpoisonous snakes
(less than three feet total length).
(Ordinance 08-01-06, sec. 3, adopted 1/15/08; Ordinance 15-10-76, sec. 2, adopted 10/6/15; Ordinance 2020-01-
03 adopted 1/21/20)
Sec. 14-4 Rabies control
(a) Vaccination requirements. The owner and/or custodian of a domestic dog, domestic cat or domestic ferret
shall have his/her animal vaccinated against rabies by four months of age. The animal must receive a rabies
booster within a 12-month interval following the initial vaccination. Every domestic dog, cat or ferret must be
revaccinated against rabies a minimum of at least once every three years with a rabies vaccine licensed by the
USDA. The vaccine must be administered according to label instructions. Livestock should be vaccinated
against rabies. Nothing in this section prohibits a veterinarian and owner or custodian from selecting a more
frequent rabies vaccination interval.
Any person moving into the city from a location outside of the city shall comply with this section of this chapter
within 30 days after having moved into the City of Frisco. If the animal inflicted a bite and/or scratch on any
person or another animal within the last ten days, the owner and/or custodian of said animal shall report the bite
and/or scratch incident to animal services as soon as possible, but not later than 24 hours of moving into the City
of Frisco. No rabies vaccine shall be administered during the 240-hour observation period until the 240-hour
observation period is concluded according to state law, as it exists or may be amended.
(b) Certificate of vaccination. Upon vaccination with an approved rabies vaccine, the veterinarian shall
execute and furnish to the owner of the animal as evidence thereof, a certificate upon a form furnished by the
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/684
veterinarian. The veterinarian shall retain a duplicate copy. Such certificate shall contain the following
information:
(1) The current name, address and telephone number of the owner of the vaccinated animal;
(2) The date of vaccination;
(3) The date vaccination expires (revaccination due date);
(4) The type of rabies vaccine used, expiration date, and serial number;
(5) The year and number of rabies tag to be worn by animal at all times;
(6) The breed, age, color, and sex of the vaccinated animal; and
(7) The veterinarian's signature or signature stamp and license number.
(c) Rabies tags. Concurrent with the issuance and delivery of the certificate of rabies vaccination referred to in
subsection (b), the owner of the animal shall cause to be attached to the collar or harness of the rabies vaccinated
animal, a metal tag that is serially numbered to correspond with the vaccination certificate number, and bearing
the year of issuance and the name of the issuing veterinarian or veterinarian's clinic and his/her telephone
number. The owner shall cause the collar or harness with the attached rabies vaccination metal tag to be worn by
the animal at all times. Rabies vaccination certificates and tags shall be valid only for the animal for which it
was originally issued.
(d) Duplicate rabies tags. In the event of loss or destruction of the original rabies tag provided in subsection
(c), the owner of the animal shall obtain a duplicate rabies tag from the licensed veterinarian who originally
vaccinated the animal. Duplicate rabies vaccination certificates and tags shall be valid only for the animal for
which it was originally issued.
(e) Proof of vaccination. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or harbors a vaccinated animal to fail
or refuse to exhibit his/her copy of the certificate of vaccination upon demand to any person charged with the
enforcement of this chapter.
(f) Harboring unvaccinated animal. It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor any animal that has not been
vaccinated against rabies, as provided herein, or that cannot be identified as having a current rabies vaccination
certificate.
(g) Animals exposed to rabies. Any person having knowledge of the existence of any domestic animal known
to have been, or suspected of being, exposed to rabies must immediately report such knowledge to animal
services, and the LRCA or his/her designee, and provide any information that may be required. For any animal
known to have been, or suspected of being, exposed to rabies, the following rules must apply:
(1) Domestic animals that have a current rabies vaccination must be humanely euthanized or
revaccinated immediately and placed in strict isolation, at the owner's expense, in a primary
enclosure for observation according to the method prescribed by the LRCA for a period of not less
than 45 days or the suspected rabies carrier animal is available for testing, is tested and the test has
returned a negative result for rabies. (See Exhibit A [which is hereby recognized as being in full force
and effect as if set out in this Code and kept on file in the city clerk or secretary's office].)
(2) Domestic animals that do not have a current rabies vaccination should be humanely euthanized.
However, if the owner of such an animal elects, he/she may, at his/her expense and in a manner
prescribed by the LRCA, quarantine said animal in a primary enclosure or the suspected rabies
carrier animal is available for testing, is tested and the test has returned a negative result for rabies.
Such animal must be vaccinated immediately following exposure and placed in strict isolation for not
less than 90 days and given booster vaccinations during the third and eighth weeks while in isolation
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/684
during the observation period. For young animals, additional vaccinations may be necessary to ensure
the young animal receives at least two vaccinations at or after the age prescribed by the United States
Department of Agriculture (USDA) for the vaccine administered. (See Exhibit A attached hereto.)
(3) This section only applies to domestic animals for which an approved rabies vaccine is
available.
(4) If a licensed veterinarian determines that a quarantined animal shows the clinical signs of
rabies, the veterinarian or animal services shall humanely euthanize the animal. If an animal dies or is
euthanized while in quarantine, the veterinarian or animal services shall remove the head of the
animal and submit it to the nearest state-approved department laboratory for testing.
(Ordinance 08-01-06, sec. 4, adopted 1/15/08; Ordinance 2020-01-03 adopted 1/21/20)
Sec. 14-5 Reporting cases of humans bitten/scratched by animals susceptible to rabies
(a) Reporting requirements. Any person having knowledge of an animal bite/scratch to a human being will
report the incident to animal services and the LRCA as soon as possible, but not later than 24 hours from the
time of the incident. This reporting requirement may not apply to bites/scratches inflicted by low risk animals.
(b) Quarantine. The owner of the biting/scratching animal may not vaccinate that animal and will place that
animal in a 240-hour quarantine in a primary enclosure for observation commencing on the day of the
biting/scratching incident under the supervision of animal services and the LRCA, or his/her designee, at the
owner's expense.
(c) Investigation. Animal services and the LRCA, or his/her designee, will investigate each bite incident. All
bites or scratches from low risk animals may be investigated at the discretion of the LRCA, the TDSHS or other
state or federal animal regulatory authorities.
(d) Exclusion. Bites/scratches to human beings from rodents, moles, shrews, opossums, armadillos, rabbits,
birds, and all cold-blooded animals are excluded from the reporting requirements of this chapter. Police dogs are
exempt from the requirements of this chapter, unless determined otherwise by a licensed veterinarian or the
LRCA, or his/her designee, but may be subject to home quarantine.
(Ordinance 08-01-06, sec. 5, adopted 1/15/08; Ordinance 2020-01-03 adopted 1/21/20)
Sec. 14-6 Quarantine procedure for suspected biting/scratching by domestic dogs, cats and ferrets
(a) Procedure. When a domestic dog, domestic cat or domestic ferret that is suspected of biting/scratching a
human being is identified, the owner or custodian of the domestic dog, domestic cat or domestic ferret is
required to produce the animal to animal services for two hundred and forty (240) hours confinement in a
primary enclosure at the owner's expense. Refusal to produce said biting/scratching animal to animal services
constitutes a violation of this section and each day of such refusal constitutes a separate and individual violation.
The two hundred and forty (240) hour observation period will begin on the day when the bite/scratch incident
occurs. The biting/scratching animal must be placed in the custody of animal services at the animal services
facilities specified for this purpose, or at a private veterinary facility designated by the TDSHS for quarantine at
the owner's expense. However, the owner of the biting/scratching animal may request permission from animal
services for home quarantine if the following criteria can be met:
(1) The animal must be placed in a primary enclosure to prevent exit, entry and contact by any
persons or animals by the biting/scratching animal at the home of the animal's owner, and must be
inspected and approved by the LRCA, or his/her designee.
(2) The animal is currently vaccinated against rabies, unless the animal is under four (4) months of
age in which case animal services and the LRCA may grant home quarantine.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/684
(3) Animal services, the LRCA, or his/her designee, or a valid state licensed veterinarian must
observe the animal at least on the first (1st) and last day of the home quarantine observation period. If
the animal becomes ill during the observation period, animal services and the LRCA, or his/her
designee, must be notified immediately by the animal's owner, veterinarian, or person having
possession of the animal. At the end of the home quarantine observation period, the animal's owner
may request a written release.
(4) The animal was not at large at the time of the bite/scratch incident as defined in section 14-3
above.
(5) If the biting/scratching animal cannot be maintained in a primary enclosure during the
quarantine period, it shall be humanely euthanized and the head/brain submitted to a state certified
laboratory for rabies diagnosis.
(b) Exemption. At the discretion of the LRCA, currently vaccinated service animals and police dogs may not
be required to be placed in quarantine during the observation period, unless otherwise directed by a licensed
veterinarian.
(c) Interruption of observation. It shall be unlawful for any person to interrupt the 240-hour observation
period. Any animal that cannot be properly quarantined must be tested for rabies.
(d) Multiple bites by animals. An animal that has inflicted multiple bites or scratches may be required by
animal services and the LRCA, or his/her designee, to be immediately tested for rabies.
(e) Stray domestic animals. Any stray domestic animal found at large that inflicted a bite/scratch may be
tested prior to the end of the 240-hour observation period.
(f) Low risk animals. No biting/scratching low risk animal will be tested; however, a biting/scratching low
risk animal may be immediately tested if the animal services officer and the LRCA suspect the low risk animal
of being rabid.
(g) Wild animals and high risk animals. No biting/scratching wild animal or biting/scratching high risk animal
will be placed in quarantine. All wild animals and high risk animals involved in biting/scratching incidents will
be humanely euthanized and tested for rabies.
(h) Quarantine procedure for biting/scratching large livestock and small livestock. Large livestock and small
livestock shall be quarantined or suitably confined for 30 days or as determined by the animal services officer
and the LRCA.
(i) Signs of rabies while quarantined. If a veterinarian determines that a quarantined animal shows the clinical
signs of rabies, the veterinarian or the LRCA, or his/her designee, shall humanely destroy the animal. If an
animal dies or is destroyed while in quarantine, the veterinarian or LRCA, or his/her designee, shall remove the
head of the animal and submit it to the nearest state-approved department laboratory for testing.
(j) Medical conditions of animal's health. If a veterinarian determines that due to the medical condition(s) of
the animal's health, the animal would not be able to be quarantined at the City of Frisco's Animal Shelter, the
animal must be quarantined at a veterinarian clinic for the duration of the rabies quarantine observation period.
(Ordinance 08-01-06, sec. 6, adopted 1/15/08; Ordinance 15-10-76, sec. 2, adopted 10/6/15; Ordinance 2020-01-
03 adopted 1/21/20)
Sec. 14-7 Domestic dog and domestic cat license
(a) License requirements.
(1) A license is voluntary.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/684
(2) Effective date of this section shall be October 1, 2011.
(b) Licensing authority and participating veterinarians.
(1) Licenses under this section may be issued by:
a. The city's animal services administrator (the “animal services administrator”); or
b. A veterinarian who is licensed by the state, who treats dogs and cats, and who submits a
written request to the animal services administrator of their desire to issue licenses under this
section and executes an indemnity agreement in a form approved by the city, or a person and/or
entity so authorized in an agreement approved by the city council, which includes an
indemnification provision (the “license authority”).
(2) License authority. The license authority shall comply with all local, state and federal laws. The
license authority shall strictly comply with this section and any written agreements between the city
and license authority regarding licensing of dogs and cats.
(3) Participating license authority. The animal services administrator shall provide the participating
licensing authorities with the applicable forms and tags to administer the licensing regulations of this
section. Participating licensing authorities shall:
a. Issue licenses and distribute license tags only to persons who meet the requirements set
forth in this section;
b. Collect the license fee for each animal issued a license and shall not charge an animal's
owner a price which is greater than or less than the applicable fees established by city council
ordinance;
c. The licensing authority may charge a convenience fee for issuing a license not to exceed
$5.00. A convenience fee may not be imposed if only forms are being supplied and the license
authority is not issuing tags or collecting money;
d. Send to the animal services administrator (or the licensing authority if so designated by the
animal services administrator), full payment of collected license fees, a copy of the application,
a copy of the license, and any other information deemed necessary by the animal services
administrator. Such payment and information shall be sent by the participating licensing
authority no later than the sixth day of the month following the month in which the license was
issued. The same is required for replacement tags issued under this section;
e. Assume full responsibility for the secure and proper handling of all license tags issued to
him/her by the animal services administrator, and shall be responsible for contracting the
animal services administrator to receive additional tags prior to their supply running out;
f. Comply with all local, state and federal laws;
g. Keep thorough and secured records of applications filed, licenses issued, licenses denied,
rabies vaccination records, and tags at the participating licensing authorities place of business;
h. Allow the animal services administer to inspect, at reasonable times, all license records,
rabies vaccination records, and tags on hand at the participating licensing authorities business
location; and
i. Assist the city in collecting information and providing copies of records and other
documents, if so required by the law.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/684
If a participating licensing authority fails to comply with the procedures and requirements set forth in this
section, the participating licensing authority shall be deemed in violation of the ordinance from which this
section derives and shall automatically forfeit his/her ability to administer and issue licenses under this section.
The city also reserves the right to seek any remedies, available by law, against the participating licensing
authority.
(c) Application for license and fees.
(1) Application. Application for a dog or cat license shall be submitted to the city's animal services
administrator or license authority. Incomplete applications shall not be accepted. A complete
application shall include the following:
a. The name, telephone number and address of the owner of the dog or cat;
b. A description of the animal, including name, breed, color, gender and age;
c. Full payment of the pet licensing fee, as established by city council ordinance;
d. A currently valid rabies certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian showing that said dog
or cat has been vaccinated within the preceding 12 months for animals being registered for a
12-month period or 36 months for animals being registered for a 36-month period;
e. If the animal is sterilized, a certificate by a veterinarian or other clear and convincing
evidence that the animal has, in fact, been sterilized; and
f. If the animal is microchipped, a certificate or other evidence establishing the animal's
microchip identification number and registration bank.
(2) Pet licensing fee.
1-Year Fee 3-Year Fee
Dog Cat Dog Cat
Non-Microchipped/Non-Spayed or Neutered
Pet
$7.50 $7.50 $20.00 $20.00
Microchipped but not Spayed or Neutered Pet $6.25 $6.25 $16.00 $16.00
Microchipped and Spayed or Neutered Pet $5.00 $5.00 $12.50 $12.50
Senior Citizen (Over 65) $0.00 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/684
Replacement tag $5.00 $5.00 $5.00 $5.00
(d) Replacement tags. In the event of loss or destruction of a license tag, replacement tags shall be available
from the animal services administrator or license authority for the payment of a replacement fee as set forth as
established by city council ordinance, upon satisfactory proof that the dog or cat in question was properly
licensed.
(e) Issuance of license. Upon receipt of a complete application, the animal services administrator or license
authority will approve the license and furnish a numbered license tag for each licensed pet. Such license tag shall
be worn by the animal to evidence the issuance of the city license. The license tag shall be valid for so long as
the animal's license remains valid. The city, or the license authority shall maintain a record of all licenses issued
under this section, which shall show the name and address of each person issued a license, the number of the
license tag furnished, a description of the dog or cat for which the license is issued, the date of issuance, the fee
paid, the place of issuance, the type of rabies vaccine administered, and the date of inoculation.
(f) Denial of license. The animal services administrator and/or the license authority shall deny a license if
owner failed to submit a complete application or if the animal services administrator or license authority has
knowledge that a reason for revocation of the license exists. If a license is denied, a written notice of the action
shall be sent to the owner explaining the reasons for denial. Notice shall be sent by depositing a certified letter,
return receipt requested, in the United States Mail and addressed to the last address provided by the owner on
his/her license application.
(g) Expiration of license. Each license shall expire upon the first occurrence of any of the following:
(1) The 30th day next following the expiration of one year from the date of issuance if the pet
received a one-year rabies vaccination;
(2) The 30th day next following the expiration of three years from the date of issuance if the pet
received a three-year rabies vaccination;
(3) The death of the animal;
(4) The 30th day next following any change of ownership of the animal, unless the license has
been amended by that date;
(5) The 30th day next following any change of the address of the animal's owner unless the license
has been amended by that date with current address information; and
(6) The 30th day next following the expiration of any rabies vaccination.
(Ordinance 08-01-06, sec. 7, adopted 1/15/08; Ordinance 11-09-35, sec. 2, adopted 9/6/11; Ordinance 2020-01-
03 adopted 1/21/20)
Editor's note–Formerly entitled, “Domestic dog, domestic cat, and domestic ferret registration”, renamed as set out herein by
Ordinance 11-09-35.
Sec. 14-8 Animals at large
(a) Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any owner, custodian, or harborer to allow any domestic dog or other
animal possessed, kept, or harbored, to roam at large as defined in section 14-3 of this chapter.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/684
(b) Authority of animal services officer. Animal services officers are authorized to pursue onto private and
public property and impound animals that roam at large, and may impound animals at large under conditions
specified in section 14-13 of this chapter, or when he/she has received a complaint that said animal has caused a
nuisance or hazard to the health, safety or welfare of human beings or the animal population.
(Ordinance 08-01-06, sec. 8, adopted 1/15/08; Ordinance 2020-01-03 adopted 1/21/20)
Sec. 14-9 Animal nuisances
(a) The keeping of any animal that physically molests passersby or passing vehicles, attacks other animals, is
not accompanied by a responsible person who maintains physical control over the animal by leash, cord, rope or
other physical restraint device, trespasses on school grounds, and/or damages public or private property is
prohibited.
(b) The keeping of bees in such a manner as to deny the lawful use of adjacent property or endanger personal
health, safety and welfare is prohibited. Upon determination that a bee colony situated within the city limits is
not being kept in compliance with this section, animal services may order the bees to be removed from the city
or destroyed.
(c) It shall be unlawful and constitute a public nuisance for an owner/custodian of a cat to allow the cat to
roam beyond the boundaries of the owner's/custodian's property.
(d) It shall be unlawful and constitute a public nuisance to keep any animal(s) that causes frequent, excessive
or long continuous barking, whining, crying, meowing, howling, or other animal-related noise that interferes
with public peace and comfort.
(e) It shall be unlawful and constitute a public nuisance for any person to maintain any animal in such a
manner or allow any pen, enclosure, yard or similar place used for the keeping of animals to become unsanitary,
offensive by reason of odor, offensive by lack of maintenance or creates a visual nuisance, creates any favorable
condition for any zoonotic diseases or any other diseases, or creates any condition that is a breeding place for
fleas, ticks or other vectors.
(f) It shall be unlawful and constitute a public nuisance for the owner/custodian of any animal to allow excreta
deposited by his/her animal to remain on public or private property. Any condition injurious to public health
caused by the lack of or improper disposal of animal waste will be considered a violation of this section. Public
property includes, but is not limited to, walks, sidewalks, alleys, parks, or recreation areas.
(g) It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally cause, suffer or permit the maintenance of an attractive
environment for the assembly of unconfined and unvaccinated stray dogs or cats by the placement of food. It
shall be an affirmative defense that the dogs or cats were feral and that the person placed the food solely for the
purpose of apprehending stray dogs or cats.
(h) It shall be unlawful for any owner, custodian or person to allow any animal to remain a public nuisance as
defined herein.
(i) It shall be unlawful and constitute a public nuisance to slaughter or kill an animal in public view.
(Ordinance 08-01-06, sec. 9, adopted 1/15/08; Ordinance 15-10-76, sec. 2, adopted 10/6/15; Ordinance 2020-01-
03 adopted 1/21/20)
Sec. 14-10 Protection of animals
(a) Baby fowl. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, barter, or give away as toys, premiums
or novelties, baby chickens, ducklings, or other fowl under eight weeks old. Sale of such animals for agricultural
purposes is exempt from this provision if sold in quantities of ten or more.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/684
(b) Change of color of certain animals. It shall be unlawful to color, dye, stain, or otherwise change the natural
color of any chickens, ducklings, other fowl, or rabbits, or to possess for the purpose of sale or to be given away,
any of the above-mentioned animals which have been so colored.
(c) Animals as prizes or inducements. No person shall give away any animal as:
(1) A prize or use as an inducement to enter any contest, game or competition;
(2) An inducement to enter a place of amusement or other nonresidential establishment; or
(3) An offer or as incentive to enter into any business establishment whereby the offer was for the
purpose of attracting trade.
(d) Sales of animals from public property. A person commits an offense if he/she sells, exchanges, barters or
gives away or offers to sell, exchange, barter or give away any animal from:
(1) Any public property; or
(2) Any property to which the public has access that does not have a valid certificate of occupancy
allowing the sale of animals on the property. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this
subsection that the person is:
a. Animal services;
b. A government-operated animal shelter; or
c. An animal welfare organization.
(e) Pet store permit.
(1) Permit required. A person wishing to operate a pet store in the city must apply for and receive a
pet store permit. A pet store permit shall be issued by the police department if the requisite fee is paid
and the pet store and pet store operator meet each of the following requirements, as determined by
animal services' inspection of the pet store:
a. Cold and hot water and disinfecting/sanitizing chemicals appropriate for washing and
disinfecting primary enclosures must be easily accessible to all parts of the animal housing
areas;
b. Fresh water must be available and accessible to all animals at all times. Water, food and
waste containers used by or accessible to animals are to be sanitized, cleaned and disinfected
each day. All water and food containers used by or accessible to animals must be removable for
cleaning and mounted, placed, weighted or designed so that the animal cannot easily turn them
over. Disposable food or water containers are acceptable for one time use only;
c. The ambient temperature in animal housing areas must be maintained between 60°F and
79°F at all times, except as otherwise directed in writing by a licensed veterinarian. The
temperature and humidity in individual primary enclosures must be maintained at levels that are
healthful for the species of animals being housed, and adequate ventilation or aeration, as
appropriate, must be maintained in all animal housing areas at all times;
d. Each primary enclosure must be of sufficient height and sufficient floorspace for the
animal to stand up, sit down, turn about freely using normal body movements without the head
touching the top of the primary enclosure, lie down with limbs outstretched, exercise normal
postural movement, move about freely as appropriate for the species, age, size and condition of
the animal, and, when appropriate, to experience socialization with other animals, if any, in the
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/684
primary enclosure. However, when freedom of movement would endanger the animal,
temporarily and appropriately restricting movement of the animal in a humane manner is
permitted;
e. Each primary enclosure must be constructed of a nonporous material with surfaces that
prevent the absorption of fluids and that can be thoroughly and repeatedly sanitized, will not
retain odors and from which fluids bead up and run off or can be removed without being
absorbed into the surface material. Each primary enclosure occupied by a dog, cat, rabbit, ferret
or bird must be thoroughly sanitized, cleaned and disinfected as needed, but no less frequently
than once per day, including Sundays and holidays. For other species of animals, each primary
enclosure occupied by an animal must be thoroughly sanitized, cleaned and disinfected as
needed, but no less frequently than once per week. The pet store operator must maintain written
records sufficient to document the required cleaning of each primary enclosure for a period of
not less than one (1) year after each such cleaning. Each primary enclosure must be locked or
otherwise secured to prevent the escape of any animal being kept therein. Injured or ill animals
must be kept isolated from healthy animals;
f. Feeding records must be maintained on a daily basis to ensure that all animals are fed a
proper and nutritious diet specific to each animal's needs. The daily feeding records must be
maintained or posted in a readily accessible location. All veterinarians' orders must be in
writing and kept on record and available for inspection by animal services and other law
enforcement officers during regular business hours. All animals under six (6) months of age are
to be fed at least two (2) times per 24-hour period, or as directed by a veterinarian, and all other
animals must be fed at least one (1) time per 24-hour period, or as directed by a veterinarian.
Animals that do not require daily feedings are exempt from the daily feeding requirement;
however, feeding records shall be maintained and the animal shall be kept in a healthful
condition;
g. Each bird must have sufficient room to stand upright without touching the top of its
primary enclosure and to spread its wings fully without touching the side of its enclosure. Each
bird must have access to a perch that is placed horizontal to other perches in the same enclosure
and must be of adequate size for the species being housed. The primary enclosure must be
sufficiently ventilated. Birds must be housed in primary enclosures with other birds of similar
size such that the largest bird does not exceed twice the weight of the smallest bird in a single
primary enclosure. There must be clean water and suitable food available to each bird at all
times, and all troughs or other receptacles must be easily accessible to each bird and placed so
that each bird cannot turn them over or defile their contents. Injured, diseased, or dead birds
must be immediately removed from housing areas holding healthy birds;
h. Sufficient clean and dry bedding must be provided to meet the needs of each individual
animal whose species typically uses bedding;
i. When a primary or temporary enclosure is being cleaned in a manner, or with a substance,
that is or may be harmful to the animals within the enclosure, those animals shall be removed
from the enclosure. Animal and food wastes, used bedding, debris and any other organic wastes
shall be removed as necessary to prevent contamination of the animals and to reduce disease
hazards and odors. Pest control measures shall be implemented to effectively control infestation
of vermin, insects or other pests;
j. Proof of current rabies, parvo, distemper and Bordetella vaccinations must be maintained
for all dogs, cats and ferrets;
k. Written procedures must be in place to notify animal services of any local rabies control
incident as required by law;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/684
l. Primary enclosures for prey species shall be located where they cannot be directly seen in
close proximity by predator animals for that species;
m. Light shall be uniformly distributed, by natural or artificial means, in a manner that
permits routine inspection and cleaning, and the proper care and maintenance of the animals.
(2) Reserved.
(3) Enforcement.
a. A person who operates a pet store commits an offense if he/she transfers ownership or
offers to transfer ownership of any animal without first obtaining or maintaining a pet store
permit. Each animal sold or offered for sale in violation of this subsection shall constitute a
separate violation.
i. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under subsection a. if the transfer of
ownership or offer to transfer ownership of the animal was a private sale between two
individuals, neither of whom are pet store operators, outside of the context of a pet store.
b. A person, including a pet store operator, commits an offense if he/she holds a permit issued
under this subsection (e) and refuses access, upon request of animal services or other law
enforcement officer, to any portion of the premises that house or are used to service the animals,
equipment, and any required registrations, veterinary records, feeding logs, permits or other
records required under this subsection (e) or other law during regular business hours or
otherwise interferes with animal services or other law enforcement officer in the performance of
their duties.
c. A person, including a pet store operator, commits an offense if he/she holds a permit issued
under this subsection (e) and fails to meet the requirements set forth in this subsection (e) or
chapter 14. Each separate violation shall constitute a separate offense. Each animal sold or
offered for sale in violation of subsection (e) or chapter 14 shall constitute a separate violation.
d. The city may recover a civil penalty of not more than $1,000.00 per day for each violation
of any provision of this subsection (e) if the city proves that:
i. The person was actually notified of the provisions of this subsection (e): and
ii. After the person received notice of the provisions of this subsection (e), the person
committed acts in violation of the provisions of this subsection (e) or failed to take action
necessary for compliance with the provisions of this subsection (e).
e. Nothing in this subsection (e) shall prevent a pet store from offering for adoption (but not
sale) dogs, cats, rabbits or ferrets owned by a government operated animal shelter or an animal
welfare organization and collecting an adoption fee. The adoption fee must only be collected by
the government operated animal shelter or animal welfare organization.
(4) Suspension, revocation, and appeal.
a. Suspension of permit. The supervisor of animal services is entitled to, without warning,
notice or hearing, suspend a permit required by this subsection (e) if the operation of a pet store
constitutes an imminent hazard to public or animal health, safety or welfare and/or for
interference with animal services or other law enforcement officers in the performance of their
duties. Suspension is effective upon service of notice. A pet store inspection report may serve as
notice. Animal services shall post and maintain at the entrance of the pet store notice of the
conditions therein, or require the pet store operator to post and maintain at the entrance of the
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/684
pet store notice that the pet store is prohibited from selling or offering to sell animals.
Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit or the pet store operator shall be
notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that
an opportunity for an appeal hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed
with animal services by the holder of the permit within ten (10) days from the date the notice is
received. If a written request for an appeal hearing is filed within the required time period,
animal services shall hold a hearing on the appeal and either affirm or rescind the suspension
within ten (10) days of the notice of appeal being received. At least two (2) days before the
appeal hearing occurs, animal services shall provide the permit holder with notice of the time
and place of the hearing. The permit holder shall be permitted to attend and be heard at the
hearing. If animal services affirms the suspension, the suspension shall be a final suspension. If
no written request for an appeal hearing is filed within ten (10) days, the suspension is sustained
until compliance with this subsection (e) is met. It is the responsibility of the permit holder to
request a reinspection once full compliance with this subsection (e) has been met. A
reinspection must be performed by animal services to ensure compliance prior to ending the
suspension. Additional reinspections may be required if compliance is not met. The request for
each reinspection must be made to animal services and a reinspection fee of five hundred
dollars ($500.00) shall be paid before each inspection is performed. Animal services may end
the suspension at any time if the reasons for suspension no longer exist and all fees have been
paid.
b. Revocation of permit. The supervisor of animal services is entitled to, after providing an
opportunity for an appeal hearing, revoke a permit required by this subsection (e) for serious or
repeated violations of any of the requirements of this subsection (e), for violations of other
applicable law affecting public or animal health, safety or welfare and/or for interference with
animal services or other law enforcement officers in the performance of their duties. Prior to
revocation, animal services shall notify the holder of the permit or the pet store operator, in
writing, of the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation and that the permit shall be
revoked at the end of the ten (10) days following service of such notice unless a written request
for an appeal hearing is filed with animal services by the holder of the permit within such ten
(10) day period referred to in the notice. If a written request for an appeal hearing is filed within
the required time period, (i) the revocation shall not take effect unless and until animal services
determines to do so in its ruling at the conclusion of the appeal hearing; and (ii) animal services
shall hold a hearing on the appeal and either enact or reject the revocation. At least two (2) days
before the appeal hearing occurs, animal services shall provide the permit holder with notice of
the time and place of the hearing. The permit holder shall be permitted to attend and be heard at
the hearing. If no request for an appeal hearing is filed within the ten (10) day period referred to
in the notice, the revocation of the permit becomes final.
c. Appeals. All appeals from final suspension or revocation of a permit required by this
subsection (e) shall be made in writing to the city manager or his designee. The appeal shall be
filed in writing within ten (10) days of the occurrence of the final suspension or revocation. At
least three (3) days before the appeal hearing occurs, the city shall provide the permit holder
with notice of the time and place of the hearing. The permit holder shall be permitted to attend
and be heard at the hearing. The city manager or his designee shall hear and rule on the appeal
within thirty (30) days after notice of the appeal. The city manager or his designee shall have
the power to reverse a decision of animal services where he finds that the basis for such final
suspension or revocation was not meritorious and that such a reversal will not adversely affect
the public or animal health, safety or welfare. All decisions of the city manager or his designee
shall be subject to review by the city council at its option at one of its regularly scheduled
meetings. The decision of the city manager or his designee will be final unless reversed by the
city council. The city council's failure to take action on any such appeal shall constitute
approval of the decision by the city manager or his designee.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/684
d. Administrative process. A notice required by this subsection (4) is properly served when it
is delivered to the holder of the permit or the pet store operator via hand-delivery, or when it is
sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, or when it is sent via Federal
Express or any courier service that provides a return receipt showing the date of actual delivery
to the last known address of the holder of the permit. The hearings provided for in this
subsection (4) shall be conducted by the applicable regulatory authority at a time and place
designated by it. The applicable regulatory authority shall make final findings, and shall sustain,
modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing
decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit by the applicable regulatory authority.
(5) Pet store operator obligations.
a. Each pet store operator shall comply with the following animal care requirements:
i. Housing only compatible animals in the same enclosure.
ii. Observing each animal at regular intervals, at least three times per day for dogs and
cats and at least once per day for all other animals, in order to recognize and evaluate
general symptoms of sickness, injury, or abnormal behavior.
iii. Taking reasonable measures to house intact mammals that have reached sexual
maturity in a manner to prevent unplanned reproduction.
iv. Having a documented program of routine care, preventative care, emergency care,
disease control and prevention and veterinary treatment and euthanasia, as outlined in
subsection vii., that is established and maintained by the pet store and approved by a
licensed veterinarian, to ensure adherence to the program with respect to each animal. For
pet stores offering for sale dogs or cats, this program also shall include a documented
onsite visit to the pet store premises by a licensed veterinarian at least once per week. For
all other pet stores, this program also shall include a documented onsite visit to the pet
store premises by a licensed veterinarian at least once per year.
v. Maintaining and abiding by written animal husbandry procedures that address animal
care, management and safe handling, disease prevention and control, routine care,
preventative care, emergency care, veterinary treatment, euthanasia, and disaster planning,
evacuation, and recovery that is applicable to the location of the pet store. These
procedures shall be reviewed with employees who provide animal care and shall be
present, in writing, either electronically or physically, in the store and made available to
all store employees.
vi. Ensuring that each diseased, ill or injured animal is evaluated and treated without
delay. If necessary for the humane care and treatment of the animal, the animal shall be
provided with veterinary treatment without delay.
vii. Euthanasia.
1. If there is a determination that an animal may need to be euthanized, ensuring
that the euthanasia and other veterinary treatment is provided without delay.
2. Notwithstanding subsection 1., a rodent or rabbit intended as food for another
animal may be euthanized by a pet store operator or an employee of a pet store only
if the animal is euthanized by a method that is performed in a humane manner,
appropriate for the species, authorized by state law, and in compliance with the
American Veterinary Medical Association (AVMA) Guidelines on Euthanasia,
published by the AVMA.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/684
3. The euthanasia performed on a rodent or rabbit intended as food for another
animal pursuant to subsection 2. may be performed by a pet store operator or an
employee of a pet store only if a state-licensed veterinarian has certified, in writing,
that the pet store operator or employee is properly trained and proficient in
performing the method of euthanasia on that particular species. The certification
shall be valid for a period of not more than three (3) years, and may be recertified
for additional periods of three (3) years. Each certification of a pet store operator or
employee shall be retained by the pet store for three (3) years. The certification shall
be made available, upon request, to animal services and other law enforcement
officers.
4. It is the responsibility of the pet store operator to ensure that euthanasia is
performed in compliance with this section.
viii. Isolating and not offering for sale those animals that have or are suspected of
having a contagious condition. The pet store shall have one or more quarantine areas of
adequate size to accommodate animals that have or are suspected of having a contagious
condition. This subsection shall not apply to those animals that are effectively isolated by
their primary enclosure, including, but not limited to, fish, provided that a sign is posted
on the enclosure that indicates that these animals are not for sale, or otherwise marked in a
manner to prevent their sale to customers during their treatment for the contagious
condition.
ix. Not displaying for sale, offering for sale or selling any dog or cat unless the dog or
cat is at least eight (8) weeks of age and has been weaned.
x. In the event of a natural disaster, an emergency evacuation, or other similar
occurrence, the humane care and treatment of each animal is provided for, as required by
this chapter, to the extent access to the animal is reasonably available.
b. Each pet store operator shall comply with the following recordkeeping and disclosure
requirements:
i. Maintaining records sufficient to document the origin of each dog, cat, rabbit or ferret
the pet store sells or provides space for, including any federal and state breeder or dealer
license number of the breeder or dealer from whom the pet store obtained each animal, for
at least one (1) year after the disposition of the animal. Additionally, the pet store operator
shall post, in a conspicuous location on the cage or enclosure of each dog, cat, rabbit or
ferret, a sign listing the name of the breeder, public animal services agency or shelter,
private shelter, nonprofit organization, person or other entity from which each animal was
obtained.
ii. Maintaining written records sufficient to document the health and disposition of each
dog, cat, rabbit or ferret for a period of not less than two (2) years after the animal is sold.
These records shall be available to animal services and other law enforcement officers,
prospective purchasers of a specific dog, cat, rabbit or ferret, or the purchaser of a dog,
cat, rabbit or ferret for inspection during normal business hours.
iii. Maintaining records sufficient to document the manner of transportation of each
dog, cat, rabbit or ferret transferred to the pet store, including the aggregate time the
animal spent in transit, for at least one (1) year after the disposition of the animal. These
records shall be available to animal services and other law enforcement officers,
prospective purchasers of a specific dog, cat, rabbit or ferret, or the purchaser of a dog,
cat, rabbit or ferret for inspection during normal business hours.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/684
iv. Providing to each prospective purchaser of a specific animal or purchaser of an
animal a copy of the veterinary medical records of the animal.
c. Each pet store operator shall comply with the following veterinary and consumer
protection requirements:
i. Ensuring that records of all veterinary visits to the pet store and orders for veterinary
treatment are documented in writing. Veterinary treatment records shall be kept for each
animal or group of animals that receives medications or immunizations while in the care
of the pet store. These records shall include summaries of direction received orally from
veterinarians, and shall include all of the following:
1. Identification of the animal or group of animals receiving medical treatment.
2. Name of the medication or immunization used.
3. Amount of medication used.
4. Time and date on which the medication or immunization was administered.
5. Identity of veterinarian providing such direction.
Records required by this subsection i. shall be made available during business hours
to each purchaser of a dog, cat, rabbit or ferret at the time of sale.
ii. Providing to each prospective purchaser of a specific animal upon request and to
each purchaser of an animal at the time of sale information concerning the store's animal
return policy, which shall be made available to customers either through in-store signs or
written handouts. The return policy shall include the circumstances, if any, under which
the pet store will provide follow-up veterinary care for the animal in the event of illness.
Each pet store operator shall maintain records sufficient to identify each dog, cat, rabbit or
ferret returned to and accepted by the pet store after the pet store sold each such animal to
a purchaser. Records required by this subsection ii. shall be made available upon request
to animal services and other law enforcement officers.
iii. Providing to purchasers of dogs, cats, rabbits or ferrets all of the following
information at the time of sale on a form and/or in format prescribed by the city:
1. Any spay or neuter procedures performed on the animal.
2. Any vaccinations, medical treatment and veterinary treatment administered to
the animal during its stay in the pet store.
3. Any identification device on or in the animal.
4. With respect to cats, all of the following information:
(A) The breeder's name, address and federal and state breeder license
number(s), if known, or if not known, the source of the cat. If the person from
whom the cat was obtained is a dealer licensed by the United States
Department of Agriculture, the person's name, address and federal and state
dealer license number(s). All unredacted violations of any federal or state
animal welfare law the cat breeder, dealer or transporter received in the
previous two years on federal or state inspection reports, if known.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/684
(B) The date of the cat's birth, unless unknown because of the source of the
cat, and the date the pet store received the cat.
(C) The breed, sex, color and identifying marks at the time of sale, if any. If
the cat is from a United States Department of Agriculture-licensed source, the
individual identifying tag, tattoo or collar number for that animal, if available.
If the breed is unknown or mixed, the record shall so indicate.
(D) A record of the immunizations and worming treatments administered, if
any, to the cat as of the time of sale, including the dates of administration and
the type of vaccine or worming treatment.
(E) A record of any known disease or sickness that the cat is afflicted with at
the time of sale. In addition, this information shall also be orally disclosed to
the purchaser.
5. With respect to dogs, all of the following information:
(A) The breeder's name, address and federal and state breeder license
number(s), if known, or if not known, the source of the dog. If the person from
whom the dog was obtained is a dealer licensed by the United States
Department of Agriculture, the person's name, address and federal and state
dealer license number(s). All unredacted violations of any federal or state
animal welfare law the dog breeder, dealer or transporter received in the
previous two years on federal or state inspection reports, if known.
(B) The date of the dog's birth, and the date the pet store received the dog. If
the dog is not advertised or sold as purebred, registered or registerable, the date
of birth may be approximated if not known by the seller.
(C) The breed, sex, color and identifying marks at the time of sale, if any. If
the dog is from a United States Department of Agriculture-licensed source, the
individual identifying tag, tattoo or collar number for that animal, if available.
If the breed is unknown or mixed, the record shall so indicate.
(D) If the dog is advertised or being sold as being capable of registration, the
names and registration numbers of the sire and dam, and the litter number, if
known, and all other information required to register the dog.
(E) A record of the immunizations and worming treatments administered, if
any, to the dog as of the time of sale, including the dates of administration and
the type of vaccine or worming treatment.
(F) A record of any veterinarian treatment or medication received by the dog
while in the possession of the pet store and either of the following:
1) A statement, signed by an authorized agent of the pet store operator
at the time of sale, disclosing that:
i) The dog has no known disease or illness; and
ii) The dog has no known congenital or hereditary condition that
adversely affects the health of the dog at the time of the sale or that is
likely to adversely affect the health of the dog in the future.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/684
2) A record of any known disease, illness and any congenital or
hereditary condition that adversely affects the health of the dog at the
time of sale, or is likely to adversely affect the health of the dog in the
future, along with a statement signed and dated by a veterinarian that
authorizes the sale of the dog, recommends necessary treatment, if any,
and verifies that the disease, illness or condition does not require
hospitalization or nonelective surgical procedures, nor is it likely to
require hospitalization or nonelective surgical procedures in the future. A
veterinarian statement is not required for intestinal or external parasites
unless their presence makes the dog clinically ill or is likely to make the
dog clinically ill. The statement shall be valid for seven days following
examination of the dog by the veterinarian, and the pet store shall not sell
a dog for which such statement is required unless the statement is valid
as of the time of sale. For the purposes of this section, “nonelective
surgical procedure” means a surgical procedure that is necessary to
preserve or restore the health of the dog, to prevent the dog from
experiencing pain or discomfort, or to correct a condition that would
interfere with the dog's ability to walk, run, jump, or otherwise function
in a normal manner. For the purposes of this section, “clinically ill”
means an illness that is apparent to a veterinarian based on observation,
examination or testing of the dog, or upon a review of the medical
records relating to the dog. For purposes of this section, a disease, illness
or congenital or hereditary condition that adversely affects the health of a
dog at the time of sale or is likely to adversely affect the health of the dog
in the future shall be one that is apparent at the time of sale or that should
have been known by the pet store operator from the history of veterinary
treatment disclosed pursuant to this section.
(G) A disclosure made pursuant to subsection (F) shall be signed by both an
authorized agent of the pet store operator certifying the accuracy of the
statement, and the purchaser of the dog, acknowledging receipt of the
statement.
iv. Maintaining records for identification purposes of the person from whom dogs, cats,
rabbits or ferrets in the pet store were acquired, including that person's name, address, and
telephone number and the date the animal was acquired.
v. Conspicuously posting, within close proximity to the cages of dogs, cats, rabbits or
ferrets offered for sale, a notice containing the following language in I00-point type:
“Information on the source of dogs, cats, rabbits or ferrets, and veterinary treatments
received by these animals is available for review. Purchasers must receive information
about the animal on a form prescribed by the City of Frisco.”
vi. Unless otherwise required, all records required by this section (e) shall be
maintained by the pet store on the pet store premises for two (2) years from the date of
disposition of the animal, and shall be made available immediately upon request to animal
services or other law enforcement officers.
(6) Microchip implants.
a. Except as provided in subsection b., a pet store shall not sell or transfer a dog or cat to a
new owner unless the dog or cat has a microchip implant containing current information on the
new owner purchasing or receiving the dog or cat.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/684
b. Notwithstanding subsection a., this section does not require a dog or cat to be
microchipped if a licensed veterinarian certifies in writing that the dog or cat is medically unfit
for the microchip implanting procedure because the dog or cat has a physical condition that
would be substantially aggravated by the procedure. The dog or cat's age shall not per se
constitute medical unfitness.
(7) Domestic-born animals. A pet store shall not offer to sell or transfer or sell or transfer an
animal that was born outside of the territorial limits of the United States of America.
(8) Inspections. Animal services shall inspect each pet store offering dogs or cats for sale at least
once per calendar quarter and all other pet stores at least once per year, except that animal services
shall inspect any pet store more frequently if deemed necessary by animal services.
(Ordinance 08-01-06, sec. 10, adopted 1/15/08; Ordinance 15-10-76, sec. 2, adopted 10/6/15; Ordinance 2020-
01-03 adopted 1/21/20)
Sec. 14-11 Wild, prohibited animal
(a) An owner shall not own, harbor, shelter, or have custody or control of a wild animal or other prohibited
animal for any purpose within the Frisco City limits, except as follows:
(1) A county, municipality, agency of the state, an agency of the United States, or an agent or
official of a county, municipality, state or agency acting in an official capacity;
(2) A research facility, as that term is defined by Section 2(e), Animal Welfare Act (7 U.S.C. sec.
2132), and its subsequent amendments, that is licensed by the Secretary of Agriculture of the United
States under that Act;
(3) An organization that is an accredited member of the American Zoo and Aquarium Association;
(4) An injured, infirmed, orphaned or abandoned wild animal or other prohibited animal while
being transported for care or treatment;
(5) An injured, infirmed, orphaned or abandoned wild animal or other prohibited animal while
being rehabilitated, treated or cared for by a licensed veterinarian, an incorporated human society or
animal shelter or a person that holds a rehabilitation permit issued under V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife
Code ch. 43, subch. C, as it currently exists or may be amended;
(6) A wild animal or prohibited animal owned by and in custody or control of a transient circus
company that is not based in this state if the animal is used as any essential, integral part of the circus
performances;
(7) A wild animal or prohibited animal while in the temporary custody or control of a television or
motion picture production company during filming of a television or motion picture production in
this state; or
(8) A wild animal or prohibited animal while being transported in interstate commerce through the
state in compliance with the animal Welfare Act (7 U.S.C. sec. 2131 et seq.) and its subsequent
amendments and the regulations adopted under that Act.
(b) An owner of a wild animal or prohibited animal, even if kept in violation of this section, shall:
(1) Notify animal services, the LRCA, and the Frisco Police Department of any attack on a human
being by the animal within 24 hours of the attack.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/684
(2) Immediately notify animal services, the LRCA, and the Frisco Police Department of any
escape of the animal.
(c) An owner of a wild animal or prohibited animal that escapes is liable for all costs incurred in apprehending
and confining the animal and for any costs and expenses incurred by way of personal injury or death in
attempting to apprehend and confine such animal.
(d) The LRCA, animal services officers, Frisco Police Officers, or an employee of animal services, or any
city-authorized person or agent, shall not be liable to an owner of a wild animal or other prohibited animal for
damages that arise in connection with the escape or attack of a wild animal or other prohibited animal, including,
but not limited to, liability for damage, injury, or death caused by the wild animal or other prohibited animal
during or after the wild animal's or other prohibited animal's escape, or for injury to, or death of, the wild animal
or other prohibited animal as a result of apprehension or confinement of the wild animal or other prohibited
animal after escape.
(e) Search and seizure. Animal services officers, Frisco Police Officers, the LRCA, the LHA, and/or other
city-authorized personnel shall be authorized to obtain a search and seizure warrant if there is reason to believe
that an animal ordered to be removed from the City of Frisco for being a wild animal or other prohibited animal
has not been so removed.
(Ordinance 08-01-06, sec. 11, adopted 1/15/08; Ordinance 2020-01-03 adopted 1/21/20)
Sec. 14-12 Dangerous animal
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor a dangerous animal within the Frisco City
limits, except as provided in this section.
(b) For the purposes of this section, a person learns that the person is the owner/custodian of a dangerous
animal when the:
(1) Owner/custodian knows of an attack committed by the animal as described in the definition of
“dangerous animal” in section 14-3 above; or
(2) Owner/custodian is informed by the court of competent jurisdiction that the animal is a
dangerous animal.
(c) If the licensee or owner/custodian of a dangerous animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of the minor
shall be liable for all costs, injuries and property damage sustained by any person or domestic animal in an
unprovoked attack by the dangerous animal.
(d) Should any person desire to file a complaint concerning an animal which is believed to be a dangerous
animal, a sworn, written complaint must be first filed with animal services and include the following:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of complainant and other witnesses;
(2) Date, time and location of any incident involving the animal;
(3) Description of the animal;
(4) Name, address and telephone number of the animal's owner, if known;
(5) A statement describing the facts upon which such complaint is based; and
(6) Statement describing any incidents where the animal has exhibited dangerous propensities in
past conduct, if known.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/684
(e) If a person reports an incident described by the definition of “dangerous animal” in section 14-3 above,
animal services may investigate the incident. Animal services shall accept sworn statements from all victims and
witnesses to the attack.
(f) After a sworn complaint is filed, it shall be referred to the court of competent jurisdiction to set a time and
place for a hearing not to exceed 20 days from the date and time the complaint is received. The animal services
officer, or his/her designee, shall give notice of the hearing to the animal's owner at least ten days prior to the
hearing date. After the owner of the animal is notified, the owner shall immediately surrender such animal to an
animal services officer to keep such animal at the city's animal shelter or at a veterinarian's clinic at the owner's
expense, until such time the hearing is held by the court of competent jurisdiction. The owner is liable for all
fees and citations pertaining to the animal's impoundment. Each day the animal has not been surrendered to
animal services shall constitute a separate offense.
(1) Any interested party, including the City of Frisco City Attorney, is entitled to present evidence
at the hearing.
(2) The court of competent jurisdiction shall receive testimony at the hearing to determine if the
animal specified in the complaint is a dangerous animal and should be permanently removed from the
City of Frisco, euthanized, or registered as a dangerous animal for the protection of the public health,
safety and welfare of the community. To order euthanasia, removal, or registration as a dangerous
animal for the public health, safety and welfare, the court of competent jurisdiction must find the
following facts to be true:
a. The animal is a dangerous animal; and
b. The euthanasia, removal, or registration of a dangerous animal is necessary to preserve the
public health, safety and welfare of the community.
(3) If the court of competent jurisdiction finds the animal to be dangerous, the owner shall have a
microchip inserted into the dangerous animal by a licensed veterinarian and provide animal services
with the alphanumeric combination code contained in the microchip within 30 days to assist in the
identification of the dangerous animal. The owner of the dangerous animal shall assume all
responsibility for microchipping their animal, including all costs. The dangerous animal must also be
made available, at any time, to animal services to verify the microchip data by scanning the animal.
Failure to microchip, show proof of microchipping, or make the animal available for scanning shall
constitute separate offenses.
(4) If the court of competent jurisdiction orders destruction, removal or registration of the animal
and the owner is not present at the hearing, the owner shall be given notice of the decision. If the
destruction, removal or registration of the animal is not ordered, the city's animal services officer or
other city-authorized person shall return the animal to the owner upon the owner's payment of all fees
to the city and its authorized agents. If the court of competent jurisdiction orders the animal removed
from the city, the owner has 30 days to do so. The owner shall furnish animal services and/or other
city-authorized designee evidence of such removal within ten days thereof.
(5) A person commits an offense if he/she possesses and fails to release to the city's animal
services, or veterinarian as approved by animal services, an animal that has been charged by sworn
complaint as provided in subsection (d) of this section and whose euthanasia or removal has been
ordered by the court of competent jurisdiction; provided that such euthanasia or removal order has
not been appealed. Each day the animal has not been released to the city's animal services or
approved veterinarian shall constitute a separate offense.
(g) An owner or person filing the action may appeal the decision of the court of competent jurisdiction in the
manner provided for the appeal of cases from the court of competent jurisdiction within 10 days of the decision.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/684
(h) The City of Frisco may, after notification an animal has been declared a dangerous animal, provide public
notice of the declaration.
(1) The declaration shall include the dangerous animal's description, place of residence, and any
other public information the City of Frisco deems relevant to maintain the public health, safety and
welfare.
(2) The City of Frisco may provide notice of the dangerous animal by, but is not limited to,
publishing notice in a newspaper or other periodical or circular in circulation in the area where the
dangerous animal resides, holding a neighborhood meeting, posting notices in the area where the
dangerous animal resides, or posting notice on the City of Frisco website.
(3) For purposes of determining liability, the release or withholding of information by an appointed
or elected official of the City of Frisco is a discretionary act.
(i) It is a defense to the determination of an animal as dangerous that:
(1) The threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who at the time was committing a
willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the animal;
(2) Person was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal or has, in the past, been
observed or reported to have teased, tormented, abused or assaulted the animal;
(3) Person was committing or attempting to commit a crime;
(4) Animal(s) attacked or killed was at the time teasing, tormenting, abusing or attacking the
alleged dangerous animal;
(5) Animal was protecting or defending a person within the immediate vicinity of the animal from
an unjustified attack or assault;
(6) Animal was injured and responding to pain; or
(7) Animal at issue is a trained guard animal in the performance of official duties while confined or
under the control of its handler.
(j) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the:
(1) Person is a veterinarian, a peace officer, a person employed by a recognized animal shelter or
person employed by the state, or a political subdivision of the state, to deal with stray animals and
has temporary ownership, custody or control of the animal; provided, however, that for any person to
claim a defense in this subsection, that person must be acting within the course and scope of his or
her official duties as regards to the dangerous animal;
(2) Person is an employee of the institutional division of the Texas Department of Criminal Justice
or a law enforcement agency and trains or uses animals for law enforcement or corrections purposes;
provided, however, that for any person to claim a defense in this subsection, that person must be
acting within the course and scope of his or her official duties as regards to the dangerous animal; or
(3) Person is a trainer or an employee of a guard animal company under the Private Investigators
and Private Security Agencies Act in V.T.C.A., Occupation Code ch. 1702, as it exists or may be
amended; provided, however, that for any person to claim a defense in this subsection, that person
must be acting within the course and scope of his/her official duties as regards to the dangerous
animal.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/684
(k) Requirements for any dangerous animal within the Frisco City limits the owner must comply with all of
the following:
(1) Register the dangerous animal with animal services within 30 days of entering the city limits or
of being determined as a dangerous animal by the court of competent jurisdiction. The dangerous
animal registration is valid for one year from the date of issue for the original owner and is not
transferable;
(2) Present proof of current rabies vaccination;
(3) Provide proof of liability insurance in a single incident amount of $100,000.00 for bodily injury
or death of any person or persons, of for damage to property owned by any person which may result
from the ownership of such animal;
(4) Maintain on the dangerous animal at all times a fluorescent orange colored ID collar visible at
50 feet in normal daylight and a tag that provides the animal services issued registration number of
the dangerous animal, along with the owner's name, current address and current telephone number so
the animal can be identified;
(5) Keep all dangerous animals securely confined indoors or in a secure enclosure behind the front
building line, except when leashed as provided herein;
(6) Not keep a dangerous animal on a porch, patio or in any part of a house or structure that would
allow the animal to exit such building of its own volition. In addition, no dangerous animal may be
kept in a house or structure when the windows are open or when screen windows or screen doors are
the only obstacles preventing the animal from exiting the structure;
(7) Prevent a dangerous animal from going outside its secure enclosure, unless such animal is
securely leashed with a leash not longer than six feet in length and in the immediate control of a
person;
(8) Prevent a dangerous animal from going outside its secure enclosure, unless such animal is
muzzled in a manner that will not cause injury to the animal, nor interfere with its vision or
respiration but shall prevent it from biting any person or animal when the dangerous animal is taken
out of its secure enclosure for any reason;
(9) Display on their premises a sign that is easily readable by the public using the words “Beware -
dangerous animal” in a conspicuous place on the enclosure or pen of such dangerous animal and
posted on all entrances to the dwelling, building or structure. The sign shall be no smaller than one
foot (12 inches x 18 inches) total area, with alphabetic letters with no less than two-inch height;
(10) Provide to animal services a minimum of two current color photographs of the dangerous
animal in two different poses (front and side views) showing the color, any specific markings, and the
approximate size of the dangerous animal;
(11) Have a microchip inserted into the dangerous animal by a licensed veterinarian and provide
animal services with the alphanumeric combination code contained in the microchip within ten days.
The dangerous animal must also be made available, at any time, to animal services to verify the
microchip data by scanning the animal;
(12) Report any attack(s) the dangerous animal makes on any person or animal as soon as possible,
but not later than 24 hours from the time of the incident;
(13) Report to animal services in writing within 30 calendar days that:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/684
a. The dangerous animal has been removed from the City of Frisco, along with the new
owner's name, current address and current telephone number;
b. The dangerous animal has died; or
c. The dangerous animal has moved within the city, along with the new owner's name,
current address and current telephone number. The new owner must comply with this section
and re-register the dangerous animal with animal services.
(14) Comply with the ownership requirements listed above. If the owner of a dangerous animal
fails to comply with the ownership requirements, the owner or harborer will be given written notice
that if the animal is not surrendered to animal services for impoundment within seven calendar days,
then the dangerous animal may be seized and impounded. A written notice left at the entrance to the
premises where the dangerous animal is kept or harbored will be considered valid notice under this
subsection.
(l) Search and seizure. Animal services officers, Frisco Police Officers, the LRCA, and other city-authorized
personnel shall be authorized to obtain a search and seizure warrant if there is reason to believe that:
(1) An animal ordered to be removed from the City of Frisco for being dangerous has not been so
removed;
(2) An animal ordered to be euthanized for being dangerous has not been so euthanized;
(3) An owner has failed to comply with one or more of the requirements for registering a
dangerous animal according to subsection (k); or
(4) A dangerous animal seized and impounded under this section shall not be returned to the owner
until the owner complies with all requirements for ownership of a dangerous animal as determined by
the court of competent jurisdiction. If all the fees have not been paid and all requirements have not
been met within ten days, the dangerous animal may be humanely euthanized.
(m) Violation. A person commits an offense if the person is the owner of a dangerous animal and the
dangerous animal makes an unprovoked attack on another person outside of the animal's secure enclosure and
causes bodily injury to the other person.
(n) Other violations. A person who owns or keeps custody or control of a dangerous animal commits an
offense if the person fails to comply with any provision of this section. An offense under this section is a class C
misdemeanor:
(1) An offense under this section is a class C misdemeanor, unless the attack causes serious bodily
injury or death, in which event the offense is a class A misdemeanor, unless otherwise classified by
state law.
(2) If a person is found guilty of an offense under this section, the court may order the dangerous
animal destroyed by a person listed in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code sec. 822.004, as it currently
exists or may be amended.
(3) In addition to criminal prosecution, a person who commits an offense under this section is
liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $10,000.00. The City of Frisco Attorney may file suit in a
court of competent jurisdiction to collect the penalty. Penalties collected under this subsection shall
be retained by the City of Frisco.
(Ordinance 08-01-06, sec. 12, adopted 1/15/08; Ordinance 2020-01-03 adopted 1/21/20)
Sec. 14-13 Impoundment
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/684
(a) The following animals may be impounded:
(1) Any animal believed to be infected with rabies;
(2) Any animal posing a threat to the public health, safety or welfare;
(3) Any animal found at large;
(4) Any animal treated in a manner determined by animal services to be cruel and/or inhumane;
(5) Any animal that is suspected of biting or scratching a human being, or any animal that is
suspected of coming into contact with a rabies high risk animal that requires isolation to observe for
possible rabies, as determined by animal services and/or state or federal authorities;
(6) Any animal in protective custody;
(7) Any animal seized pursuant to a warrant or court order;
(8) Any animal violating any provision of V.T.C.A., Penal Code secs. 42.09, 42.091 or 42.10, as
they currently exist or may be amended;
(9) Any animal violating any provision of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 821, as it currently
exists or may be amended;
(10) Any animal violating any provision of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 822, as it
currently exists or may be amended;
(11) Any animal violating any provision of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 826, as it
currently exists or may be amended;
(12) Any animal violating any provision of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 828, as it
currently exists or may be amended;
(13) Any animal violating any provision of V.T.C.A., Administrative Code ch. 169, as it currently
exists or may be amended; and/or
(14) Any animal violating any provisions of this chapter.
(b) If any animals named in this chapter are found upon the premises of any resident located within Frisco's
City limits, the city resident shall have the right to confine such animal in a humane manner until he/she can
notify animal services to retrieve the animal for impoundment. When so notified, it shall be the duty of animal
services to impound such animal as herein provided.
(c) Reasonable effort shall be made by animal services to contract the animal owner of any animal impounded
that is wearing an identification tag of any type; however, final responsibility for location of an impounded
animal is that of the animal owner.
(d) The owner can resume possession of any impounded animal upon payment of impoundment fees, handling
fees, and any veterinarian bills incurred by animal services and the city's authorized agents for the welfare of the
animal, and upon compliance with vaccination, and registration provisions of this chapter.
(e) Disposition of animals impounded as a result of cruel or inhumane treatment will be determined by the
court of competent jurisdiction.
(f) If any animal is being held in quarantine or observation for rabies, the owner shall not be entitled to
possession until it has been released from the quarantine observation period by animal services and has satisfied
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/684
payment of any impoundment fees, handling fees, any veterinarian bills, or any other fees incurred while in the
custody of animal services or the city's authorized agents.
(g) The city council or city manager shall select and establish a place for impounding animals. The animal
shelter will establish criteria and procedures for adoption and final disposition of animals in accordance with the
State of Texas Health and Safety Codes in relation to animal handling and care. The City of Frisco will adhere to
the animal shelter criteria as part of this chapter.
(h) Any animal not reclaimed by the owner may be humanely euthanized or adopted after being impounded
for three days, unless under quarantine, by animal services or its city-authorized agents. Any animal wearing a
current rabies tag shall be impounded for not less than six days, unless under quarantine. Unclaimed animals
wearing an identification tag that are in the custody of animal services or any of its authorized agents may be
humanely euthanized or adopted after being impounded for six days.
(i) Any seized or impounded, dangerous animal, or wild animal, unless there is reason to believe such animal
has an owner, may have its disposition immediately determined as deemed appropriate by animal services, or
Frisco's authorized agents.
(j) Any nursing baby animal impounded without it's mother, or where the mother cannot or refuses to provide
nutritious milk, may be immediately euthanized to prevent further suffering.
(k) An animal owner, who no longer wishes responsibility for an animal or believes the animal to be in an ill
or injured condition, may sign a written waiver supplied by animal services or its agents, that surrenders the
animal to animal services or its authorized agents. The written waiver surrenders the animal to animal services
or its authorized agents to be impounded for adoption or to be immediately euthanized in a humane manner. No
warm-blooded animal that has bitten or scratched a human being shall be euthanized before the expiration of the
quarantine observation period, unless said animal's owner requests the animal be euthanized for rabies testing.
(l) Any impounded animal that appears to be suffering from extreme injury or illness may be humanely
euthanized as soon as practical or given to a nonprofit humane organization for the purposes of veterinary care
or as determined by animal services.
(Ordinance 08-01-06, sec. 13, adopted 1/15/08; Ordinance 2020-01-03 adopted 1/21/20)
Sec. 14-14 Impoundment fees
Impoundment fees for animals impounded shall be published and determined by the City of Frisco's authorized
animal shelter agent(s) for all animals:
(1) Class A: All domestic dogs and domestic cats, unsterilized (unspayed or unneutered) or
sterilized (spayed or neutered).
(2) Class B: Small livestock shall include goats, sheep, lambs, swine, and animals of the same
approximate size and weight. Fees shall be set based on actual costs, damages and the factors set
forth in V.T.C.A., Agricultural Code ch. 142, as it exists or may be amended.
(3) Class C: Large livestock shall include cattle, horses, ponies, mules, and animals of the same
approximate size and weight. Fees shall be set based on actual costs, damages and the factors set
forth in V.T.C.A., Agricultural Code ch. 142, as it exists or may be amended.
(4) Class D: Animals not listed herein above shall be impounded and/or disposed of at the
discretion of animal services or the city's authorized agents.
(5) Handling fee: A daily handling fee shall be charged for every day, or fraction thereof, that an
animal is at the animal shelter. Said fee shall be based upon the class of animal enumerated as
deemed by the City of Frisco's authorized agent(s), and class D animals shall be charged as deemed
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/684
by the City of Frisco's authorized animal shelter agent(s). This is in addition to the impoundment fee
as set forth by the City of Frisco's authorized animal shelter agent(s). Class B and class C animals
that are impounded by Collin County or Denton County shall be in accordance with the Texas Estray
Act, as it currently exists or may be amended.
(6) The owner of any class A, class B, or class C animal held in quarantine for observation
purposes or any other purposes shall be charged for each day or fraction of a day an animal is at the
animal shelter at the rates set forth and published by the City of Frisco's authorized animal shelter
agent(s). This is in addition to impoundment fees and daily handling fees or any other costs incurred
by the City of Frisco's authorized animal shelter agent(s).
(7) The owner of a class D animal shall be charged for each day or fraction of a day the animal is
held in quarantine for observation purposes or any other purposes at the animal shelter or at the rates
set forth and published by the City of Frisco's authorized animal shelter agent(s). This is in addition
to impoundment fees and daily handling fees or any other costs incurred by the City of Frisco's
authorized animal shelter agent(s).
(8) Impound administrative fee: Animals that are impounded by the city at the Collin County
Animal Shelter shall be charged an administrative fee that is set and collected by the Collin County
Animal Shelter.
Exemption: A pet that is impounded, and it is determined that the pet is registered pursuant to
section 14-7, shall be exempt from any impound administrative fees.
(Ordinance 08-01-06, sec. 14, adopted 1/15/08; Ordinance 11-09-35, sec. 3, adopted 9/6/11; Ordinance 15-10-
76, sec. 2, adopted 10/6/15; Ordinance 2020-01-03 adopted 1/21/20)
Sec. 14-15 Animal ownership limitation
(a) From and after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
keep or harbor more than six domestic dogs, or six domestic cats, or three domestic ferrets, or any combination
of six thereof, providing the number of domestic ferrets does not exceed three of that species, (i.e., five domestic
dogs and one domestic cat; one domestic dog and five domestic cats; three domestic dogs, two domestic cats and
one domestic ferret) over the age of six months on any one residential dwelling property located within the
Frisco City limits.
(b) Kennels are only permitted in districts that meet the requirements of the City of Frisco Comprehensive
Zoning Ordinance, as it currently exists or may be amended.
(Ordinance 08-01-06, sec. 15, adopted 1/15/08; Ordinance 2020-01-03 adopted 1/21/20)
Sec. 14-16 Small livestock and large livestock
(a) Swine: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep any swine, including potbellied
pigs, within the Frisco City limits, unless certified for medical, biological, or other scientific research or study.
(b) Cattle and equine: It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a cow, steer, bull or horse, donkey, or mule
(at times, collectively referred to as “cow or horse”) on any premises where the overall area is less than one acre
for each cow or horse kept, or is less than one acre for two foals or two calves up to nine months of age. The
number of foals or calves permitted on one acre shall not exceed two foals or two calves under nine months of
age. Any one adult cow or horse and its young up to nine months of age are permitted on one acre.
Agriculture properties are exempt, so long as the person(s) do not keep more than can be cared for under
sanitary conditions and/or create a nuisance. The person(s) in lawful possession of the premises as owner,
occupant or tenant may keep thereon cattle, horses, calves, or foals belonging to others, but limitation to number
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/684
of cattle, horses, foals, or calves on the premises and the area and distance requirements of this section shall not
be done as a commercial business in violation of the City of Frisco Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance No. 00-
11-01, as it currently exists or may be amended.
(c) Holding areas for small livestock and/or large livestock: Small livestock and large livestock must be kept
within an enclosure, pen, corral or restrictive area to prevent exit by the animal(s). The fence posts must not
sway more than six inches when tested by an animal services officer. Gates for small livestock enclosures shall
be mounted on hinges to a solid wall or fence posts. Such a gate must connect with another fence post or wall in
such a manner that small livestock cannot pass through it, and the gate itself must be constructed so that there is
not an opening that will allow the animal(s) to escape the enclosed area. Such gates must have a latch or chain
attached capable of keeping the gate closed when tested by an animal services officer.
(d) Proximity of livestock areas: It shall be unlawful for any owner to keep on premises within the Frisco City
limits under his/her control, any small livestock or large livestock in such a manner that the livestock will be
quartered closer than 100 feet from any human living quarters measured in a straight line from any direction,
whether occupied or unoccupied. Notwithstanding, if the human living quarters are the living quarters of the
owner or keeper, then the small livestock or large livestock must not be quartered closer than 20 feet thereto,
measured in a straight line from any direction.
(e) Confinement of male horses: Male equines, including, but not limited to, horses, capable of breeding, will
be confined in such a manner that said animal will not be dangerous to human beings, and all breeding shall be
under the control of the owner or handler.
(Ordinance 08-01-06, sec. 16, adopted 1/15/08; Ordinance 2020-01-03 adopted 1/21/20)
Sec. 14-17 Fowl
(a) It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of gallinaceous fowl to keep or harbor more than 12
gallinaceous fowl in one enclosure, none of which may be male.
(1) It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under subsection (a) for an owner of custodian
of gallinaceous fowl to keep or harbor male gallinaceous fowl if the premises where such male
gallinaceous fowl are kept or harbored is one acre or more in size.
(b) “One enclosure” as that term is used herein shall be held to mean any and all connected buildings, whether
under one roof or otherwise, and buildings and sheds which may have entrances to the same or adjoining lot or
lots with a gateway or other opening between them.
(Ordinance 08-01-06, sec. 17, adopted 1/15/08; Ordinance 15-10-76, sec. 2, adopted 10/6/15)
Sec. 14-18 Sanitary conditions
(a) The owner, custodian or person in possession of animals shall keep pens, enclosures, yards, cages,
structures, or other similar enclosures in which any animals are kept, clean and sanitary and shall not create any:
(1) Offensive odors or visual nuisances (unsightly) within the vicinity that creates a public
nuisance;
(2) Favorable conditions that breed or attract flies, mosquitoes or other noxious insects;
(3) Favorable conditions for any zoonotic diseases or any other diseases; or
(4) Unsanitary condition that endangers public or animal health or safety.
(b) All persons keeping such animals shall comply with the following regulations:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/684
(1) Manure and droppings shall be removed from pens, stables, yards, cages and other enclosures
as necessary to maintain sanitary conditions and handled or properly disposed of in such manner as to
keep the premises free of any public nuisances. Discarding waste on any public or private property
shall be considered a violation of this section.
(2) Mound storage of manure or droppings between such removals shall be permitted only under
such conditions as to protect against the breeding of flies and to prevent the migration of fly larvae
(maggots) into the surrounding soil.
(3) The feeding of vegetables, meat scraps or garbage shall be done only in impervious containers
or on an impervious platform.
(4) Watering troughs, tanks or other watering containers provided for animals shall be equipped
with adequate facilities for draining water overflow to prevent the breeding of flies, mosquitoes, or
other insects.
(5) No putrescible material shall be allowed to accumulate on the premises, and all such
putrescible material that is used to feed which is unconsumed shall be removed and properly disposed
of by burial or other sanitary means.
(Ordinance 08-01-06, sec. 18, adopted 1/15/08)
Sec. 14-19 Treatment of animals
The following are established as guidelines for pet animal and animal care and not intended to contravene with
the provisions for animal cruelty as contained in V.T.C.A., Penal Code secs. 42.09 and 42.10, as they currently
exist or may be amended.
(1) Every owner/custodian or other person having care and control of any animal shall provide the
following for each animal under his/her care and control:
a. Sufficient nutritious and wholesome food served to the animal in clean containers to
maintain the animal in good health;
b. Clean and wholesome water served to the animal in a clean container and such water to be
available to the animal at all times;
c. Adequate shelter, which shall allow the pet animal to remain dry and protected from the
elements at all times, allow room for the pet animal to stand, move around and lay down apart
from its excrement and which shall provide either natural or artificial shade for the pet animal
to avoid direct sunlight. If the shelter is provided by enclosure, the enclosure shall allow for
adequate ventilation;
d. Veterinary care as needed to prevent suffering;
e. Any animal which is not provided the basic level of care and protection as outlined in this
section may be immediately removed and impounded. Any animal left without basic care due to
injury, illness, incarceration or other involuntary absence of the person responsible for the care
of such animal may be immediately removed and impounded. The animal shall remain in the
custody of animal services until the conditions are improved and an animal services officer has
determined that such animal can be safely returned to the owner or agent. The owner or agent
reclaiming such animal will be responsible for paying all applicable fees and citations. If the
conditions have not improved within 30 days, final disposition of the animal shall be
determined by animal services.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/684
(2) No person shall torture, beat, cruelly ill-treat, overload, overwork or otherwise abuse an
animal; or cause, instigate, or permit any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight, or other combat between
animals or between animals and human beings.
(3) No owner of an animal shall abandon such animal.
(4) Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle or any other means of transportation,
strikes any domestic animal or livestock shall stop at once and render such assistance and shall
immediately report such injury or death to the animal's owner. In the event the animal's owner cannot
be ascertained and/or located, such operator shall at once report the accident to animal services or the
appropriate law enforcement agency.
(5) No person shall intentionally or knowingly trip a horse or other equine.
(6) No owner/custodian or person shall leave any animal in a standing or parked vehicle in such a
way as to endanger the animal's health, safety or welfare, including but not limited to, dangerous
temperature, lack of food, water or attention, or confinement with a dangerous animal. Any animal
services officer, peace officer, fire personnel or other city-authorized person is authorized to use
reasonable force to remove an animal, including but not limited to, the breaking of a vehicle window,
whenever it appears the animal's health, safety or welfare is, or soon will be, endangered and said
animal may be impounded.
(7) Tethering animals. A person commits an offense if he/she tethers an animal to a stationary
object for any length of time.
a. It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under subsection a. if the animal is
tethered on the owner/custodian's property or as part of a lawful city-sponsored event,
veterinary treatment, grooming, training, law enforcement activity, or when needed to protect
the safety or welfare of a person or animal, provided that all of the following conditions are
met:
i. The animal's owner/custodian maintains continuous, direct physical control of the
animal throughout the period of restraint;
ii. The tether is attached to a properly fitting collar or harness and is not wrapped
around the animal's neck. Choke or prong-type collars shall not be used;
iii. The tether is designed and placed in a manner to prevent entanglement or injury; and
iv. The tether does not allow the animal to move outside the owner/custodian's property
or to come within ten (10) feet of public property if tethered outside of a fenced area.
b. It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under subsection a. if the tether includes a
“skyline”-type aerial trolley consisting of a line that is strung between two (2) fixed points that
are at least twenty (20) feet apart with a down line that is at least five (5) feet in length provided
that the conditions of subsections a.i through a.iv are met and the animal is enclosed behind a
fence of adequate size and strength capable of preventing the general public, including children,
or other animals from entering the area.
(Ordinance 08-01-06, sec. 19, adopted 1/15/08; Ordinance 15-10-76, sec. 2, adopted 10/6/15; Ordinance 2020-
01-03 adopted 1/21/20)
Sec. 14-20 Animal traps
(a) Only humane live animal traps may be used for capturing animals roaming unrestrained in the City of
Frisco. The use of steel jaw traps to apprehend animals is illegal. As an exception to this section, government
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/684
agencies and entities shall be permitted to use such traps and equipment as necessary and permitted by state law
or regulation, as they currently exist or may be amended.
(b) No person shall remove, alter, damage or otherwise tamper with a trap or equipment set out by animal
services or the city's agent(s).
(c) Animal services traps placed at a site at the request of a property owner or resident are the responsibility of
the property owner or resident. The property owner or resident shall check all such traps at least once each day.
The property owner or resident shall contact animal services within 24 hours after the property owner or resident
becomes aware that an animal has been captured. The property owner or resident shall be responsible for caring
for any captured animal until the animal is removed by animal services. In the event that a trap placed by animal
services is damaged or lost, the property owner or resident shall reimburse the city for the cost of the trap and
shall pay any other costs incurred as a result of the damaged or lost trap.
(Ordinance 08-01-06, sec. 20, adopted 1/15/08; Ordinance 15-10-76, sec. 2, adopted 10/6/15; Ordinance 2020-
01-03 adopted 1/21/20)
Sec. 14-21 Enforcement
(a) Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of animal services and/or other authorized city
personnel and/or its authorized agents.
(b) Animal services officers, peace officers, code enforcement officers, health inspectors, the local rabies
control authority (LRCA), the local health authority (LHA), and/or other authorized city personnel or the city's
authorized agents shall have the authority to issue citations for any violation of this chapter or remedy violations
by limitations set forth by state or federal law.
(c) If the person being cited is not present, animal services or other city-authorized personnel or the city's
authorized agents may send a citation to the alleged offender. Such notice may be given in any one of the
following ways:
(1) Sent via registered or certified mail addressed to the owner at the owner's address; or
(2) By hand delivery to the owner at the owner's address. If the City of Frisco or its authorized
agents mails a citation to the owner and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as
“refused”, “unclaimed”, or if the address that was used for sending the citation is returned as “not
deliverable as addressed” (or an equivalent marking), the validity of the citation mailed to the owner
is not affected, and the citation is considered as delivered.
(d) Any person who violates a provision of this chapter or fails to perform an act required of him/her by this
chapter commits an offense.
(e) A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this chapter, unless the
provision defining the conduct expressly requires a culpable mental state.
(f) It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, interfere with, obstruct, or give false information to animal
services or any city-authorized person or city authorized agent who is in the lawful discharge of his/her duties
under this chapter or other local, state or federal law.
(g) Animal services officers, peace officers, the local rabies control authority (LRCA), local health authorities,
or other city-authorized personnel and/or city's authorized agents are given the right to trespass onto any private
property in the city for the purpose of determining whether or not any provision of this chapter, state statutes or
the Texas Penal Code relating to animals have been violated and to impound any animal kept or harbored in
violation of any terms of this chapter, state statutes or the Texas Penal Code relating to animals.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/684
(h) It shall be unlawful for any person being issued a citation for a violation of this section, a violation of state
statutes or the Texas Penal Code relating to animals to be filed in municipal court or any civil proceeding to
intentionally or knowingly fail to give the animal services officer their true name and address or to intentionally
or knowingly fail to appear in accordance with the terms of a citation issued by the animal services officer or
other city-authorized person. For the purpose of this section, a person shall be in violation immediately upon
his/her failure to provide the requisite identification information upon request for such information by an animal
services officer or other city-authorized person.
(i) In addition to imposing a monetary penalty against a person convicted of an offense under this section a
court may do one or more of the following:
(1) Require the person, at the person's expense, to attend a responsible pet ownership program
approved by animal services.
(2) Order the impoundment of any animal owned by a person, forfeit the person's ownership of the
animal and award the animal to the City of Frisco.
(3) Suspend the person's right to own an animal in the city for a period of time specified by the
court.
(4) Require the person to have any animal owned by the person spayed or neutered within a time
period specified by the court.
(5) Revoke any permit issued to the person under any section of this chapter.
(6) Impose any other condition(s) or restriction(s) that would reasonably abate the violation(s) for
which the person was convicted.
(7) Take any and all other action(s) authorized by law.
(j) It shall be unlawful for any person to claim or disclaim ownership of an animal that he/she knows is false.
(k) It shall be unlawful for any person to report a violation of this chapter or other local, state or federal law
that he/she knows is false.
(l) It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make, convey or cause to be imparted or conveyed false
statements in an application submitted under this chapter, or to furnish, present or exhibit any fictitious or false
documentation submitted under this chapter.
(Ordinance 08-01-06, sec. 21, adopted 1/15/08; Ordinance 15-10-76, sec. 2, adopted 10/6/15; Ordinance 2020-
01-03 adopted 1/21/20)
Sec. 14-22 Penalty
Any owner, custodian, person, firm, corporation, or business entity violating this chapter shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined a sum not exceeding $2,000.00. Each continuing
day's violation under this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. The Texas Penal Code provisions imposed
under this chapter shall not preclude Frisco from filing suit to enjoin the violation. Frisco retains all legal rights
and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law. (Ordinance 08-01-06, sec. 22, adopted
1/15/08)
CHAPTERS 15-17
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/684
RESERVED
CHAPTER 18
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 18-1–18-18 Reserved
ARTICLE II. CONTRACTOR REGISTRATION
Sec. 18-19 Registration required
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or business entity in the business of contracting
services which require, by state law or local ordinance, a registration, certification or license to perform such
services, to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish any building or
appurtenance, plumbing, electrical, mechanical, irrigation, or private sewage disposal system in the city, unless
such person, firm, corporation or business entity is the holder of a valid registration with the city. Such person,
firm, corporation or business entity shall be herein designated as an “applicant” or “registrant,” as applicable.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any general contractor to engage in the business of general contracting,
construction management, or coordination of subcontractor services related to the construction, alteration,
addition, and/or renovation of residential or commercial structures or building sites within the city, unless such
general contractor is the holder of a valid registration with the city. Such general contractor shall be herein
designated as an “applicant” or “registrant,” as applicable.
(1) The term “general contractor,” as used in this article, is defined to mean any person, firm,
corporation or business entity engaged in the business of general contracting, construction
management, or coordination of subcontractor services related to the construction, alteration,
addition, and/or renovation to residential or commercial structures or building sites within the city.
(c) Registration shall also be required for any person, firm, corporation or business entity providing removal
and disposal of construction debris services, including re-roofing contractors, in the city.
(d) In extending the rights and privileges of such registration, the city makes no statement of the technical
competency of those so registered, and no manner of license is proffered.
(e) No permit to perform work on any building or appurtenance, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, irrigation,
or private sewage wastewater disposal system shall be issued to any person, firm, corporation or business entity
without prior registration; provided, however, property owners performing work on their primary place of
residence shall be exempt from the registration requirements set forth in this article.
(Ordinance 95-07-10, sec. 1, adopted 7/5/95; Ordinance 15-10-75, sec. 2, adopted 10/6/15)
Sec. 18-20 Application for registration
An applicant for registration under this article shall provide to the office of the chief building official the
following information:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/684
(1) The complete name, mailing address, and telephone number of the person, firm, corporation or
entity making application; if the applicant is a firm, corporation or business entity, there must be
provided the name and private mailing address of a principal of the firm, corporation or business
entity who is authorized to bind the firm, corporation or business entity in legal agreements. Each
applicant must also provide the names of all employees authorized to obtain permits.
(2) A copy of the applicant's valid license, issued by the appropriate state board or agency with the
authority to issue licenses for that particular trade. In the case of electricians, a master license from
another municipality may be accepted.
(3) Proof of liability insurance.
(4) Make, model, and registration number on all vehicles used in the removal and disposal of
construction debris.
(5) Any other information deemed necessary by the chief building official.
(Ordinance 95-07-10, sec. 2, adopted 7/5/95)
Sec. 18-21 Transfer of registration prohibited
No registrant under this article shall for any purpose allow its registration, by name or any other identification, to
be transferred to, assigned to, or in any manner directly or indirectly used by, any person, firm, corporation or
business entity other than the one to whom the registration was issued. (Ordinance 95-07-10, sec. 3, adopted
7/5/95)
Sec. 18-22 Requirement to update information provided under section 18-20
If a change occurs in the information previously provided by registrant under the provisions of section 18-20,
then the registrant shall provide written notice of the updated information to the chief building official within 30
days of the change. (Ordinance 95-07-10, sec. 4, adopted 7/5/95)
Sec. 18-23 Registration fee and renewal
The fee for registration shall be $50.00 per year, unless specifically exempted by state law, and shall be
submitted with each application for registration. Registration shall expire annually on the date of the initial
registration and shall be routinely reactivated by the payment of a renewal fee if the application information
remains accurate. The fee for renewal shall be the same as for the initial registration. No permits will be issued
to a contractor whose registration has expired. (Ordinance 95-07-10, sec. 5, adopted 7/5/95; Ordinance 15-10-75,
sec. 2, adopted 10/6/15)
Sec. 18-24 Revocation of registration
A registrant's privileges under this article may be revoked, temporarily or permanently, for providing false or
misleading information; failing to provide updated information within 30 days of such change; failing to
maintain trade licensure from the appropriate agency having licensing authority; suspension of licensure;
transferring or allowing another person, firm, or corporation to use registration; failing to maintain general
liability insurance; being convicted of at least two violations of this article or any other ordinance of the city
within a 12-month period, including but not limited to, convictions arising from failing to obtain required
permits, failing to request required inspections and failing to correct code violations. (Ordinance 95-07-10, sec.
6, adopted 7/5/95; Ordinance 15-10-75, sec. 2, adopted 10/6/15)
Sec. 18-25 Penalty for violation
Any person, firm, corporation or business entity violating this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction thereof shall be fined any sum not exceeding $2,000.00. Each continuing day's violation
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/684
under this article shall constitute a separate offense. The penal provisions imposed under this article shall not
preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin the violation. The city retains all legal rights and remedies available to
it pursuant to local, state and federal law. (Ordinance 95-07-10, sec. 7, adopted 7/5/95)
Secs. 18-26–18-53 Reserved
ARTICLE III. CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF APPEALS
Sec. 18-54 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivation shall have the meaning
given herein:
Board means the construction board of appeals of the City of Frisco, Texas.
Board member means the members of the construction board of appeals, excluding the building official who
shall serve as an ex officio member of the board.
Building official means the building official of the City of Frisco, Texas, or his designee.
City means the City of Frisco, Texas.
City manager means the city manager of the City of Frisco, Texas, or his designee.
Fire code official means the fire marshal of the City of Frisco, Texas, or his designee.
International Codes when used herein shall mean the International Residential Code, the International Energy
Conservation Code, the International Building Code, the International Plumbing Code, the International Fuel
Gas Code, the International Mechanical Code, the National Electrical Code, the International Property
Maintenance Code and the International Fire Code, as they currently exist or may be amended.
(Ordinance 02-02-28, sec. 2, adopted 2/5/02; Ordinance 17-11-79 adopted 11/7/17)
Sec. 18-55 Establishment of construction board of appeals
There is hereby created and established within the city the construction board of appeals. (Ordinance 02-02-28,
sec. 3, adopted 2/5/02)
Sec. 18-56 Number of members; appointment; terms
The board shall consist of five members, who shall be the same as the members of the board of adjustment. The
initial board members shall be those persons serving on the board of adjustment on the effective date of the
ordinance from which this article is derived. Thereafter, all persons serving on the board of adjustment shall be
considered board members. The terms of the board members shall be consistent with the members of the board
of adjustment as set forth in Ordinance Nos. 92-01-02 and 92-07-11, as they currently exist or may be amended.
In addition to the five board members, the building official shall serve as an ex officio member of the board, but
shall have no right to vote on any matter before the board. Each board member shall serve without
compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual expenses approved in advance by the city council. (Ordinance
02-02-28, sec. 4, adopted 2/5/02; Ordinance 02-03-40, sec. 4, adopted 3/5/02)
Sec. 18-57 Board member's qualifications
Each board member shall be qualified by experience and/or training to consider and vote on matters within the
jurisdiction of the board and shall not be employees of the city. Each board member shall have any other
qualifications as the city council deems necessary and appropriate. (Ordinance 02-02-28, sec. 5, adopted 2/5/02)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/684
Sec. 18-58 Meetings
The board shall have its regular meeting on the third Thursday of each month, if needed, and at such other time
as the board and/or city council deem necessary and appropriate. (Ordinance 02-02-28, sec. 6, adopted 2/5/02)
Sec. 18-59 Vacancies
When vacancies occur on the board, the city council shall appoint, by majority vote, a replacement to serve the
remainder of the term. (Ordinance 02-02-28, sec. 7, adopted 2/5/02)
Sec. 18-60 Removal
Each board member serves at the pleasure of the city council and may be removed at the discretion of the city
council. Board member absences shall be controlled by article VIII of the city's Charter. (Ordinance 02-02-28,
sec. 8, adopted 2/5/02)
Sec. 18-61 Quorum
Four board members shall constitute a quorum of the board for the purpose of conducting its business,
exercising its powers and for all other purposes. (Ordinance 02-02-28, sec. 9, adopted 2/5/02)
Sec. 18-62 Alternate board members
The board shall have three alternate board members appointed by the city council to serve in the absence of one
or more regular board members when requested to do so by the mayor or city manager. Each alternate board
member serves for the same period as a regular board member and is subject to removal in the same manner as a
regular board member. A vacancy among the alternate board members is filled in the same manner as a vacancy
among the regular board members. An alternate board member serves upon the same terms and conditions as a
regular board member. (Ordinance 02-02-28, sec. 10, adopted 2/5/02)
Sec. 18-63 Officers
The board shall have a chairman, vice-chairman and secretary whose terms shall be one year. The chairman,
vice-chairman and secretary shall be elected by the board members. The chairperson shall preside over meetings
and shall be entitled to vote upon each issue. The vice-chairman shall assist the chairman in directing the affairs
of the board. In the absence of the chairman, the vice-chairman shall assume all duties of the chairman. The
secretary shall keep the minutes of all meetings, and in the secretary's absence, the chairman shall designate
another member to act as secretary. The secretary may accept the assistance of city personnel in taking and
transcribing minutes. (Ordinance 02-02-28, sec. 11, adopted 2/5/02)
Sec. 18-64 Powers and duties
(a) Authority of the board. The board may hear and decide an appeal that alleges error in an order,
requirement, decision or determination made by the building official and/or fire code official in the enforcement
of the International Codes and this article, as it exists or may be amended. In exercising the board's authority
herein, the board may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the building official's or fire code
official's order, requirement, decision or determination from which an appeal is taken and make the correct
order, requirement, decision or determination, and for that purpose, the board has the same authority as the
building official or fire code official. The board shall have no power to obligate the city in any manner
whatsoever. The board's finances shall be handled in the same manner as any other board of the city. The board
shall have no authority to waive any requirement contained in any of the International Codes.
(b) Basis of board's decision/vote required. In order to make a finding for the appellant, the board must make a
determination that the true intent of any of the International Codes has been incorrectly interpreted by the
building official or fire code official; that a provision of the International Codes, made the subject of the appeal,
does/do not fully apply; or an equally good or better form of construction of the specific International Code,
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/684
made the subject of the appeal, is proposed. The concurring vote of four members of the board is necessary to
reverse an order, requirement, decision or determination of the building official or fire code official.
(c) Minutes. The board shall keep and maintain minutes of any and all proceedings held and shall submit a
written report of such proceedings to the city council not more than three weeks following each such meeting.
(d) Adoption of rules and regulations. The board may adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of its
business. All rules and regulations adopted by the board shall be reviewed and approved by the city council. The
rules and regulations shall be consistent with and not in conflict with this article, the International Codes and/or
other rules and regulations prescribed by the city council. The board shall function according to the laws of the
state, the city's Charter, the International Codes and the provisions of this article.
(e) Written decision. The board shall render all decisions in writing to the appellant with a copy to the
building official.
(Ordinance 02-02-28, sec. 12, adopted 2/5/02; Ordinance 17-11-79 adopted 11/7/17)
Sec. 18-65 Appeal
(a) Building official's or fire code official's order, requirement, decision or determination. Appeals from an
order, requirement, decision or determination of the building official or fire code official shall be made in
writing to the city manager's office within seven working days of the order, requirement, decision or
determination of the building official or fire code official. The city manager shall notify the building official or
fire code official and the appellant of the placement of the appeal on the first available board agenda in
compliance with the Texas Open Meetings Act.
(b) Board's decision. Appeals from a decision of the board shall be made in writing to the city council within
seven working days of the written decision of the board. The city secretary shall notify the building official and
the appellant of the placement of the appeal on the first available city council agenda in compliance with the
Texas Open Meetings law. The decision of the city council is final.
(c) Conflicts between this article and the International Codes. In all cases of conflict between a provision of
this article and a provision of the International Codes, this article shall prevail.
(Ordinance 02-02-28, sec. 13, adopted 2/5/02; Ordinance 17-11-79 adopted 11/7/17)
Secs. 18-66–18-88 Reserved
ARTICLE IV. TECHNICAL CODES
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Secs. 18-89–18-119 Reserved
DIVISION 2. ELECTRICAL CODE
Sec. 18-120 Adoption of the National Electrical Code
The National Electrical Code, including annex H, copyrighted by the National Fire Protection Association, save
and except the deletions and additions set forth in exhibit A, attached to Ordinance 19-11-98 and incorporated
herein for all purposes, regulating the construction, alteration, removal, use and maintenance of any electrical
wiring, apparatus, device and/or system within the city (“2017 National Electrical Code”). The 2017 National
Electrical Code, including annex H, is made a part of this section as if fully set forth herein. Three (3) copies of
the 2017 National Electrical Code are on file in the office of the city secretary being marked and designated as
the 2017 National Electrical Code. The deletions and additions set forth in exhibit A to Ordinance 19-11-98 are
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/684
located on the city's website under development services. (Ordinance 00-03-02, sec. 2, adopted 3/7/00;
Ordinance 08-01-10, sec. 3, adopted 1/15/08; Ordinance 13-10-67, sec. 3, adopted 10/1/13; Ordinance 16-12-
101, sec. 3, adopted 12/6/16; Ordinance 19-11-98 adopted 11/19/19)
Sec. 18-121 Reserved
Editor's note–Ordinance No. 08-01-10, sec. 2, adopted January 15, 2008, repealed sec. 18-121, which pertained to fees and derived
from Ordinance 00-03-02, adopted March 7, 2000.
Sec. 18-122 Reserved
Editor's note–Ordinance No. 08-01-10, sec. 2, adopted January 15, 2008, repealed sec. 18-121, which pertained to other requirements
and derived from Ordinance 00-03-02, adopted March 7, 2000.
Sec. 18-123 Penalty provision
Any person, firm, corporation or business entity violating this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction therefor, shall be fined a sum not exceeding two thousand and no/dollars ($2,000.00), and
each and every day that such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense; provided, however, that
such penal provision shall not preclude a suit to enjoin such violation. The city retains all legal rights and
remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law. (Ordinance 00-03-02, sec. 5, adopted 3/700;
Ordinance 08-01-10, sec. 5, adopted 1/15/08; Ordinance 13-10-67, sec. 5, adopted 10/1/13; Ordinance 16-12-
101, sec. 5, adopted 12/6/16; Ordinance 19-11-98 adopted 11/19/19)
Sec. 18-124 Establishment of procedures for amendments to the National Electrical Code
The following procedure shall be followed in adopting amendments to the applicable National Electrical Code:
(1) The city staff shall propose in writing to the city council amendments to the National Electrical
Code and shall state the basis for such amendments.
(2) The city council shall review the amendments proposed by the city staff and the reasons
therefor and may approve the same if it is deemed in the best interest of the city.
(Ordinance 03-06-49, sec. 3, adopted 6/3/03)
Secs. 18-125–18-166 Reserved
DIVISION 3. GREEN BUILDING PROGRAM
Sec. 18-167 Residential green building program; penalty
(a) The residential green building program sets the minimum standards for energy efficiency, conservation of
water, indoor air quality, and waste recycling for all single-family residential buildings platted after May 23,
2001. The minimum standards required for all single-family residential buildings and structures for which an
application for a building permit is filed after June 30, 2007, are set forth in Exhibit A, which is attached to
Ordinance No. 06-10-111 and incorporated as if fully set forth herein. The existing standards, adopted by
Ordinance No. 01-05-39, shall continue to apply to lots platted after May 23, 2001, and for which a building
permit application is filed before July 1, 2007.
(b) Any person, firm, corporation or entity violating this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction therefore, shall be fined a sum not exceeding $500.00 or fined a sum not exceeding $2,000.00
for violations related to public health, public sanitation, or refuse dumping, and each and every day that such
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense; provided, however, that such penal provision shall not
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/684
preclude a suit to enjoin such violation. Frisco retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to
local, state and federal law.
(Ordinance 01-05-39, secs. 2, 4, adopted 5/1/01; Ordinance 06-10-111, secs. 2, 4, adopted 10/17/06; Ordinance
07-04-17, secs. 1, 2, adopted 4/17/07)
Sec. 18-168 Commercial green building program; penalty
(a) The commercial green building program shall set the minimum standards for energy efficiency, mitigation
of urban heat island effect, conservation of water, and construction waste recycling for all nonresidential
buildings and multifamily developments submitted by preliminary and/or final site plan on or after November
27, 2006 (“minimum standards”). The minimum standards required for all nonresidential and multifamily
buildings are set forth in Exhibit A, which is attached to Ordinance No. 18-09-49 and incorporated as if fully set
forth herein.
(b) Any person, firm, corporation or entity violating this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and
upon conviction therefor, shall be fined a sum not exceeding $500.00 or fined a sum not exceeding $2,000.00 for
violations related to public heath, public sanitation, or refuse dumping, and each and every day that such
violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense; provided, however, that such penal provision shall not preclude a suit to enjoin such violation. Frisco
retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law.
(Ordinance 04-05-44, secs. 2, 4, adopted 5/18/04; Ordinance 06-10-110, secs. 3, 5, adopted 10/17/06; Ordinance
08-10-96, sec. 2, adopted 10/21/08; Ordinance 18-09-49 adopted 9/18/18)
Secs. 18-169–18-189 Reserved
DIVISION 4. RESIDENTIAL CODE
Sec. 18-190 Adoption of the International Residential Code
The International Residential Code, copyrighted by the International Code Council, Inc., including appendix J,
save and except the deletions and additions set forth in exhibit A, attached to Ordinance 19-11-102 and
incorporated herein for all purposes, regulating the construction, alteration, movement , enlargement,
replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, removal, and demolition of detached one-family
and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three (3) stories in
height with a separate means of egress and related accessory structures within the city (“2018 International
Residential Code”). The 2018 International Residential Code is made a part of this section as if fully set forth
herein. Three (3) copies of the 2018 International Residential Code are on file in the office of the city secretary
being marked and designated as the 2018 International Residential Code. The deletions and additions set forth in
exhibit A to Ordinance 19-11-102 are located on the city's website under development services. (Ordinance 01-
12-97, sec. 2, adopted 12/18/01; Ordinance 08-01-12, sec. 3, adopted 1/15/08; Ordinance 13-10-69, sec. 4,
adopted 10/1/13; Ordinance 16-12-102, sec. 3, adopted 12/6/16; Ordinance 19-11-102 adopted 11/19/19)
Sec. 18-191 Penalty provision
Any person, firm, corporation or business entity violating this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction therefor, shall be fined a sum not exceeding two thousand and no/100 dollars ($2,000.00),
and each and every day that such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense; provided, however,
that such penal provision shall not preclude a suit to enjoin such violation. The city retains all legal rights and
remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law. (Ordinance 01-12-97, sec. 4, adopted 12/18/01;
Ordinance 08-01-12, sec. 5, adopted 1/15/08; Ordinance 13-10-69, sec. 6, adopted 10/1/13; Ordinance 16-12-
102, sec. 5, adopted 12/6/16; Ordinance 19-11-102 adopted 11/19/19)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/684
Sec. 18-192 Establishment of procedures for amendments to the International Residential Code
The following procedure shall be followed in adopting amendments to the applicable International Residential
Code:
(1) The city staff shall propose in writing to the city council amendments to the International
Residential Code and shall state the basis for such amendments.
(2) The city council shall review the amendments proposed by the city staff and the reasons
therefor and may approve the same if it is deemed in the best interest of the city.
(Ordinance 03-06-49, sec. 2, adopted 6/3/03)
Secs. 18-193–18-222 Reserved
DIVISION 5. ENERGY CONSERVATION
Sec. 18-223 Adoption of the International Energy Conservation Code
The International Energy Conservation Code, copyrighted by the International Code Council, Inc., save and
except the deletions and additions set forth in exhibit A, attached to Ordinance 19-11-101 and incorporated
herein for all purposes, regulating the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air
leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water-heating and illumination systems
and equipment which will enable effective use of energy in new building construction located within the city
(“2018 International Energy Conservation Code”). The 2018 International Energy Conservation Code is made a
part of this section as if fully set forth herein. Three (3) copies of the 2018 International Energy Conservation
Code are on file in the office of the city secretary being marked and designated as the 2018 International Energy
Conservation Code. The deletions and additions set for in exhibit A to Ordinance 19-11-101 are located on city's
website under development services. (Ordinance 01-12-98, sec. 3, adopted 12/18/01; Ordinance 08-01-07, sec.
3, adopted 1/15/08; Ordinance 13-10-63, sec. 3, adopted 10/1/13; Ordinance 16-12-97, sec. 3, adopted 12/6/16;
Ordinance 19-11-101 adopted 11/19/19)
Sec. 18-224 Penalty provision
Any person, firm, corporation or business entity violating this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction therefor, shall be fined a sum not exceeding two thousand and no/100 ($2,000.00), and each
and every day that such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense; provided, however, that such
penal provision shall not preclude a suit to enjoin such violation. The city retains all legal rights and remedies
available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law. (Ordinance 01-12-98, sec. 5, adopted 12/18/01; Ordinance
08-01-07, sec. 5, adopted 1/15/08; Ordinance 13-10-63, sec. 5, adopted 10/1/13; Ordinance 16-12-97, sec. 5,
adopted 12/6/16; Ordinance 19-11-101 adopted 11/19/19)
Secs. 18-225–18-241 Reserved
DIVISION 6. BUILDING CODE
Sec. 18-242 Adoption of the International Building Code
The 2018 edition of the International Building Code, copyrighted by the International Code Council, Inc., save
and except the deletions and additions set forth in exhibit A, attached to Ordinance 19-11-103 and incorporated
herein for all purposes, regulating the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair,
equipment, use and occupancy, location, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any
appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures within buildings located within the city
(“2018 International Building Code”). The 2018 International Building Code is made a part of this section as if
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/684
fully set forth herein. Three (3) copies of the 2018 International Building Code are on file in the office of the city
secretary, being marked and designated as the 2018 International Building Code. The deletions and additions set
forth in exhibit A to Ordinance 19-11-103 also are located on city's website under development services.
(Ordinance 02-02-23, sec. 3, adopted 2/5/02; Ordinance 06-02-10, sec. 3, adopted 2/7/06; Ordinance 08-04-40,
sec. 3, adopted 4/1/08; Ordinance 13-10-68, sec. 3, adopted 10/1/13; Ordinance 17-11-78, sec. 3, adopted
11/7/17; Ordinance 19-11-103 adopted 11/19/19)
Sec. 18-243 Penalty provision
Any person, firm, corporation or business entity violating this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction therefor, shall be fined a sum not exceeding two thousand and no/100 dollars ($2,000.00),
and each and every day that such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense; provided, however,
that such penal provision shall not preclude a suit to enjoin such violation. The city retains all legal rights and
remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law. (Ordinance 02-02-23, sec. 5, adopted 2/5/02;
Ordinance 08-04-40, sec. 5, adopted 4/1/08; Ordinance 13-10-68, sec. 5, adopted 10/1/13; Ordinance 17-11-78,
sec. 5, adopted 11/7/17; Ordinance 19-11-103 adopted 11/19/19)
Secs. 18-244–18-264 Reserved
DIVISION 7. PLUMBING
Sec. 18-265 Adoption of the International Plumbing Code
The International Plumbing Code, copyrighted by the International Code Council, Inc., save and except the
deletions and additions set forth in exhibit A, attached to Ordinance 19-11-99 and incorporated herein for all
purposes, regulating the erection, installation, alteration, repairs, relocation, replacement, addition to, use and
maintenance of plumbing systems within the city (“2018 International Plumbing Code”). The 2018 International
Plumbing Code is made a part of this section as if fully set forth herein. Three (3) copies of the 2018
International Plumbing Code are on file in the office of the city secretary being marked and designated as the
2018 International Plumbing Code. The deletions and additions set forth in exhibit A to Ordinance 19-11-99 are
located on city' s website under development services. (Ordinance 02-02-24, sec. 3, adopted 2/5/02; Ordinance
06-11-114, sec. 3, adopted 11/17/06; Ordinance 08-01-09, sec. 3, adopted 1/15/08; Ordinance 13-10-66, sec. 3,
adopted 10/1/13; Ordinance 16-12-100, sec. 3, adopted 12/6/16; Ordinance 19-11-99 adopted 11/19/19)
Sec. 18-266 Penalty provision
Any person, firm, corporation or business entity violating this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction therefor, shall be fined a sum not exceeding two thousand and no/100 dollars ($2,000.00),
and each and every day that such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense; provided, however,
that such penal provision shall not preclude a suit to enjoin such violation. The city retains all legal rights and
remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law. (Ordinance 02-02-24, sec. 5, adopted 2/5/02;
Ordinance 06-11-114, sec. 6, adopted 11/17/06; Ordinance 08-01-09, sec. 5, adopted 1/15/08; Ordinance 13-10-
66, sec. 5, adopted 10/1/13; Ordinance 16-12-100, sec. 5, adopted 12/6/16; Ordinance 19-11-99 adopted
11/19/19)
Secs. 18-267–18-295 Reserved
DIVISION 8. FUEL GAS
Sec. 18-296 Adoption of the International Fuel Gas Code
The International Fuel Gas Code, copyrighted by the International Code Council, Inc., save and except the
deletions and additions set forth in exhibit A, attached to Ordinance 19-11-97 and incorporated herein for all
purposes, regulating the installation of fuel gas piping systems, fuel gas utilization equipment and related
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/684
accessories within the city (“2018 International Fuel Gas Code”). The 2018 International Fuel Gas Code is made
a part of this section as if fully set forth herein. Three (3) copies of the 2018 International Fuel Gas Code are on
file in the office of the city secretary being marked and designated as the 2018 International Fuel Gas Code. The
deletions and additions set forth in exhibit A to Ordinance 19-11-97 are located on city's website under
development services. (Ordinance 02-02-25, sec. 2, adopted 2/5/02; Ordinance 06-11-115, sec. 3, adopted
11/7/06; Ordinance 08-01-08, sec. 3, adopted 1/15/08; Ordinance 13-10-64, sec. 3, adopted 10/1/13; Ordinance
16-12-98, sec. 3, adopted 12/6/16; Ordinance 19-11-97 adopted 11/19/19)
Sec. 18-297 Penalty provision
Any person, firm, corporation or business entity violating this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction therefor, shall be fined a sum not exceeding two thousand and no/100 dollars ($2,000.00),
and each and every day that such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense; provided, however,
that such penal provision shall not preclude a suit to enjoin such violation. The city retains all legal rights and
remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law. (Ordinance 02-02-25, sec. 4, adopted 2/5/02;
Ordinance 06-11-115, sec. 6, adopted 11/7/06; Ordinance 08-01-08, sec. 5, adopted 1/15/08; Ordinance 13-10-
64, sec. 5, adopted 10/1/13; Ordinance 16-12-98, sec. 5, adopted 12/6/16; Ordinance 19-11-97 adopted 11/19/19)
Secs. 18-298–18-327 Reserved
DIVISION 9. MECHANICAL SYSTEMS
Sec. 18-328 Adoption of the International Mechanical Code
The International Mechanical Code, copyrighted by the International Code Council, Inc., save and except the
deletions and additions set forth in exhibit A, attached to Ordinance 19-11-100 and incorporated herein for all
purposes, regulating the design, installation, maintenance, addition, alteration and inspection of mechanical
systems that are permanently installed and utilized to provide control of environmental conditions and related
processes within buildings located within the city (“2018 International Mechanical Code”). The 2018
International Mechanical Code is made a part of this section as if fully set forth herein. Three (3) copies of the
2018 International Mechanical Code are on file in the office of the city secretary being marked and designated as
the 2018 International Mechanical Code. The deletions and additions set forth in exhibit A to Ordinance 19-11-
100 are located on city's website under development services. (Ordinance 02-02-26, sec. 3, adopted 2/5/02;
Ordinance 06-11-113, sec. 3, adopted 11/7/06; Ordinance 08-01-11, sec. 3, adopted 1/15/08; Ordinance 13-10-
65, sec. 3, adopted 10/1/13; Ordinance 16-12-99, sec. 3, adopted 12/6/16; Ordinance 19-11-100 adopted
11/19/19)
Sec. 18-329 Penalty provision
Any person, firm, corporation or business entity violating this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction therefor, shall be fined a sum not exceeding two thousand and no/100 dollars ($2,000.00),
and each and every day that such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense; provided, however,
that such penal provision shall not preclude a suit to enjoin such violation. The city retains all legal rights and
remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law. (Ordinance 02-02-26, sec. 5, adopted 2/5/02;
Ordinance 06-11-113, sec. 6, adopted 11/7/06; Ordinance 08-01-11, sec. 5, adopted 1/15/08; Ordinance 13-10-
65, sec. 5, adopted 10/1/13; Ordinance 16-12-99, sec. 5, adopted 12/6/16; Ordinance 19-11-100 adopted
11/19/19)
Secs. 18-330–18-346 Reserved
DIVISION 10. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Sec. 18-347 Adoption of the International Property Maintenance Code
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/684
The 2018 International Property Maintenance Code, including appendix A, copyrighted by the International
Code Council, Inc., save and except the deletions and amendments set forth in exhibit A, attached to Ordinance
19-11-96 and incorporated herein for all purposes, regulating all existing residential and nonresidential structures
and all existing premises by establishing minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures
equipment, and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety
from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance within the city (“2018 International Property
Maintenance Code”). The 2018 International Property Maintenance Code, including appendix A, is made a part
of this section as if fully set forth herein. Three (3) copies of the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code
are on file in the office of the city secretary being marked and designated as the 2018 International Property
Maintenance Code. The deletions and amendments set forth in exhibit A to Ordinance 19-11-96 are located on
city's website under development services. (Ordinance 02-02-27, sec. 3, adopted 2/5/02; Ordinance 06-11-112,
sec. 3, adopted 11/7/06; Ordinance 08-01-05, sec. 3, adopted 1/15/07; Ordinance 13-12-78, sec. 3, adopted
12/3/13; Ordinance 16-12-103, sec. 3, adopted 12/6/16; Ordinance 19-11-96 adopted 11/19/19)
Sec. 18-348 Penalty provision
Any person, firm, corporation or business entity violating this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction therefor, shall be fined a sum not exceeding two thousand and no/100 dollars ($2,000.00),
and each and every day that such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense; provided, however,
that such penal provision shall not preclude a suit to enjoin such violation. The city retains all legal rights and
remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law. (Ordinance 02-02-27, sec. 5, adopted 2/5/02;
Ordinance 06-11-112, sec. 5, adopted 11/7/06; Ordinance 08-01-05, sec. 5, adopted 1/15/07; Ordinance 13-12-
78, sec. 5, adopted 12/3/13; Ordinance 16-12-103, sec. 5, adopted 12/6/16; Ordinance 19-11-96 adopted
11/19/19)
Secs. 18-349–18-369 Reserved
DIVISION 11. SWIMMING POOLS*
Sec. 18-370 Purpose
The purpose of this division is to, among other things, safeguard public safety and provide patrons a pool that is
safe to occupy within reasonable means. These rules and regulations are considered and found to be good public
health engineering and safety practices. (Ordinance 06-02-14, sec. 3, adopted 2/21/06)
Sec. 18-371 Adoption of Standards for Public Pools and Spas
The Texas Department of State Health Services Standards for Public Pools and Spas, adopted by the Texas
Board of Health in Title 25 (Health Services), Tex. Admin. Code, pt. 1 (Department of State Health Services),
ch. 265 (General Sanitation), subch. L (Standards for Public Pools and Spas), which establishes regulations for
the design, construction, operation, repair and maintenance of all public and semi-public swimming pools, are
hereby adopted, save and except the amendments set forth below (the “Texas Department of Health Pool
Rules”). The Texas Department of Health Pool Rules, save and except the amendments set forth below, are made
a part of this division as if fully set forth herein. Copies of the Texas Department of Health Pool Rules are on file
in the office of the City Secretary of the city being marked and designated as the Texas Department of Health
Pool Rules, published by the Texas Board of Health, General Sanitation Division. The city amends the Texas
Department of Health Pool Rules as follows:
Section 265.182 (Definitions) is amended as follows:
75. Local regulatory authority-the City of Frisco, Texas.
Section 265.183 (Plans, Permits and Instructions for post-October 1, 1999 pools and spas) is amended as
follows:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/684
(a) Plans and permits for post-October 1, 1999 pools and spas. The local regulatory authority shall
review all applicable permitting and plan submittal documents for post-October 1, 1999 pools, spas,
water features and facilities in order to ensure compliance regarding enforcement issues. The local
regulatory authority requires that a registered professional engineer approve the design and
construction of pools, spas, water features, and facilities. Regardless of whether a regulatory
authority requires plans or permits, pools and spas shall be designed, constructed, and operated in
compliance with the Texas Department of Health Pool Rules.
All commercial pools and spas shall be designed by a registered Professional Engineer in the State
of Texas and all drawings and documentation must be signed and sealed. Design engineers must be
registered with the city and provide proof of professional liability insurance with a minimum
coverage of $1,000,000.00. The professional engineer shall certify that pools, spas, water features,
and facilities are designed, built, and operate in compliance with these rules and with applicable
federal, state, and/or local regulatory requirements. Documentation shall include:
(1) Preconstruction document signed and sealed referencing project name/address, pool
builder name/address, and owner name/address. The preconstruction certification requires the
design engineer to certify that the submitted plans/blueprints and specifications for the
described swimming pool(s) and/or spa(s) and/or other water/play features and associated
facilities meet or exceed the requirements detailed in sections 265.184 through 265.201 and
265.205 of the Texas Department of State Health Services Standards for Swimming Pools and
Spas adopted July 1, 2004, to be effective Sept. 1, 2004; except that Jan. 1, 2005 is the effective
date under section 265.190(e). Furthermore, the design engineer shall certify the accuracy of the
calculations and design values. The preconstruction certification shall include calculations and
design values for pool volume (gallons), turnover rate (hours), flow rate (gallons per minute),
total dynamic head (feet of head), maximum velocity in suction lines at designed flow (feet per
second), maximum velocity in return lines at designed flow (feet per second), maximum
velocity at main drain grate (minimum 24 inches diagonal) at designed flow (feet per second),
maximum flow through remaining drain grate with one main drain blocked (feet per second),
maximum design flow rate at main drain with approved covers (gallons per minute), main drain
cover approved flow rate (stamped on cover) (gallons per minute), maximum flow through
remaining drain cover with one main drain blocked (gallons per minute, feet per second),
required skimmers (#), required return inlets (#) and bather loads (pool and spa) (#).
(2) Post-construction document signed and sealed referencing project name/address, pool
builder name/address, and owner name/address. The post-construction certification requires the
design engineer to examine and certify that the completed and installed swimming pool(s)
and/or spa(s) and/or other water/play features and associated facilities at the described location
meet or exceed the requirements detailed in sections 265.184 through 265.201 and 265.205 of
the Texas Department of State Health Services Standards for Swimming Pools and Spas,
adopted July 1, 2004, to be effective Sept. 1, 2004; except that Jan. 1, 2005 is the effective date
under section 265.190(e). Furthermore, the design engineer shall certify the accuracy of the
calculations and design values. The preconstruction certification shall include calculations and
design values for pool volume (gals.), turnover rate (hours), flow rate (gallons per minute), total
dynamic head (feet of head), maximum velocity in suction lines at designed flow (feet per
second), maximum velocity in return lines at designed flow (feet per second), maximum
velocity at main drain grate (minimum 24 inches diagonal) at designed flow (feet per second),
maximum flow through remaining drain grate with one main drain blocked (feet per second),
maximum design flow rate at main drain with approved covers (gallons per minute), main drain
cover approved flow rate (stamped on cover) (gallons per minute), maximum flow through
remaining drain cover with one main drain blocked (gallons per minute, feet per second),
required skimmers (#), required return inlets (#) and bather loads (pool and spa) (#).
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/684
Section 265.186 (Decks, Entry/Exit, Diving Facilities and Other Deck Equipment at Post-October 1, 1999 and
Pre-October 1, 1999, Pools and Spas) is amended as follows:
(a) (14) Deck(s) shall be sloped to effectively drain to perimeter areas or to deck drains.
Drainage shall remove pool and spa splash water, deck cleaning water and rainwater without
leaving standing water deeper than one-eighth inch. Drains removing all water on deck(s) shall
be routed to the storm sewer system or as otherwise approved by current local plumbing code,
as amended. Water from deck drainage shall not be mixed with pool or spa water.
Section 265.187 (Circulation Systems for Post-October 1, 1999, and Pre-October 1, 1999, Pools and Spas) is
amended as follows:
(a) Suction outlet covers or grates for post-October 1, 1999, and pre-October 1, 1999, pools and
spas. Suction outlet covers or grates must be provided for post-October 1, 1999, and pre-October 1,
1999, pools and spas in accordance with section 265.190(c) of this title (relating to suction outlets
and return inlets in post-October 1, 1999, and pre-October 1, 1999, pools and spas). If the owner or
operator of a post-October 1, 1999, or pre-October 1, 1999, pool or spa knows or should have known
in the exercise of ordinary care that a suction outlet cover or grate is missing, broken, or loose, the
pool or spa must be closed immediately and the pump(s) must be shut off. The pool or spa must
remain closed until a proper repair or replacement has been accomplished. Repair must be inspected
by the local regulatory authority before the pool or spa is allowed to reopen.
Section 265.188 (Filters) is amended as follows:
(h) Backwashing for post-October 1, 1999, and pre-October 1, 1999, pools and spas. All backwash
systems shall be discharged to the sanitary sewer system through an approved p-trap unless prior
approval for alternate disposal is obtained from the local regulatory authority. See also section
265.196.
Section 265.190 Suction Outlets and Return Inlets at Post-October 1, 1999, and Pre-October 1, 1999, Pools and
Spas.
(d) Suction outlets in post-October 1, 1999, pools and spas.
(1) In post-October 1, 1999, pools and spas, at least two hydraulically balanced suction
outlets (suction fittings) with approved covers or grates per pump suction line, must be
provided for each suction line. Multiple sets of pump suctions are permitted in two or more
suction outlets as long as they are hydraulically balanced and meet the requirements of
subsection (c) of this section. The distance between the drain covers or grates of the suction
outlet fittings must be no less than three feet, inside edge of the cover or grate to inside edge of
the cover or grate, and no more than 20 feet apart. Suction outlets that are main drains shall be
located at the lowest point of the pool or spa floor. No means of isolating hydraulically
balanced suction outlets is permitted that could allow one suction outlet to serve as the sole
source of water to a pump. A single pipe to a pump suction inlet that serves two or more suction
outlets may have a valve to shut off the flow to the pump.
(e) Upgrading suction outlet systems on pre-October 1, 1999, pools and spas.
(1) In a pre-October 1, 1999, pool or spa, suction outlets that are four feet deep or less, as
measured from the normal water level to the suction outlet, must have for each suction system:
(A) dual hydraulically balanced suction outlets with approved covers as described in
subsection (c)(1) or approved grates as described in subsection (c)(4) of this section with a
distance between the suction outlet fittings no less than three feet, inside edge of the cover
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/684
or grate to inside edge of the cover or grate, and no more than 20 feet, and either an AVS
or SVRD as described in subsection (d)(3) of this section;
(C) dual hydraulically-balanced, suction outlets with a distance between the suction
outlet fittings no less than three feet, inside edge of the cover or grate to inside edge of the
cover or grate, and no more than 20 feet, each with a minimal diagonal measurement of
24 inches and a flow velocity through the open area of the grate that does not exceed one
and one-half feet per second.
(3) In a pre-October 1, 1999, pool or spa, suction outlets that are more than four feet deep, as
measured from the normal water level to the suction outlets, must have, for each suction
system:
(A) two or more hydraulically-balanced suction outlets with a distance between the
suction outlet fittings no less than three feet, inside edge of the cover or grate to inside
edge of the cover or grate, and no more than 20 feet, each with a minimum diagonal
measurement of 24 inches and a flow velocity through the open area of the grate that does
not exceed one and one-half feet per second.
Section 265.196. (Waste Water Disposal at Post-October 1, 1999, and Pre-October 1, 1999, Pools and Spas) is
amended as follows:
(a) Filter backwash disposal for post-October 1, 1999, and pre-October 1, 1999, pools and spas.
Filter backwash water and pool or spa drainage water from post-October 1, 1999, and pre-October 1,
1999, pools and spas shall be discharged or disposed of in accordance with the International
Plumbing Code as adopted by the local regulatory authority.
Section 265.199 (Specific Safety Features) is amended as follows:
(c) Depth markers for post-October 1, 1999, pools. Post-October 1, 1999, pools shall have markers
showing depth and unit of measurement for the depth, complying with the following:
(2) Depth and unit markers number and unit markers on decks shall be slip-resistant tile,
flush mounted, placed within 24 inches of the waters edge, and positioned to be read while
standing on the deck facing the water. Spray paint, painted on and vinyl lettering units of
measurements are prohibited.
(d) Depth markers for pre-October 1, 1999, pools. Pre-October 1, 1999, pools shall have markers
that comply with the following:
(2) Pre-October 1, 1999, depth markers and any unit markers shall be slip-resistant, flush
mounted, placed within 24 inches of the waters edge, and positioned to be read while standing
on the deck facing the water. Spray paint, painted on and vinyl lettering units of measurements
are prohibited. Pre-October 1, 1999, existing vinyl lettering may be continued to be used as
deck depth markers, units of measurement and required signage. In addition to any other
requirement herein, slip-resistant tile markers, flush mounted shall be mandated in place of the
vinyl lettering if any one of the following conditions occurs:
(A) Three consecutive inspections performed by the local regulatory authority note a
deficiency in the vinyl lettering. A deficiency shall include, but is not limited to, a vinyl
letter which is damaged, missing or illegible;
(B) If the local regulatory authority reasonably deems that there is a safety hazard,
whereby installing the slip-resistant, flush-mounted tiles, would abate, correct or prevent
the hazard;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/684
(C) Renovations to the pool area, including amenity center, pools(s), spas or pool
enclosure exceeding 30 percent of the square footage of the pool area;
(D) Failure of property owner, or its designee, to obtain an approved certificate of
occupancy; or
(E) Violation(s) of any provision of this division.
(f) Signs for post-October 1, 1999, and pre-October 1, 1999, pools.
(1) Post-October 1, 1999, and pre-October 1, 1999, pools shall comply with the following
sign requirements:
(C) For pools where no lifeguard service is required, a warning sign shall be placed in
plain view and shall state “WARNING-NO LIFEGUARD ON DUTY” with clearly
legible letters at least 4 inches high. In addition, the sign shall also state in letters at least 2
inches high “CHILDREN SHOULD NOT USE POOL WITHOUT ADULT
SUPERVISION”. The sign shall also state “ADULTS SHOULD NOT SWIM ALONE”,
“NO GLASS IN POOL AREA”, “SWIMMERS MUST SHOWER BEFORE ENTERING
POOL/SPA” and “NO ANIMALS IN POOL AREA”. The additional signage required in
this subsection may be included on the sign described in paragraph (2) of this subsection.
The language on the sign may impose stricter adult supervision requirements for children
using the pool.
(D) When a required telephone is not readily visible from a post-October 1, 1999, or
pre-October 1, 1999, pool or spa, directions shall be posted regarding its location as stated
in subsection (j) of this section. When the required telephone or electronic means does not
have immediate dial tone operation, clear instructions regarding the exact operation shall
be legibly provided on a sign and located at the telephone. The local regulatory authority
shall approve the wording of all required signs.
(j) Telephones at post-October 1, 1999, and pre-October 1, 1999, pools and spas. Post-October 1,
1999, and pre-October 1, 1999, pools and spas shall have a telephone or other electronic means
approved by the local regulatory authority capable of immediately summoning emergency service
readily accessible within 100 feet from the pool or spa water. The telephone or other approved
electronic means shall be located at the same address as the pool(s) and spa(s). Any electronic means
of summoning emergency service will qualify as a telephone if clear instructions for its use are
provided by signage. A telephone that is answered by an on-site office does not meet the
requirements of this subsection. A sign in plain view of the pool or spa shall state in letters at least
four inches high: “IN CASE OF EMERGENCY CALL 911 (or other appropriate emergency number
or action).” A sign shall be placed at the telephone or other approved electronic means of summoning
emergency service stating the address of the pool. The following shall also apply to telephones for
post-October 1, 1999, October 1, 1999, and pre-October 1, 1999, pools and spas:
(5) Regardless of where the telephone is located or whether the gate(s) or door(s) are locked,
a sign must be installed inside the pool yard or spa yard in plain view of the pool or spa and
state in at least four inch high letters: “IN CASE OF EMERGENCY, DIAL 911” (or other
appropriate emergency number or action). If the telephone is not readily visible from the pool
or spa, the sign inside the pool yard shall include a concise description of the location of the
telephone.
Section 265.200 (Pool Yard Enclosures) is amended as follows:
(b) Enclosures for post-October 1, 1999, or pre-October 1, 1999, class C pools and spas and class
D pools at class C facility that are subject to Health and Safety Code, chapter 757.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/684
(1) The pool yard or spa yard enclosure for a post-October 1, 1999, or a pre-October 1, 1999,
pool or spa is recommended to have a minimum perpendicular height of at least 72 inches as
measured from the ground surface on the outside of the fence.
(c) Enclosures for all other post-October 1, 1999, or pre-October 1, 1999, class C pools and spas
and class D pools at class C facilities.
(1) (A) The enclosure is recommended to have a minimum perpendicular height of at
least 72 inches as measured from the ground surface on the outside of the fence.
Section 265.201 (Dressing and Sanitary Facilities at Post-October 1, 1999, and Pre-October 1, 1999, Pools and
Spas) is amended as follows:
(f) (3) Shower(s) and lavatory(s) water temperature shall be controlled by anti-scald
devices. The water heater and thermostatically-controlled mixing valves shall be inaccessible to
users and shall be capable of providing two gallons per minute of water, not to exceed 110
degrees Fahrenheit with a minimum of 90 degrees Fahrenheit water to each shower head. A
shower can be located on the deck of the pool if proper wastewater disposal is provided as
approved by the local regulatory authority. Construction of the shower drain shall be in
accordance with the local plumbing code, as amended, and shall be constructed to minimize the
entrance of storm water. The shower need not be enclosed in class C pools.
(g) Sanitary facilities serving post-10/01/99 pools or spas in apartments, hotels, motels or
condominiums. Post-10/01/99 Class C and D pools and spas located in an apartment, hotel, motel or
condominium complex are not required to have the following facilities:
(3) Deleted.
(5) Deleted.
(7) Deleted.
Section 265.203 (Operation and Management of Post-October 1, 1999, and Pre-October 1, 1999, pools and
Spas) is amended as follows:
(a) Required operator certification and training for certain types of post-October 1, 1999, and pre-
October 1, 1999, pools and spas. Post-October 1, 1999, and pre-October 1, 1999, class A or B pools
and class D pools operated in conjunction with a class A or B pool, as well as post-October 1, 1999,
and pre-October 1, 1999, class C or D pools and spas located at class C facilities, shall be maintained
under the supervision and direction of a properly trained and certified operator who is responsible for
the sanitation, safety, and proper maintenance of the pool or spa, and for maintaining all physical and
mechanical equipment and records. Training and certification can be obtained by completion of one
of the following courses or their equivalent:
(1) The NRPA, “Aquatic Facility Operator” (A.F.O.);
(2) The NSPF, “Certified Pool-Spa Operator” (C.P.O.);
(3) YMCA, “Pool Operator on Location” (P.O.O.L.);
(4) The NSPI, “Professional Pool &amp; Spa Operator” (P.P.S.O.); or
(5) The ASPSA, “Licensed Aquatic Facility Technician” (L.A.F.T.).
Section 265.204 (Water Quality at Post-October 1, 1999, and Pre-October 1, 1999, Pools and Spas) is amended
as follows:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/684
(c) Testing frequency for post-October 1, 1999, and pre-October 1, 1999, pools and spas. When a
post-October 1, 1999, or pre-October 1, 1999, class A or B pool is open for use or when a post-
October 1, 1999, or pre-October 1, 1999, class D pool operated in conjunction with a class A or B
pool or spa is open for use, a test for disinfectant level and pH shall be conducted at least every two
hours to assure compliance with subsection (a) of this section relating to required water quality
parameters. In lieu of the above testing frequency, if a system is used to automatically control
disinfectant and pH, testing for disinfectant level and pH shall be made once per day. If necessary,
tests shall be conducted more frequently to assure proper disinfectant level and pH.
When a class C or D pool or spa located at a class C facility is open for use, it shall be required
that tests for disinfectant level, and pH be made two or more times per day to assure compliance with
subsection (a) of this section relating to water quality parameters. In lieu of this testing frequency, if
an automatic system is used to control disinfection and pH, it shall be required that testing for
disinfection and pH be made at least once per day. To assure proper disinfectant levels and pH, tests
shall be conducted more frequently if necessary. If inspections by regulatory authorities indicate noncompliance
with subsection (a) of this section relating to water quality parameters, then the local
regulatory authority may require that these tests be done at an appropriate frequency and may require
recording in accordance with subsection (e) of this section.
(d) Other required tests for post-October 1, 1999, and pre-October 1, 1999, pools and spas. Test(s)
for total chlorine, cyanuric acid, alkalinity and hardness at post-October 1, 1999, and pre-October 1,
1999, pools and spas shall be conducted as necessary to assure proper chemical control. A test for
cyanuric acid shall be conducted a minimum of one time during the operating season.
(f) Microbiological quality standards. Microbiological examination may be requested when
deemed necessary by the city. These samples shall be examined in accordance with the procedures
described in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, or
as amended, (APHA, AWWA, and WPCF). All related fees shall be paid by the owner/operator of the
pool or spa.
Section 265.205 (Spa Construction, Operation, and Maintenance) is amended as follows:
(f) Other safety related requirements for post-October 1, 1999, and pre-October 1, 1999, spas.
Post-October 1, 1999, and pre-October 1, 1999, spas shall comply with the following:
(4) (B) There shall be a minimum of two deck depth markers per spa, regardless of
spa size or shape. There shall also be an International No Diving Symbol in slip resistant
tile, flush mounted every 25 feet around new and existing spas. In no event shall there be
less than two International No Diving Symbols located at each new and existing spa.
(4) (F) Deck depth markers in or on the deck surfaces shall be slip-resistant tile, flush
mounted.
(7) Signs. Signs for post-October 1, 1999, and pre-October 1, 1999, spas shall be securely
mounted and readily visible to the spa user from inside the spa enclosure. Signage shall state
the following:
(F) “ALCOHOL SHOULD NOT BE CONSUMED PRIOR TO OR WHILE USING
SPA”
Section 265.208 (Enforcement) is amended as follows:
(a) If inspections by the local regulatory authority determine that a person has caused, suffered,
allowed or permitted a violation of Health and Safety Code 341.064 or any of these rules, the
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/684
department or local regulatory authority may, among other things, in accordance with Health and
Safety Code 341.092, assess civil penalties, seek injunctive relief in district court, or both.
If inspections by the local regulatory authority determine that the operation or maintenance of
the pool, spa, public interactive water feature or facility constitutes a serious health or safety
hazard for the user, the local regulatory authority may request voluntary immediate closure,
perform involuntary closure, seek injunctive relief in district court, and/or use any other
enforcement methods and/or remedies available. The local regulatory authority may pursue any
and all appropriate legal remedies available to it including, but not limited to, immediately
posting the pool closed and issuing citations to the operator or owner. Whenever a pool
voluntarily closes or is required to cease operation at any time, all access to the pool shall be
restricted and a notice shall be posted at every entrance notifying the public that the pool is
closed until further notice. Whenever a pool closes by mandate of the local regulatory authority
or is required to cease operation, all access to the pool shall be restricted and a notice shall be
posted at every entrance notifying the public that the pool is closed until further notice; a
reinspection fee in the amount of one hundred and no/100 dollars ($100.00) shall be paid; and, a
reinspection of the offense shall be performed by the local regulatory authority to ensure
correction prior to operation.
(f) The chief building official, or his/her designee, shall be responsible for the enforcement of the
terms of this division.
(Ordinance 06-02-14, sec. 4, adopted 2/21/06; Ordinance 18-01-02, sec. 2, adopted 1/2/18)
Sec. 18-372 Offenses
A person, firm, corporation or business entity commits an offense if:
(1) They violate any provision of this division;
(2) They violate any of the posted signs as required by this division;
(3) The owner or designated manager of such pool knowingly allows the pool to be used for
swimming, diving or bathing purposes when it is closed or posted closed, whether voluntarily or
involuntarily; or
(4) They occupy the pool area at any time the pool is closed, whether voluntarily or involuntarily.
(Ordinance 06-02-14, sec. 5, adopted 2/21/06)
Sec. 18-373 Revocation or suspension of operating permit
(a) The city may deny, revoke, or suspend any operating permit for failure of the applicant to comply with the
provisions of this division, or in cases where the operating permit has been obtained through nondisclosure,
misrepresentation or misstatement of a material fact.
(b) All notices or orders issued pursuant to this section shall be either delivered personally or sent by certified
mail to the person or corporation to whom the permit was issued or to the person in charge of the subject
premises (the manager). Except in cases of emergency or urgent public necessity, such notice shall be delivered
or mailed at least ten days before any operating permit is revoked or suspended and shall state the reason(s) for
such proposed revocation or suspension and notify that person of a right to appeal under this section.
(c) A permit to operate that has been revoked or suspended may be reissued upon proper application, payment
of all fees and presentation of evidence that the deficiencies, violations and/or irregularities that caused the
revocation or suspension have been corrected.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/684
(d) If the city determines that the operation or maintenance of any swimming pool, spa or public interactive
water feature constitutes an imminent hazard to the health and/or safety of the public, the permit to operate shall
be suspended immediately, and the swimming pool, spa or public interactive water feature shall be closed for use
and shall remain closed until the necessary remedial action has been successfully completed. The city shall make
an inspection of completion of remedial action to ensure compliance with this division. Each separate inspection
shall incur a fee of one hundred and no/100 dollars ($100.00), which must be paid prior to the inspection being
performed.
(Ordinance 06-02-14, sec. 6, adopted 2/21/06; Ordinance 18-01-02, sec. 2, adopted 1/2/18)
Sec. 18-374 Appeals
Any appeal from a final order or notice issued in connection with the requirements of this division must be in
writing and received by the chief building official within 15 days after the date of said order or notice. The chief
building official will render a decision within ten days of his/her receipt of the appeal. If the appellant disputes
the chief building official's decision, the appellant may appeal, in writing, to the city manager within five days of
the date of the chief building official's decision. The city manager will render his/her decision within ten days of
his/her receipt of the appeal, and the decision of the city manager is final. The city manager's failure to render a
decision within the ten-day time period shall be deemed a denial of the appeal. (Ordinance 06-02-14, sec. 7,
adopted 2/21/06)
Sec. 18-375 Administrative process; issuance of permit to operate
(a) No person shall operate a swimming pool, spa or public interactive water feature unless a valid permit to
operate said swimming pool, spa or public interactive water feature has been obtained from the city; provided,
however, pools and spas which are subject to section 265.206, Texas Department of Health Pool Rules, will not
be required to obtain the permit described in this Section. A separate permit is required for pools, spas and
public interactive water features physically separated by pool enclosure. A pool, spa or public interactive water
feature located inside a pool enclosure will be subject to fee of two hundred twenty-five and no/100 dollars
($225.00) per entity. Such permit for each location of the pool, spa or public interactive water feature, unless
otherwise revoked or suspended as prescribed herein, shall be valid from the date of issuance through March
31st of the following year. If paid by April 30th, the fee shall be three hundred twenty-five and no/100 dollars
($325.00) per entity; by May 31st, the fee shall be four hundred and twenty-five and no/100 dollars ($425.00)
per entity. After May 31st, the fee shall be five hundred and no/100 dollars ($500.00) per entity. If, upon the first
inspection, fees have not been paid, the pool, spa or public interactive water feature will be closed until
compliance with this division is met. A separate application and fee shall be submitted for each operational
permit sought. A separate pool or public interactive water feature is determined by physical separation. A spa is
considered separate and requires separate fees by the local regulatory authority.
(b) Applications for a permit to operate a swimming pool shall be made to the city on application forms
prescribed and provided by the city. The applicant shall certify that he/she is knowledgeable about and
understands the contents of this division and further that he/she understands and is capable of operating the
swimming pool for which the operating permit is requested.
(c) The city shall require that applicants for an operating permit of a swimming pool and/or spa provide proof
of knowledge of proper operation and maintenance of pool(s) and spa(s) by attaching a copy of one operator
certification as described in section 265.203(a) to the application for permit to operate. Applications submitted
without required certification will not be accepted.
(d) The city shall require an inspection of the pool, spa or public interactive water feature prior to March 31st
of each year. This inspection shall be required prior to the approval of the permit to operate each year. Should
any pool, spa or public interactive water feature fail the annual inspection, the owner of the subject pool, spa or
public interactive water feature is responsible for remedying the issues which resulted in the failed inspection,
and for obtaining a satisfactory reinspection from the city prior to the issuance of a permit to operate. Each
reinspection will incur a fee of one hundred and no/100 dollars ($100.00) and must be paid prior to reinspection.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/684
The permit to operate will be approved when each pool, spa or public interactive water feature is in full
compliance with this division.
(e) The city permit to operate shall expire on March 31st of each year. It is the responsibility of the
operator/owner to request the inspection and to apply for the permit to operate prior to March 31st each year.
(f) Once the inspection is approved, the application for permit to operate is submitted and appropriate fees are
paid, the city will release the permit to operate.
(Ordinance 06-02-14, sec. 8, adopted 2/21/06; Ordinance 18-01-02, sec. 2, adopted 1/2/18)
Sec. 18-376 Penalty provision
Any person, firm, corporation or business entity violating this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction thereof shall be fined any sum not exceeding $2,000.00. Each continuing day's violation
under this division shall constitute a separate offense. The penal provisions imposed under this division shall not
preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin the violation. The city retains all legal rights and remedies to it
pursuant to local, state and federal law. (Ordinance 06-02-14, sec. 9, adopted 2/21/06)
DIVISION 12. PUBLIC INTERACTIVE WATER FEATURES AND FOUNTAINS
Sec. 18-376.1 Adoption of Standards for Public Interactive Water Features and Fountains
The city hereby adopts by reference the Standards for Public Interactive Water Features and Fountains
promulgated by the Texas Department of State Health Services, codified at 25 Texas Administrative Code
chapter 265, subchapter M, as amended, which establish regulations for the construction, operation and
maintenance of public interactive water features and fountains, save and except the deletions and additions set
forth below (the “Public Interactive Water Features and Fountains Rules”). The Public Interactive Water
Features and Fountains Rules are made a part of this division as if fully set forth herein. Copies of the Public
Interactive Water Features and Fountains Rules are on file in the office of the city secretary, being marked and
designated as the Public Interactive Water Features and Fountains Rules, published by the Texas Department of
State Health Services, General Sanitation Division. The following deletions and additions to the Public
Interactive Water Features and Fountains Rules are hereby approved and adopted:
Section 265.302 Definitions is amended as follows:
...
(63) Remodeled - Replacement of facility components or modification of the PIWF so that the
design, configuration, capacity or operation differs in any aspect from the original approved design.
This term does not include normal maintenance and repair of a PIWF or a water circulation system
but does include any replacement or repair of circulation system equipment if the size, type or
operation of the equipment differs from the original equipment.
Section 265.307 Inspections and permitting of public interactive water features and fountains is amended as
follows:
(a) Frisco may:
...
(3) Require that the PIWF is tested for Cryptosporidium or other water borne
illnesses/diseases when the illnesses/diseases are diagnosed in an individual who has used the
PIWF. Such testing costs shall be incurred and paid for by the owner or operator of the PIWF.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/684
...
(e) The owner or operator of a PIWF shall obtain from Frisco an annual operational permit
for each PIWF. The permit fee for each PIWF that has recirculated water shall be two hundred
twenty-five and no/100 dollars ($225.00); the permit fee for each PIWF that has nonrecirculated
water shall be one hundred and no/100 dollars ($100.00).
...
(g) The owner or operator of a PIWF shall permit Frisco to conduct an inspection of the
PIWF prior to March 31st of each year. This inspection shall be required prior to the approval
of an annual operational permit. Should any portion of the PIWF and/or facility fail the annual
inspection, the owner or operator of the subject PIWF or facility shall be responsible for
remedying the issues which resulted in the failed inspection, and for obtaining a satisfactory
reinspection prior to the March 31st deadline and before the issuance of the annual operational
permit. Each reinspection will incur a fee of one hundred and no/100 dollars ($100.00) and
must be paid prior to reinspection. The annual operational permit will be approved when the
PIWF is in full compliance with this division.
Section 265.308 Closure of a public interactive water feature and fountain is amended as follows:
...
(g) If Frisco determines that the operation, construction or maintenance of any PIWF constitutes an
imminent hazard to the health or safety of the public, the annual operational permit shall be
suspended immediately, and the PIWF shall be closed for use and shall remain closed until the
necessary remedial action has been successfully completed. Frisco shall make an inspection after
completion of such remedial action to ensure compliance with this division. Each separate inspection
shall incur a fee of one hundred and no/100 dollars ($100.00) and shall be paid prior to the inspection
being performed.
(Ordinance 18-01-02, sec. 3, adopted 1/2/18)
Sec. 18-376.2 Penalty provision
Any person, firm, corporation or business entity violating this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and on conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding two thousand and no/100 dollars
($2,000.00). Each continuing day's violation under this division shall constitute a separate offense. The penal
provisions imposed under this division shall not preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin the violation. The city
retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law. (Ordinance 18-01-02,
sec. 3, adopted 1/2/18)
DIVISION 13. IRRIGATION SYSTEMS*
Sec. 18-377 Definitions
All technical industry words or phrases related to the irrigation systems not specifically defined in this section
shall have the meanings customarily attributable in the irrigation industry. The following words and terms, when
used in this division, have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
Air gap. A complete physical separation between the free flowing discharge end of a potable water supply
pipeline and an open or nonpressure receiving vessel.
Atmospheric vacuum breaker. An assembly containing an air inlet value, a check seat, and an air inlet port. The
flow of water into the body causes the air inlet valve to close the air inlet port. When the flow of water stops the
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/684
air inlet valve falls and forms a check against back-siphonage. At the same time it opens the air inlet port
allowing air to enter and satisfy the vacuum. Also known as an atmospheric vacuum breaker back-siphonage
prevention assembly.
Automatic controller. A solid state timer capable of operating valve stations to set the days, time of day, and
length of time water is applied.
Backflow prevention. The mechanical prevention of reverse flow, or back siphonage, of nonpotable water from
an irrigation system into the potable water source.
Backflow prevention assembly. Any assembly used to prevent backflow into a potable water system. The type of
assembly used is based on the existing or potential degree of health hazard and backflow condition.
Completion of irrigation system installation. When the landscape irrigation system has been installed, all
minimum standards met, all tests performed, and the irrigator is satisfied that the system is operating correctly.
Consulting. The act of providing advice, guidance, review or recommendations related to landscape irrigation
systems.
Cross-connection. An actual or potential connection between a potable water source and an irrigation system
that may contain contaminates or pollutants or any source of water that has been treated to a lesser degree in the
treatment process.
Design. The act of determining the various elements of a landscape irrigation system that will include, but not be
limited to, elements such as collecting site specific information, defining the scope of the project, defining plant
watering needs, selecting and laying out emission devices, locating system components, conducting hydraulic
calculations, identifying any local regulatory requirements, or scheduling irrigation work at a site. Completion of
the various components will result in an irrigation plan.
Design pressure. The pressure that is required for an emission device to operate properly. Design pressure is
calculated by adding the operating pressure necessary at an emission device to the total of all pressure losses
accumulated from an emission device to the water source.
Double check valve. An assembly that is composed of two independently acting, approved check valves,
including tightly closed resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with
properly located resilient seated test cocks. Also known as a double check valve backflow prevention assembly.
Emission device. Any device that is contained within an irrigation system and that is used to apply water.
Common emission devices in an irrigation system include, but are not limited to, spray and rotary sprinkler
heads, and drip irrigation emitters.
Employed. Engaged or hired to provide consulting services or perform any activity relating to the sale, design,
installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service to irrigation systems. A person is employed if that person
is in an employer-employee relationship as defined by Internal Revenue Code, 26 United States Code Service,
sec. 3212(d) based on the behavioral control, financial control, and the type of relationship involved in
performing employment related tasks.
Head-to-head spacing. The spacing of spray or rotary heads equal to the manufacturer's published radius of the
head.
Health hazard. A cross-connection or potential cross-connection with an irrigation system that involves any
substance that may, if introduced into the potable water supply, cause death or illness, spread disease, or have a
high probability of causing such effects.
Hydraulics. The science of dynamic and static water; the mathematical computation of determining pressure
losses and pressure requirements of an irrigation system.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/684
Inspector. A licensed plumbing inspector, water district operator, other governmental entity, or irrigation
inspector who inspects irrigation systems and performs other enforcement duties for a municipality or water
district as an employee or as a contractor.
Installer. A person who actually connects an irrigation system to a private or public raw or potable water supply
system or any water supply, who is licensed according to V.T.C.A., Texas Administrative Code, tit. 30, ch. 30
(relating to occupational licenses and registrations).
Irrigation controller. A programmable device capable of providing multiple irrigation programs with a least
three (3) start times per program and capable of limiting the irrigation frequency to once every seven (7) days.
Irrigation inspector. A person who inspects irrigation systems and performs other enforcement duties for a
municipality or water district as an employee or as a contractor and is required to be licensed under V.T.C.A.,
Texas Administrative Code, tit. 30, ch. 30 (relating to occupational licenses and registrations).
Irrigation plan. A scaled drawing of a landscape irrigation system which lists required information, the scope of
the project, and represents the changes made in the installation of the irrigation system.
Irrigation services. Selling, designing, installing, maintaining, altering, repairing, servicing, permitting,
providing consulting services regarding, or connecting an irrigation system to a water supply.
Irrigation system. An assembly of component parts that is permanently installed for the controlled distribution
and conservation of water to irrigate any type of landscape vegetation in any location, and/or to reduce dust or
control erosion. This term does not include a system that is used on or by an agricultural operation as defined by
V.T.C.A., Texas Agricultural Code, sec. 251.002.
Irrigation technician. A person who works under the supervision of a licensed irrigator to install, maintain, alter,
repair, service or supervise installation of an irrigation system, including the connection of such system in or to a
private or public, raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, and who is required to be licensed
under V.T.C.A., Texas Administrative Code, tit. 30, ch. 30 (relating to occupational licenses and registrations).
Irrigation zone. A subdivision of an irrigation system with a matched precipitation rate based on plant material
type (such as turf, shrubs, or trees), microclimate factors (such as sun/shade ratio), topographic features (such as
slope) and soil conditions (such as sand, loam, clay, or combination) or for hydrological control.
Irrigator. A person who sells, designs, offers consultations regarding, installs, maintains, alters, repairs, services
or supervises the installation of an irrigation system, including the connection of such system to a private or
public, raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, and who is required to be licensed under
V.T.C.A., Texas Administrative Code, tit. 30, ch. 30.
Irrigator-in-charge. The irrigator responsible for all irrigation work performed by an exempt business owner,
including, but not limited to obtaining permits, developing design plans, supervising the work of other irrigators
or irrigation technicians, and installing, selling, maintaining, altering, repairing, or servicing a landscape
irrigation system.
Landscape irrigation. The science of applying the necessary amount of water to promote or sustain healthy
growth of plant material or turf.
License. An occupational license that is issued by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, under
V.T.C.A., Texas Administrative Code, tit. 30, ch. 30, to an individual that authorizes the individual to engage in
an activity that is covered by V.T.C.A., Texas Administrative Code, tit. 30, ch. 30.
Mainline. A pipe within an irrigation system that delivers water from the water source to the individual zone
waives.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/684
Maintenance checklist. A document made available to the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative
that contains information regarding the operation and maintenance of the irrigation system, including, but not
limited to: checking and repairing the irrigation system, setting the automatic controller or smart contractor,
weather monitor, checking the rain or moisture sensor, cleaning filters, pruning grass and plants away from
irrigation emitters, using and operating the irrigation system, the precipitation rates of each irrigation zone
within the system, any water conservation measures currently in effect from the water purveyor, the name of the
water purveyor, a suggested seasonal or monthly watering schedule based on current evapotranspiration data for
the geographic region, and the minimum water requirements for the plant material in each zone based on the soil
type and plant material where the system is installed.
Major maintenance, alteration, repair, or service. Any activity that involves opening to the atmosphere the
irrigation main line at any point prior to the discharge side of any irrigation zone control valve. This includes,
but is not limited to, repairing or connecting into a main supply pipe, replacing a zone control valve, or repairing
a zone control valve in a manner that opens the system to the atmosphere.
Master valve. A remote control valve located after the backflow prevention device that controls the flow of
water to the irrigation system mainline.
Matched precipitation rate. The condition in which all sprinkler heads within an irrigation zone apply water at
the same rate.
New installation. An irrigation system installed at a location where one did not previously exist.
Pass-through contract. A written contract between a contractor or builder and a licensed irrigator or exempt
business owner to perform part or all of the irrigation services relating to an irrigation system.
Potable water. Water that is suitable for human consumption.
Pressure vacuum breaker. An assembly containing an independently operating internally loaded check valve and
an independently operating loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. Also known
as a pressure vacuum breaker back-siphonage prevention assembly.
Reclaimed water. Domestic or municipal wastewater which has been treated to a quality suitable for beneficial
use, such as landscape irrigation.
Records of landscape irrigation activities. The irrigation plans, contracts, warranty information, invoices, copies
of permits, and other documents that relate to the installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of a
landscape irrigation system.
Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. An assembly containing two independently acting
approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating mechanically independent pressure differential
relief valve located between the two check valves and below the first check valve.
Smart (ET) controller. A device capable of receiving and monitoring weather data using evapotranspiration
technology or measuring soil moisture directly to calculate or determine the amount of moisture lost from the
soil to automatically create or make adjustments to the irrigation schedule to apply only the amount of water that
is necessary to replace what has been lost.
Static water pressure. The pressure of water when it is not moving.
Supervision. The on-the-job oversight and direction by a licensed irrigator who is fulfilling his or her
professional responsibility to the client and/or employer in compliance with local or state requirements. Also a
licensed installer working under the direction of a licensed irrigator or beginning January 1, 2009, an irrigation
technician who is working under the direction of a licensed irrigator to install, maintain, alter, repair or service
an irrigation system.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/684
Water conservation. The design, installation, service, and operation of an irrigation system in a manner that
prevents the waste of water, promotes the most efficient use of water, and applies the least amount of water that
is required to maintain healthy individual plant material or turf, reduce dust, and control erosion.
Zone flow. A measurement, in gallons per minute or gallons per hour, of the actual flow of water through a zone
valve, calculated by individually opening each zone valve and obtaining a valid reading after the pressure has
stabilized. For design purposes, the zone flow is the total flow of all nozzles in the zone at a specific pressure.
Zone valve. An automatic valve that controls a single zone of a landscape irrigation system.
(Ordinance 08-12-103, sec. 2, adopted 12/2/08; Ordinance 17-12-83 adopted 12/5/17)
Sec. 18-378 License and permit required
(a) License required. Any person who connects an irrigation system to the water supply within the city or the
city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, commonly referred to as the ETJ, must hold a valid license, as defined by
V.T.C.A., Texas Administrative Code, tit. 30, ch. 30 and required by V.T.C.A., Texas Occupations Code ch. 1903
or as defined by V.T.C.A., Texas Administrative Code tit. 22, ch. 365 and required by V.T.C.A., Texas
Occupations Code ch. 1301.
Exemption: A property owner is not required to be licensed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Texas Occupations
Code tit. 12, sec. 1903.002(c)(1) if he or she is performing irrigation work in a building or on a premises owned
or occupied by the person as the person's home. A home or property owner who installs an irrigation system
must meet the remaining standards contained in this division. V.T.C.A., Texas Administrative Code tit. 30, ch.
344 regarding spacing, water pressure, spraying water over impervious materials, rain or moisture shut-off
devices or other technology, backflow prevention and isolation valves. The city may, at any point, adopt more
stringent requirements for a home or property owner who installs an irrigation system. See V.T.C.A., Texas
Occupations Code sec. 1903.002 for other exemptions to the licensing requirement.
(b) Permit required. Any person installing an irrigation system within the territorial limits or extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city is required to obtain a permit from the city. Two copies of an irrigation plan must be
submitted to the building official or the official city representative in conjunction with the permit application
with one set being retained as part of the inspection records. The second set is required for onsite inspection and
must be given to the property owner on completion of the irrigation system. Any plan approved for a permit
must be in compliance with the requirements of this division. The city of Frisco will provide a checklist for plan
review and inspections.
Exemptions:
(1) An irrigation system that is an onsite sewage disposal system, as defined by V.T.C.A., Health
and Safety Code sec. 355.002; or
(2) An irrigation system used on or by an agricultural operation as defined by V.T.C.A.,
Agriculture Code sec. 251.002.
(Ordinance 08-12-103, sec. 2, adopted 12/2/08)
Sec. 18-379 Backflow prevention methods and devices
(a) General. Any irrigation system that is connected to the potable water supply must be connected through a
backflow prevention method approved by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). The
backflow prevention device must be approved by the American Society of Sanitary Engineers, the Foundation
for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, the University of Southern California, the Uniform
Plumbing Code; or any other laboratory that has equivalent capabilities for both the laboratory and field
evaluation of backflow prevention assemblies. The backflow prevention device must be installed in accordance
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/684
with the laboratory approval standards or if the approval does not include specific installation information, the
manufacturer's current published recommendations.
(1) If conditions that present a health hazard exist, one of the following methods must be used to
prevent backflow:
a. An air gap may be used if:
1. There is an unobstructed physical separation; and
2. The distance from the lowest point of the water supply outlet to the flood rim of the
fixture or assembly into which the outlet discharges is at least one inch or twice the
diameter of the water supply outlet, whichever is greater.
b. Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies may be used if:
1. The device is installed at a minimum of 12 inches above ground in a location that
will ensure that the assembly will not be s submerged; and
2. Drainage is provided for any water that may be discharged through the assembly
relief valve.
c. Pressure vacuum breakers may be used if:
1. No back-pressure condition will occur; and
2. The device is installed at a minimum of 12 inches above any downstream piping and
the highest downstream opening. Pop-up sprinklers are measured from the retracted
position from the top of the sprinkler.
d. Atmospheric vacuum breakers may be used if:
1. No back-pressure will be present;
2. There are no shutoff valves downstream from the atmospheric vacuum breaker;
3. The device is installed at a minimum of six inches above any downstream piping and
the highest downstream opening. Pop-up sprinklers are measured from the retracted
position from the top of the sprinkler;
4. There is no continuous pressure on the supply side of the atmospheric vacuum
breaker for more than 12 hours in any 24-hour period; and
5. A separate atmospheric vacuum breaker is installed on the discharge side of each
irrigation control valve, between the valve and all the emission devices that the valve
controls.
(2) Backflow prevention devices used in applications designated as health hazards must be tested
upon installation and annually thereafter.
(3) If there are no conditions that present a health hazard, double check valve backflow prevention
assemblies may be used to prevent backflow if the device is tested upon installation and test cocks
are used for testing only.
(4) If a double check valve is installed below ground:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/684
a. Test cocks must be plugged, except when the double check valve is being tested;
b. Test cock plugs must be threaded, watertight, and made of nonferrous material;
c. A y-type strainer is installed on the inlet side of the double check valve;
d. There must be a minimum twelve (12) inch clearance between any fill material and the
bottom of the double check valve to allow for testing and repair; and
e. There must be space on the side of the double check valve to test and repair the double
check valve.
(5) If an existing irrigation system without a backflow-prevention assembly requires major
maintenance, alteration, repair, or service, the system must be connected to the potable water supply
through an approved, properly installed backflow prevention method before any major maintenance,
alteration, repair, or service is performed.
(6) If an irrigation system is connected to a potable water supply through a double check valve,
pressure vacuum breaker, or reduced pressure principle backflow assembly and includes an automatic
master valve on the system, the automatic master valve must be installed on the discharge side of the
backflow prevention assembly.
(7) The irrigation shall ensure the backflow prevention device is tested by a licensed backflow
prevention assembly tester prior to being placed in service and the test results provided to the city and
the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative within ten business days of testing of the
backflow prevention device.
(Ordinance 08-12-103, sec. 2, adopted 12/2/08; Ordinance 17-12-83 adopted 12/5/17)
Sec. 18-380 Specific conditions and cross-connection control
(a) Before any chemical is added to an irrigation system connected to the potable water supply, the irrigation
system must be connected through a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or air gap.
(b) Connection of any additional water source to an irrigation system that is connected to the potable water
supply can only be done if the irrigation system is connected to the potable water supply through a reducedpressure
principle backflow prevention assembly or an air gap.
(c) Irrigation system components with chemical additives induced by aspiration, injection, or emission system
connected to any potable water supply must be connected through a reduced pressure principle backflow device.
(d) If an irrigation system is designed or installed on a property that is served by an onsite sewage facility, as
defined in V.T.C.A., Texas Administrative Code tit. 30, ch. 285, then:
(1) All irrigation piping and valves must meet the separation distances from the onsite sewage
facilities system as required for a private water line in V.T.C.A., Texas Administrative Code, tit. 30,
sec. 285.91(10);
(2) Any connections using a private or public potable water source that is not the city's potable
water system must be connected to the water source through a reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention assembly as defined in V.T.C.A., Texas Administrative Code, tit. 30, sec. 344.50; and
(3) Any water from the irrigation system that is applied to the surface of the area utilized by the
onsite sewage facility system must be controlled on a separate irrigation zone or zones so as to allow
complete control of any irrigation to that area so that there will not be excess water that would
prevent the onsite sewage facilities system from operating effectively.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/684
(Ordinance 08-12-103, sec. 2(18-379), adopted 12/2/08)
Sec. 18-381 Water conservation
All irrigation systems shall be designed, installed, maintained, altered, repaired, serviced, and operated in a
manner that will promote water conservation as defined in the definitions section of this division. (Ordinance 08-
12-103, sec. 2(18-380), adopted 12/2/08)
Sec. 18-382 Irrigation plan design; minimum standards
(a) An irrigation shall prepare an irrigation plan for each site where a new irrigation system will be installed.
A paper or electronic copy of the irrigation plan must be on the job site at all times during the installation of the
irrigation system. A drawing showing the actual installation of the system is due to each irrigation system owner
after all new irrigation system installations. During the installation of the irrigation system, variances from the
original plan may be authorized by the licensed irrigator if the variance from the plan does not:
(1) Diminish the operational integrity of the irrigation system;
(2) Violate any requirements of this division; and
(3) Go unnoted in red on the irrigation plan.
(b) The irrigation plan must include complete coverage of the area to be irrigated. If a system does not provide
complete coverage of the area to be irrigated, it must be noted on the irrigation plan.
(c) All irrigation plans used for construction must be legible and drawn to scale on a maximum sheet size of
24 inches by 36 inches. The plan must include, at a minimum, the following information:
(1) The irrigator's seal, signature, and date of signing;
(2) All major physical features and the boundaries of the areas to be watered;
(3) A North arrow;
(4) A legend;
(5) The zone flow measurement for each zone;
(6) Location and type of each:
a. Irrigation controller and sensor that has the capability to set thresholds for both and freeze
at 40 degrees or above.
(7) Location, type, and size of each:
a. Water source, such as, but not limited to a water meter and point(s) of connection;
b. Backflow prevention device;
c. Water emission device, including, but not limited to, spray heads, rotary sprinkler heads,
quick-couplers, bubblers, drip, or micro-sprays;
d. Valve, including but not limited to, zone valves, master valves, and isolation valves;
e. Pressure regulation component; and
f. Main line and lateral piping
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/684
g. Wiring splice locations.
(8) The engineer's scale used; and
(9) The design pressure.
(10) Total landscape area (excluding all impervious surfaces) served by the irrigation system.
(Ordinance 08-12-103, sec. 2(18-381), adopted 12/2/08; Ordinance 17-12-83 adopted 12/5/17)
Sec. 18-383 Design and installation; minimum requirements
(a) Manufacturer's limitations. No irrigation design or installation shall require the use of any component,
including the water meter, in a way which exceeds the manufacturer's published performance limitations for the
component; and
(b) Spacing.
(1) The maximum spacing between emission devices must not exceed the manufacturer's published
radius or spacing of the device(s). The radius or spacing is determined by referring to the
manufacturer's published specifications for a specific emission device at a specific operating
pressure. Turf area eight (8) feet or wider must have heads spraying back to achieve head to head
coverage.
(2) New irrigation systems or extensions of systems shall comply with article IV, section 2 of the
Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance (Revised ZA06-0005). If pop-up sprays or rotary sprinkler heads
are used in a new irrigation system, the sprinkler heads must direct flow away from any adjacent
surface and shall not be installed closer than four inches from a hardscape, such as, but not limited to,
a building foundation, fence, concrete, asphalt, pavers, or stones set with mortar.
(3) Narrow paved walkways, jogging paths, golf cart paths or other small areas located in
cemeteries, parks, golf courses or other public areas may be exempted from this requirement if the
runoff drains into a landscaped area.
(4) Each backflow prevention device must be located no more than three (3) feet from the water
meter. In cases where RPZ or PVB assemblies are used, the device shall be located on the side of the
building and integrated into the building envelope or consolidated into enclosed service areas and
screened with primary building materials used on the building or living vegetative screens.
(c) Water pressure. Emission devices must be installed to operate at the minimum and not above the maximum
sprinkler head pressure as published by the manufacturer for the nozzle and head spacing that is used. Methods
to achieve the water pressure requirements include either a city-approved pressure regulator or pressurecompensating
heads. Commercial irrigation must use pressure-regulating heads on all turf heads.
(d) Piping. Piping in irrigation systems must be designed and installed so that the flow of water in the pipe
will not exceed a velocity of five feet per second for polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe.
(e) Irrigation zones. Irrigation systems shall have separate zones based on plant material type, microclimate
factors, topographic features, foundation protection, soil conditions, and hydrological requirements. All non-turf
landscape areas shall be designed with drip irrigation to include pressure-compensating, non-draining emitters
and a 120 mesh filter. Parkway areas within ten (10) feet from the curb must have either drip irrigation or highefficiency,
low-precipitation nozzles, as approved in writing by the city. No single stream rotors permitted in
front yards unless approved in writing by the city.
(f) Matched precipitation rate. Zones must be designed and installed so that all of the emission devices in that
zone irrigate at the same precipitation rate.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/684
(g) No-spray surface. Irrigation systems shall not spray water over surfaces made of concrete, asphalt, brick,
wood, stones set with mortar, or any other impervious material, such as, but not limited to, walls, fences,
sidewalks, streets, etc.
(h) Foundations. A separate station shall be dedicated only for drip irrigation for the purpose of watering a
structure's foundation.
(i) Master valve. A master valve shall be installed on the discharge side of the backflow prevention device on
all new installations and located within twelve (12) inches of the backflow prevention device.
(j) Check valves. Check valves are required where elevation differences may result in low head drainage.
Check valves may be located at the sprinkler head(s) or on the lateral line. Any slope greater than a 4:1 ratio
must be irrigated by drip irrigation.
(k) Pop-up heads. Pop-up heads shall be installed and operated to extend above all landscape turfgrass.
(l) PVC pipe primer solvent. All new irrigation systems that are installed using PVC pipe and fittings shall be
primed with a colored primer prior to applying the PVC cement in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code
(sec. 316) or the International Plumbing Code (sec. 605).
(m) Irrigation controllers. All new irrigation systems must include an irrigation controller capable of
providing the minimum following features:
(1) Multiple irrigation programs with at least three start times per program;
(2) Limiting the irrigation frequency to once every seven (7) days and once every fourteen (14)
days; and
(3) Water budgeting features.
(n) Operational rain and freeze shut-off devices capable of setting thresholds for rain and freeze at or above 40
degrees. All new automatically controlled irrigation systems must include an operational sensor with the
capability to set thresholds for both rain and freezing temperatures at or above 40 degrees or other technology
designed to inhibit or interrupt operation of the irrigation system during periods of freezing weather at or above
40 degrees and rainfall. Freeze and rain shut-off technology must be installed according to the manufacturer's
published recommendations. Repairs to existing automatic irrigation systems that require replacement of an
existing controller must include an operational sensor with the capability to set thresholds for both rain and
freezing temperatures at or above 40 degrees or other technology designed to inhibit or interrupt operation of the
irrigation system during periods of freezing weather at or above 40 degrees and rainfall.
(o) Isolation valve. All new irrigation systems must include an isolation valve between the water meter and
the backflow prevention device.
(p) Depth coverage of piping. Piping in all irrigation systems must be installed according to the
manufacturer's published specifications for depth coverage of piping.
(1) If the manufacturer has not published specifications for depth coverage of piping, the piping
must be installed to provide minimum depth coverage of six inches of select backfill, between the top
of the pipe and the natural grade of the topsoil. All portions of the irrigation system that fail to meet
this standard must be noted on the irrigation plan. If the area being irrigated has rock at a depth of six
inches or less, select backfill may be mounded over the pipe. Mounding must be noted on the
irrigation plan and discussed with the irrigation system owner or owner's representative to address
any safety issues.
(2) If a utility, manmade structure or roots create an unavoidable obstacle, which makes the sixinch
depth coverage requirement impractical, the piping shall be installed to provide a minimum of
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/684
two inches of select backfill between the top of the pipe and the natural grade of the topsoil.
(3) All trenches and holes created during installation of an irrigation system must be backfilled and
compacted to the original grade.
(q) Wiring irrigation systems.
(1) Underground electrical wiring used to connect an irrigation controller to any electrical
component of the irrigation system must be listed by Underwriters Laboratories as acceptable for
burial underground.
(2) Electrical wiring that connects any electrical components of an irrigation system must be sized
according to the manufacturer's recommendation.
(3) Electrical wire splices which may be exposed to moisture must be waterproof as certified by
the wire splice manufacturer.
(4) Underground electrical wiring that connects an irrigation controller to any electrical component
of the irrigation system must be buried with a minimum of six (6) inches of select backfill.
(r) Water contained within the piping of an irrigation system is deemed to be non potable. No drinking or
domestic water usage, such as, but not limited to, filling swimming pools or decorative fountains, shall be
connected to an irrigation system. If a hose bib (an outdoor water faucet that has hose threads on the spout) is
connected to an irrigation system for the purpose of providing supplemental water to an area, the hose bib must
be installed using a quick coupler key on a quick coupler installed in a covered purple valve box and the hose
bib and any hoses connected to the bib must be labeled “Non Potable, Not Safe For Drinking.” An isolation
valve must be installed upstream of a quick coupler connecting a hose bib to an irrigation system.
(s) Beginning January 1, 2010, either a licensed irrigator or a licensed irrigation technician shall be onsite at
all times while the landscape irrigation system is being installed. When an irrigator is not onsite, the irrigator
shall be responsible for ensuring that a licensed irrigation technician is onsite to supervise the installation of the
irrigation system.
(Ordinance 08-12-103, sec. 2(18-382), adopted 12/2/08; Ordinance 17-12-83 adopted 12/5/17)
Sec. 18-384 Initial inspection
The city will conduct an initial inspection of all piping, valves, emission devices, and other irrigation system
components prior to backfilling any part of the system. (Ordinance 08-12-103, sec. 2(18-383), adopted 12/2/08)
Sec. 18-385 Completion of irrigation system installation
Upon completion of the irrigation system, the irrigator or irrigation technician who provided supervision for the
on-site installation shall be required to complete the following items:
(1) A final “walk through” with the irrigation system's owner or the owner's representative to
explain the operation of the system. The “walk through” must include, but not be limited to, visual
inspection of all zones and emission devices operating for not less than two minutes, a review of the
currently programmed, as well as seasonal, watering schedule, list of the components that require
maintenance and the recommended frequency of service, location of the irrigation controller and
associated manufacturer's manual, water meter, isolation valve, backflow preventer, sprinkler heads,
drip or pressure compensating tubing irrigation, rain or moisture and freeze shut-off device, irrigation
plan showing the installed system, maintenance checklist, etc.
(2) The maintenance checklist on which the irrigator or irrigation technician shall obtain the
signature of the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative and shall sign, date, and seal the
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/684
checklist. If the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative is unwilling or unable to sign the
maintenance checklist, the irrigator shall note the time and date of the refusal on the irrigation
system's owner or owner's representative's signature line. The irrigation system owner or owner's
representative will be given the original maintenance checklist and a duplicate copy of the
maintenance checklist shall be maintained by the irrigator and provided to the building official or the
official city representative. The items on the maintenance checklist shall include but are not limited
to:
a. Irrigator's name, license number, company name, telephone number, and the dates of the
warranty period;
b. The manufacturer's manual for the irrigation controller;
c. A seasonal (spring, summer, fall, winter) watering schedule based on either current/real
time evapotranspiration or monthly historical reference evapotranspiration (historical ET) data,
monthly effective rainfall estimates, plant landscape coefficient factors, and site factors;
d. A list of components, such as the nozzle, or pump filters, and other such components; that
require maintenance and the recommended frequency for the service; and
e. The statement, “This irrigation system has been installed in accordance with all applicable
state and local laws, ordinances, rules, regulations or orders. I have tested the system and
determined that it has been installed according to the Irrigation Plan and is properly adjusted for
the most efficient application of water at this time.”
(3) A permanent sticker which contains the irrigator's name, license number, company name,
telephone number and the dates of the warranty period shall be affixed to each irrigation controller
installed by the irrigator or irrigation technician. The information contained on the sticker must be
printed with waterproof ink.
(4) The irrigation plan indicating the actual installation of the system must be provided to the
irrigation system's owner or owner representative and to the building official or the official city
representative.
(5) In the event that the irrigation system owner or owner representative is a residential home
builder and the new residential home with the associated irrigation system will be sold for the first
time to a new homeowner, a copy of the irrigation plan indicating the actual installation of the system
and corresponding maintenance checklist must be placed within or attached to the irrigation
controller. A copy of the irrigation plan and corresponding maintenance checklist must be placed
within or attached to the irrigation controller if the irrigation system is sold or transferred from the
new home owner or subsequent owners.
(Ordinance 08-12-103, sec. 2(18-384), adopted 12/2/08; Ordinance 17-12-83 adopted 12/5/17)
Sec. 18-386 Maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of irrigation systems
(a) The licensed irrigator is responsible for all work that the irrigator performed during the maintenance,
alteration, repair, or service of an irrigation system during the warranty period. The irrigator or business owner is
not responsible for the professional negligence of any other irrigator who subsequently conducts any irrigation
service on the same irrigation system.
(b) All trenches and holes created during the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of an irrigation system
must be returned to the original grade with compacted select backfill.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/684
(c) Colored PVC pipe primer solvent must be used on all pipes and fittings used in the maintenance,
alteration, repair, or service of an irrigation system in accordance with the Uniform Plumbing Code (sec. 316) or
the International Plumbing Code (sec. 605).
(d) When maintenance, alteration, repair or service of an irrigation system involves excavation work at the
water meter or backflow prevention device, an isolation valve shall be installed, if an isolation valve is not
present.
(Ordinance 08-12-103, sec. 2(18-385), adopted 12/2/08)
Sec. 18-387 Reclaimed water
Reclaimed water may be utilized in landscape irrigation systems if:
(1) There is no direct contact with edible crops, unless the crop is pasteurized before consumption;
(2) The irrigation system does not spray water across property lines that do not belong to the
irrigation system's owner;
(3) The irrigation system is installed using purple components;
(4) The domestic potable water line is connected using an air gap or a reduced pressure principle
backflow prevention device, in accordance with V.T.C.A., Texas Administrative Code tit. 30, sec.
290.47(i)(relating to appendices);
(5) A minimum of an eight-inch by eight-inch sign, in English and Spanish, is prominently posted
on/in the area that is being irrigated, that reads, “RECLAIMED WATER-DO NOT DRINK” and
“AGUA DE RECUPERACION-NO BEBER”; and
(6) Backflow prevention on the reclaimed water supply line shall be in accordance with the
regulations of the city's water provider.
(Ordinance 08-12-103, sec. 2(18-386), adopted 12/2/08)
Sec. 18-388 Advertisement requirements
(a) At least one vehicle must remain onsite and clearly visible when used in the performance of irrigation
installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service must display the irrigator's license number in the form of
“LI____________” in a contrasting color of block letters at least two inches high, on both sides of the vehicle.
(b) All forms of written and electronic advertisements for irrigation services must display the irrigator's
license number in the form of “LI____________.” Any form of advertisement, including business cards, and
estimates which displays an entity's or individual's name other than that of the licensed irrigator must also
display the name of the licensed irrigator and the licensed irrigator's license number. Trailers that advertise
irrigation services must display the irrigator's license number.
(Ordinance 08-12-103, sec. 2(18-387), adopted 12/2/08)
Sec. 18-389 Contracts
(a) All contracts to install an irrigation system must be in writing and signed by each party and must specify
the irrigator's name, license number, business address, current business telephone numbers, the date that each
party signed the agreement, the total agreed price, and must contain the statement, “Irrigation in Texas is
regulated by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), MC-178, P.O. Box 13087, Austin, Texas
78711-3087. TCEQ's website is: www. tceq.state.tx.us.” All contracts must include the irrigator's seal, signature,
and date.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/684
(b) All written estimates, proposals, bids, and invoices relating to the installation or repair of an irrigation
system(s) must include the irrigator's name, license number, business address, current business telephone
number(s), and the statement: “Irrigation in Texas is regulated by the Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality (TCEQ) (MC-178), P.O. Box 13087, Austin, Texas 78711-3087. TCEQ's web site is:
www.tceq.state.tx.us.”
(c) An individual who agrees by contract to provide irrigation services as defined in V.T.C.A., Texas
Administrative Code tit. 30, sec. 344.30 (relating to License Required) shall hold an irrigator license issued
under V.T.C.A., Texas Administrative Code tit. 30, ch. 30 (relating to occupational licenses and registrations)
unless the contract is a pass-through contract as defined in V.T.C.A., Texas Administrative Code tit. 30, sec.
344.1(36)(relating to definitions). If a pass-through contract includes irrigation services, then the irrigation
portion of the contract can only be performed by a licensed irrigator. If an irrigator installs a system pursuant to a
pass-through contract, the irrigator shall still be responsible for providing the irrigation system's owner or
through contract, the irrigator shall still be responsible for providing the irrigation system's owner or owner's
representative a copy of the warranty and all other documents required under this chapter. A pass-through
contract must identify by name and license number the irrigator that will perform the work and must provide a
mechanism for contacting the irrigator for irrigation system warranty work.
(d) The contract must include the dates that the warranty is valid.
(Ordinance 08-12-103, sec. 2(18-388), adopted 12/2/08; Ordinance 17-12-83 adopted 12/5/17)
Sec. 18-390 Warranties for systems
(a) On all installations of new or major repair of irrigation systems, an irrigator shall present the irrigation
system's owner or owner's representative with a written warranty covering materials and labor furnished in the
new installation of the irrigation system. The irrigator shall be responsible for adhering to terms of the warranty.
If the irrigator's warranty is less than the manufacturer's warranty for the system components, then the irrigator
shall provide the irrigation system's owner or the owner's representative with applicable information regarding
the manufacturer's warranty period. The warranty must include the irrigator's seal, signature, and date. If the
warranty is part of an irrigator's contract, a separate warranty document is not required.
(b) An irrigator's written warranty on new irrigation systems must specify the irrigator's name, business
address, and business telephone number(s), must contain the signature of the irrigation system's owner or
owner's representative confirming receipt of the warranty and must include the statement: “Irrigation in Texas is
regulated by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), MC-178, P.O. Box 130897, Austin,
Texas 78711-3087. TCEQ's website is: www.tceq.state.tx.us.”
(c) On all maintenance, alterations, repairs, or service to existing irrigation systems, an irrigator shall present
the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative a written document that identifies the materials furnished
in the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service.
(Ordinance 08-12-103, sec. 2(18-389), adopted 12/2/08)
Sec. 18-391 Duties and responsibilities of city irrigation inspectors
A licensed irrigation inspector or plumbing inspector shall enforce the ordinance of the city, and shall be
responsible for:
(1) Verifying that the appropriate permits have been obtained for an irrigation system and that the
irrigator and installer or irrigation technician, if applicable, are licensed;
(2) Inspecting the irrigation system prior to back-filling;
(3) Determining that the irrigation system complies with the requirements of this division;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/684
(4) Determining that the appropriate backflow prevention device was installed, tested, and test
results provided to the city;
(5) Providing the final walk-through of the irrigation system;
(6) Investigating complaints related to irrigation system installation, maintenance, alteration,
repairs, or service of an irrigation system and advertisement of irrigation services; and
(7) Maintaining records according to this division.
(Ordinance 08-12-103, sec. 2(18-390), adopted 12/2/08)
Sec. 18-392 Fees
The fee for this permit for each individual residential irrigation system shall be $185.00 payable to the City of
Frisco and submitted to the building official or the official city representative at the time of application. The
nonresidential fee for each individual irrigation system will be $250.00 for the first controller, an additional
$175.00 for a second controller, with a total not to exceed $500.00 for any individual system and shall be
submitted likewise. This fee shall include plan review and approval, one inspection prior to back-filling, and one
final walk-through inspection. Additional inspections will be $50.00 each and payable prior to the issuance of
final approval. (Ordinance 08-12-103, sec. 2(18-391), adopted 12/2/08)
Sec. 18-393 Enforcement and penalty
(a) The city shall have the power to administer and enforce the provisions of this section as may be required
by governing law. Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of this Code, or fails to
comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, is subject to suit for injunctive relief as well as
prosecution for criminal violations. Any violation of the ordinance codified in this section is declared to be a
nuisance.
(b) Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum not exceeding
$2,000.00. Each day that a provision of this section is violated shall constitute a separate offense. An offense
under this section is a class C misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up to $2,000.00.
(c) Nothing in this section shall be construed as a waiver of the city's right to bring a civil action to enforce the
provisions of this section and to seek remedies as allowed by law, including, but not limited to the following:
(1) Injunctive relief to prevent specific conduct that violates the ordinance or to require specific
conduct that is necessary for compliance with this division; and
(2) Other available relief.
(Ordinance 08-12-103, sec. 2(18-392), adopted 12/2/08)
DIVISION 14. RESIDENTIAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE
Sec. 18-393.1 Adoption of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code
The 2018 edition of the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, copyrighted by the International Code
Council, Inc., save and except the deletions and additions set forth in exhibit A, attached to Ordinance 19-11-104
and incorporated herein for all purposes, regulating the construction, alteration, movement, renovation,
replacement, repair and maintenance of residential pools and spas installed in or on the lot of a one- or twofamily
dwelling within the city (“2018 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code”). The 2018 International
Swimming Pool and Spa Code is made a part of this section as if fully set forth herein. Three (3) copies of the
2018 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code are on file in the office of the city secretary being marked and
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/684
designated as the 2018 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code. The deletions and additions set forth in
exhibit A to Ordinance 19-11-104 are located on city's website under development services. (Ordinance 19-11-
104, sec. 2, adopted 11/19/19)
Sec. 18-393.2 Penalty provision
Any person, firm, corporation or business entity violating this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction therefor, shall be fined a sum not exceeding two thousand and no/dollars ($2,000.00), and
each and every day that such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense; provided, however, that
such penal provision shall not preclude a suit to enjoin such violation. The city retains all legal rights and
remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law. (Ordinance 19-11-104, sec. 4, adopted 11/19/19)
Secs. 18-393.3–18-393.10 Reserved
DIVISION 15. EXISTING BUILDING CODE
Sec. 18-393.11 Adoption of the International Existing Building Code
The 2018 edition of the International Existing Building Code, copyrighted by the International Code Council,
Inc., save and except the deletions and additions set forth in exhibit A, attached to Ordinance 19-11-105 and
incorporated herein for all purposes, regulating the repair, alteration, change of occupancy, addition and
relocation of existing buildings within the city (“2018 International Existing Building Code”). The 2018
International Existing Building Code is made a part of this section as if fully set forth herein. Three (3) copies of
the 2018 International Existing Building Code are on file in the office of the city secretary being marked and
designated as the 2018 International Existing Building Code. The deletions and additions set forth in exhibit A
to Ordinance 19-11-105 are located on city's website under development services. (Ordinance 19-11-105, sec. 2,
adopted 11/19/19)
Sec. 18-393.12 Penalty provision
Any person, firm, corporation or business entity violating this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction therefor, shall be fined a sum not exceeding two thousand and no/dollars ($2,000.00), and
each and every day that such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense; provided, however , that
such penal provision shall not preclude a suit to enjoin such violation. The city retains all legal rights and
remedies available to it pursuant to local , state and federal law. (Ordinance 19-11-105, sec. 4, adopted 11/19/19)
ARTICLE V. IMPACT FEES*
Sec. 18-394 Purpose
This article is intended to assure the provision of adequate public facilities to serve new development in the city
by requiring each such development to pay its share of the costs of such improvements necessitated by and
attributable to such new development. (Ordinance 05-07-53, sec. 2, art. 1, adopted 7/5/05; Ordinance 12-03-12,
sec. 2, art. 1, adopted 3/6/12)
Sec. 18-395 Definitions
Area-related facility means a capital improvement or facility expansion which is designated in the impact fee
capital improvements plan and which is not a site-related facility. Area-related facility may include a capital
improvement which is located off site or within or on the perimeter of the development site.
Capital improvement means any of the following facilities with a life expectancy of three (3) or more years that
are owned and operated by or on behalf of the city:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/684
(1) Water supply, treatment and distribution facilities; wastewater collection and treatment
facilities; and stormwater, drainage and flood-control facilities, whether or not they are located within
the service area; and
(2) Roadway facilities.
Capital improvements plan means a plan contemplated by the ordinance that identifies capital improvements or
facility expansions for which impact fees may be assessed.
City or Frisco means the City of Frisco, Texas.
City council means the city council of the City of Frisco, Texas.
Facility expansion means the expansion of the capacity of an existing facility that serves the same function as an
otherwise necessary new capital improvement, in order that the existing facility may serve new development.
The term does not include the repair, maintenance, modernization or expansion of an existing facility to better
serve existing development.
Final plat or final plat approval or approved final plat means the point at which the applicant has complied with
all conditions of approval for any type of plat required by law to be filed with the applicable county, including
but not limited to, a final plat, replat, amending plat and vacating plat, and the subject plat has been approved by
the city.
Impact fee means a charge or assessment imposed as set forth in this article against new development. The term
does not include:
(1) Required dedications of land for public parks or payments in lieu thereof;
(2) Dedication of rights-of-way or easements or construction or dedication of on-site or off-site
water distribution, wastewater collection or drainage facilities, or streets, sidewalks, or curbs if the
dedication or construction is required by a valid ordinance and is necessitated by and attributable to
the new development;
(3) Lot or acreage fees or pro-rata fees to be placed in trust funds for the purpose of reimbursing
developers for oversizing or constructing water or wastewater mains or lines; or
(4) Other pro-rata fees for reimbursement of water or wastewater mains or lines extended by the
city.
Land use assumptions means a description of the service area and the projections of changes in land uses,
densities, intensities, population and employment growth in the service area over at least a ten-year period and
adopted by the city, as may be amended from time to time, upon which the capital improvements plans are
based.
New development means a project involving the construction, reconstruction, redevelopment, conversion,
structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure, or any use or extension of the use of land, any of
which has the effect of increasing the requirements for capital improvements or facility expansions, measured by
the number of service units to be generated by such activity, and which requires either the approval of a plat
pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations, the issuance of a building permit or connection to the city's water
or wastewater system, and which has not been exempted from these regulations by provisions herein or attached
hereto. Installation of a larger water meter will constitute new development.
Off site means a facility or expansion that is now a site-related facility, as defined herein.
Plat shall mean any type of plat required by law to be filed with the applicable county, including but not limited
to, a final plat, replat, amending plat and vacating plat.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/684
Property owner has the same meaning as the term “subdivider” in the city's subdivision regulations. Property
owner includes the developer for the new development.
Recoup means the imposition of an impact fee to reimburse the city for capital improvements which the city has
previously oversized to serve new development.
Roadway facilities means arterial or collector streets or roads that have been designated on the city's official
adopted roadway plan, together with all necessary appurtenances. The term includes, but is not limited to, the
city's share of costs for roadways and associated improvements designated on the federal or state highway
system, including but not limited to, local matching funds and costs related to utility line relocation and the
establishment of curbs, gutters, sidewalks and drainage appurtenances. The term also includes, but is not limited
to, interest in land, traffic lanes, intersection improvements, traffic-control devices and turn lanes associated with
the roadway or street lighting.
Service area means the area within the city and/or the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, as identified in the land
use assumptions, to be served by the capital improvements or facilities expansions specified in the capital
improvements plan, except for roadway facilities service area means any one of the individual services areas
within the city's corporate boundaries as identified in the land use assumptions and the capital improvements
plan.
Service unit means the standardized measure of consumption, use, generation or discharge attributable to an
individual unit of development, calculated in accordance with generally accepted engineering and/or planning
standards, as indicated in the land use equivalency tables located in the study (hereinafter defined).
Single-family residential has the meaning given the term in the city's zoning regulations, as they exist or may be
amended.
Site-related facility means an improvement or facility which is for the primary use or benefit of a new
development and/or which is for the primary purpose of safe and adequate provision of roadway, water or
wastewater facilities to serve the new development, and which is not included in the capital improvements plan
and for which the property owner is solely responsible under subdivision or other applicable regulations or
which is located at least partially on the plat which is being considered for impact fee assessment. Site-related
facility includes that portion of an off-site water or wastewater main, equivalent to a standard size water or
wastewater main, which is necessary to connect any new development with the city's water or wastewater
system, the cost of which has not been included in the city's impact fee capital improvements plan.
Study means the “Water, Wastewater and Roadway Impact Fee Update” study, dated January 2019 and prepared
by Kimley-Horn Associates, Inc. on behalf of the city, a copy of which is located in the office of the city
secretary and incorporated by reference herein, as may be amended from time to time.
Utility connection means authorization to install a water meter for connecting a new development to the city's
water system or to the city's wastewater system.
Wastewater facility means a wastewater interceptor or main, lift station or other facility or improvement used for
providing wastewater collection and treatment included within the city's collection system for wastewater.
Wastewater facility includes, but is not limited to, land, easements or structures associated with such facilities.
Wastewater facility excludes a site-related facility.
Water facility means a water interceptor or main, pump station, storage tank or other facility or improvement
used for providing water supply, treatment and distribution service included within the city's water storage or
distribution system. Water facility includes, but is not limited to, land, easements or structures associated with
such facilities. Water facility excludes site-related facilities.
Water meter means a device owned by the city for measuring the flow of water to a development, whether for
domestic or for irrigation purposes.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/684
(Ordinance 05-07-53, sec. 2, art. 2, adopted 7/5/05; Ordinance 12-03-12, sec. 2, art. 2, adopted 3/6/12;
Ordinance 19-04-29 adopted 4/2/19)
Sec. 18-396 Applicability
The provisions of this article regarding water and wastewater impact fees apply to all new development within
the corporate boundaries of the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. The provisions of this article regarding
roadway impact fees apply to all new development within the corporate boundaries of the city. (Ordinance 05-
07-53, sec. 2, art. 3, adopted 7/5/05; Ordinance 12-03-12, sec. 2, art. 3, adopted 3/6/12)
Sec. 18-397 Land use assumptions adopted
The previously adopted land use assumptions have been reviewed, evaluated, updated and revised, and the city
council finds that the land use assumptions set forth in the 2014 study are hereby adopted and approved.
(Ordinance 05-07-53, sec. 2, art. 4, ex. D, adopted 7/5/05; Ordinance 12-03-12, sec. 2, art. 4, adopted 3/6/12;
Ordinance 14-05-29, sec. 5, adopted 5/20/14)
Sec. 18-398 Capital improvements plan adopted
The previously adopted capital improvements plan has been reviewed, evaluated, updated and revised, and the
city council finds that the capital improvements plan set forth in the 2014 study is hereby adopted and approved.
(Ordinance 05-07-53, sec. 2, art. 5, adopted 7/5/05; Ordinance 12-03-12, sec. 2, art. 5, adopted 3/6/12;
Ordinance 14-05-29, sec. 6, adopted 5/20/14)
Sec. 18-399 Impact fees adopted
The previously adopted impact fees for roadways, water and wastewater have been reviewed, evaluated, updated
and revised. The city council finds that:
(1) The impact fees for roadways set forth in exhibit A, “roadway impact fee schedule,” attached to
Ordinance 19-04-29 and incorporated for all purposes, representing seventy percent (70%) of the
total projected costs for single-family land uses and one hundred percent (100%) of the total
projected costs for all other land uses, are hereby adopted and approved;
(2) The impact fees for water set forth in exhibit B, “water impact fee schedule,” attached to
Ordinance 19-04-29 and incorporated for all purposes, representing seventy percent (70%) of the
total projected costs for single-family land uses and one hundred percent (100%) of the total
projected costs for all other land uses, are hereby adopted and approved; and
(3) The impact fees for wastewater set forth in exhibit C, “wastewater impact fee schedule,”
attached to Ordinance 19-04-29 and incorporated for all purposes, representing seventy percent
(70%) of the total projected costs for single family land uses and one hundred percent (100%) of the
total projected costs for all other land uses, are hereby adopted and approved.
(Ordinance 05-07-53, sec. 2, art. 6, adopted 7/5/05; Ordinance 12-03-12, sec. 2, art. 6, adopted 3/6/12;
Ordinance 14-05-29, sec. 7, adopted 5/20/14; Ordinance 19-04-29 adopted 4/2/19)
Sec. 18-400 Impact fee as condition of development approval; permit issuance
No final plat for new development shall be released for filing with the appropriate county, or in the cases for
which no plat is submitted to the city, whether the property is located inside or outside the corporate boundaries
of the city, no application for a utility connection shall be approved and/or no building permit and/or certificate
of occupancy shall be issued, without assessment of an impact fee pursuant to this article. No building permit
shall be issued, or in the cases for which no plat is submitted to the city, whether the property is located inside or
outside the corporate boundaries of the city, no building permit and/or certificate of occupancy shall be issued
and/or utility connection made, for new development, until the property owner has paid the impact fee imposed
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/684
by and calculated herein or a contract for payment is approved by the city and executed by the parties.
(Ordinance 05-07-53, sec. 2, art. 7, adopted 7/5/05; Ordinance 12-03-12, sec. 2, art. 7, adopted 3/6/12)
Sec. 18-401 Assessment of impact fees
(a) The assessment of impact fees for any new development shall be calculated and made at the time of final
plat approval (as defined in section 18-395 (definitions)); however, for the sole purpose of phasing in the
application of this article, final plats that have been approved by the city on or before May 2, 2019, pursuant to
the city's subdivision regulations, or for a final plat deemed approved by the city on or before May 2, 2019 due
to the city's failure to act, assessment for the new development to which the final plat applies shall be calculated
and made in accordance with the impact fees existing on May 1, 2019.
(b) Following initial assessment of the roadway impact fee for a new development pursuant to subsection (a),
the amount of the impact fee per service unit for that development cannot be increased, unless the approved final
plat expires or lapses under applicable ordinances or law or the owner proposes to change the approved
development by the submission of a new development application or application to increase the number of
service units, in which case the impact fee will be reassessed for increased meter size or additional meters or
service units at the impact fee rate then in effect.
(c) Following the lapse or expiration of a final plat that has been approved or a final plat deemed approved
due to the city's failure to act, pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations, a new assessment shall be performed
at the time of new final plat approval in accordance with this article.
(Ordinance 05-07-53, sec. 2, art. 8, adopted 7/5/05; Ordinance 12-03-12, sec. 2, art. 8, adopted 3/6/12;
Ordinance 14-05-29, sec. 9, adopted 5/20/14; Ordinance 19-04-29 adopted 4/2/19)
Sec. 18-402 Computation and collection of impact fees
(a) The impact fees due on new development shall be collected at the time of application for a building permit
or, in the cases for which no plat is submitted to the city, whether the property is located inside or outside the
corporate boundaries of the city, at the time of application for building permit, utility connection or certificate of
occupancy, whichever occurs first, unless an agreement between the developer and the city has been executed
providing for a different time of payment.
(b) At the time of final plat approval, or the request for a utility connection for an area in the city's
extraterritorial jurisdiction for which a final plat was not submitted to the city, for all new developments, the city
shall compute the impact fees due for the new development in the following manner:
(1) The amount of each type of impact fee due (roadway, water, and/or wastewater) shall be
determined by multiplying the number of each type of service units generated by the new
development by the impact fee due for each type of service unit in the applicable service area set
forth in exhibits A, B and/or C to the ordinance from which this article derives, respectively.
(2) The amount of each impact fee due shall be reduced by any allowable credits for that category
of capital improvements in the manner provided by this article.
(c) Whenever a property owner proposes to increase the number of service units for a new development, the
additional impact fees collected for such new service units shall be determined by using the amount of impact
fee per service unit in exhibits A, B and/or C then in effect, and such additional fee shall be collected at the time
of issuance of a new building permit, or for an area in the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction for which a final plat
was not required to be submitted to the city, prior to or at the time of enlargement of the connection to the city's
water or wastewater system.
(Ordinance 05-07-53, sec. 2, art. 9, adopted 7/5/05; Ordinance 12-03-12, sec. 2, art. 9, adopted 3/6/12)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/684
Sec. 18-403 Credits against impact fees
(a) Any construction or contributions to or dedications of any area-related facility appearing in the capital
improvements plan that is required to be constructed by a property owner as a condition of new development
shall be credited against the impact fees otherwise due on that new development from the same category
(roadway, water or wastewater) of impact fees assessed on the new development.
(b) All credits against impact fees shall be subject to the following limitations and shall be granted based on
this article and any additional administrative guidelines that may be adopted by the city.
(1) No credit shall be given for the dedication or construction of site-related facilities.
(2) No credit shall exceed an amount equal to the assessed impact fee.
(3) If a credit applicable to a final plat has not been exhausted within ten (10) years from: (i) the
acquisition of the first building permit issued; or (ii) in the cases for which no plat is submitted to the
city, whether the property is located inside or outside the corporate boundaries of the city, the
acquisition of the first building permit issued, the acquisition of the first certificate of occupancy is
issued or connection made after the effective date of the adoption of the applicable impact fees,
whichever occurs first, or within such period as may otherwise be designated by contract, such credit
shall lapse.
(4) In no event will the city reimburse the property owner or developer for a credit when no impact
fees for the new development can be collected pursuant to city ordinance or for any amount
exceeding the total impact fees due for the new development for the category of capital improvement,
unless otherwise agreed to by the city.
(c) The available credit associated with new development shall be applied against an impact fee in the
following manner:
(1) For single-family residential lots in a new development consisting only of single-family
residential development, such credit shall be prorated equally among such lots, to be applied at the
time of application of a building permit for each lot, against impact fees to be collected at the time
the building permit is issued.
(2) For all other types of new development, including those involving mixed uses, the credit
applicable to the new development shall be applied to the impact fee due at the time of approval.
(3) At its sole discretion, the city may authorize alternative credit agreements upon written
agreement with the property owner in accordance with the city's administrative guidelines.
(Ordinance 05-07-53, sec. 2, art. 10, adopted 7/5/05; Ordinance 12-03-12, sec. 2, art. 10, adopted 3/6/12)
Sec. 18-404 Establishment of accounts
(a) The city shall establish an account to which interest is allocated for each service area for each type of
capital facility for which an impact fee is imposed. Each impact fee collected within the service area shall be
deposited in such account.
(b) Interest earned on the account into which the impact fees are deposited shall be considered funds of the
account and shall be used only in the same manner as which the underlying funds may be used.
(c) The city shall establish adequate financial and accounting controls to ensure that impact fees disbursed
from the accounts are utilized solely for authorized purposes.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/684
(d) The city shall maintain and keep financial records for impact fees, which shall show the source and
disbursement of all fees collected in or expended within each service area. The records of the account into which
impact fees are deposited shall be open for public inspection and copying during ordinary business hours. The
city may establish a fee for copying services.
(Ordinance 05-07-53, sec. 2, art. 11, adopted 7/5/05; Ordinance 12-03-12, sec. 2, art. 11, adopted 3/6/12)
Sec. 18-405 Use of proceeds of impact fee accounts
(a) The impact fees collected for each service area may be used to finance or to recoup the costs of any capital
improvements or facility expansion identified in the capital improvements plan for the service area, including
but not limited to the construction contract price, surveying and engineering fees, land acquisition costs
(including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorney's fees and expert witness fees). Impact fees may also
be used to pay the principal sum and interest and other finance costs on bonds, notes or other obligations issued
by or on behalf of the city to finance such capital improvements or facility expansion.
(b) Impact fees collected pursuant to this article shall not be used to pay for any of the following expenses:
(1) Construction, acquisition or expansion of public facilities or assets other than capital
improvements or facility expansions identified in the capital improvements plan;
(2) Repair, operation or maintenance of existing or new capital improvements or facility
expansion;
(3) Upgrade, update, expansion or replacement of existing capital improvements to provide better
service to existing development; or
(4) Administrative and operating costs of the city.
(Ordinance 05-07-53, sec. 2, art. 12, adopted 7/5/05; Ordinance 12-03-12, sec. 2, art. 12, adopted 3/6/12)
Sec. 18-406 Refunds
(a) Upon application by an owner of property, any impact fee or portion thereof collected pursuant to city
ordinance shall be refunded as specified in this article if:
(1) [It] has not been expended within the service area within ten (10) years from the date of
payment; or
(2) Existing facilities are available and service is denied; or
(3) The city has, after collecting the impact fee when service was not available, failed to
commence construction within two (2) years or service is not available within a reasonable period
considering the type of improvement or expansion, but in no event later than five (5) years from the
date of payment.
(b) Payment shall be refunded to the record owner of the property for which the impact fee was paid or, if the
impact fee was paid by another governmental entity, to such governmental entity, together with interest
calculated from the date of payment to the date of refund at the statutory rate as set forth in the Texas Finance
Code, section 302.002, or its successor statute. The application for refund pursuant to this article shall be
submitted within sixty (60) days after the expiration of the ten-year period for expenditure of the fee. An impact
fee shall be considered expended on a first-in, first-out basis.
(c) An impact fee collected pursuant to this article shall also be considered expended if the total expenditures
for capital improvements or facility within the service area within ten (10) years following the date of payment
exceed the total fees collected within the service area for such improvements or expansions during such period.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/684
(d) If a refund is due pursuant to subsections (a) and (b), the city shall divide the difference between the
amount of expenditures and the amount of the fees collected by the total number of service units assumed within
the service area for the period to determine the refund due per service unit. The refund to the record owner shall
be calculated by multiplying the refund due per service unit by the number of service units for the development
for which the fee was paid, and interest due shall be calculated upon that amount.
(Ordinance 05-07-53, sec. 2, art. 13, adopted 7/5/05; Ordinance 12-03-12, sec. 2, art. 13, adopted 3/6/12)
Sec. 18-407 Updates to plan and revision of fees
(a) The city shall update its land use assumptions and capital improvements plans at least every five (5) years,
commencing from the date of adoption of such plans, and shall recalculate the impact fees based thereon in
accordance with the procedures set forth in Texas Local Government Code, chapter 395, or in any successor
statute.
(b) The city may review its land use assumptions, impact fees, capital improvements plans and other factors
such as market conditions more frequently than provided in subsection (a) to determine whether the land use
assumptions and capital improvements plan should be updated and the impact fee recalculated accordingly, or
whether any exhibits hereto should be changed.
(c) If, at the time an update is required pursuant to subsection (a), the city council determines that no change
to the land use assumptions, capital improvements plan or impact fee is needed, it may dispense with such
update by following the procedures in Texas Local Government Code, section 395.0575, or its successor statute.
(d) In addition to the reviews required by this article, the city shall also conduct the reviews required by
section 18-399, impact fees adopted, above.
(Ordinance 05-07-53, sec. 2, art. 14, adopted 7/5/05; Ordinance 12-03-12, sec. 2, art. 14, adopted 3/6/12)
Sec. 18-408 Use of other financing mechanisms
(a) The city may finance capital improvements or facility expansion designated in the capital improvements
plan through the issuance of bonds, through the formation of public utility districts or other assessment districts,
or through any other authorized mechanism, in such manner and subject to such limitations as may be provided
by law, in addition to the use of impact fees.
(b) Except as herein otherwise provided, the assessment and collection of an impact fee shall be additional
and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other tax, fee, charge or assessment which is lawfully
imposed on and due against the property.
(Ordinance 05-07-53, sec. 2, art. 15, adopted 7/5/05; Ordinance 12-03-12, sec. 2, art. 15, adopted 3/6/12)
Sec. 18-409 Impact fee as additional and supplemental regulation
Impact fees established by this article are additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other
requirements imposed by the city on the development of land or the issuance of building permits or certificates
of occupancy. Such fee is intended to be consistent with and to further the policies of the city's comprehensive
land use plan, the capital improvements plan, the zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations and other city
policies, ordinances, codes and resolutions by which the city seeks to ensure the provision of adequate public
facilities in conjunction with the development of land. (Ordinance 05-07-53, sec. 2, art. 16, adopted 7/5/05;
Ordinance 12-03-12, sec. 2, art. 16, adopted 3/6/12)
Sec. 18-410 Relief procedures
Any person who has paid an impact fee or an owner of land upon which an impact fee has been paid may
petition the city council to determine whether any duty required by this article has not been performed within the
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/684
time so prescribed. The petition shall be in writing and shall state the nature of the unperformed duty and request
that the duty be performed within sixty (60) days of the request. If the city council determines that the duty is
required pursuant to this article and is late in being performed, it shall cause the duty to commence within sixty
(60) days of the date of the request and to continue until completion. (Ordinance 05-07-53, sec. 2, art. 17,
adopted 7/5/05; Ordinance 12-03-12, sec. 2, art. 17, adopted 3/6/12)
Secs. 18-411–18-420 Reserved
ARTICLE VI. MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS, UNITS AND APARTMENTS; STANDARDS
Sec. 18-421 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city by establishing
minimum standards governing the construction, use, occupancy, management, operation and maintenance of
multi-family dwellings, multi-family dwelling units and apartment houses; by establishing minimum standards
governing utilities, facilities, and other physical components and conditions essential to make multi-family
dwellings, multi-family dwelling units and apartment houses safe, sanitary and fit for human use, occupancy and
habitation; and by fixing penalties for the violation of the provisions of this article. This article is hereby
declared to be remedial and essential to the public interest, safety, health and welfare and it is intended that this
article be liberally construed to effectuate the purposes as stated above. Further, it is declared that this article
shall not be used as an instrument for the harassment of any persons. Finally, it is found and declared that the
fees exacted in this article are necessary to cover the cost of exercising the proper regulation of multi-family
dwellings as set forth in this article. (Ordinance 08-09-86, sec. 2, adopted 9/15/08)
Sec. 18-422 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or requires a
different meaning.
Accessory building. A structure on the same lot as the main building.
Administrator. The department(s) or division(s) of the city designated by the city manager to administer and/or
enforce the provisions of this article and any person or persons designated by such a department or division to
represent the department or division for said purpose.
Apartment. A room or suite of rooms arranged or designed to be used as a residence by a single individual or
group of individuals.
Apartment building. Any structure containing four or more dwelling units.
Apartment house. Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased, let, or hired out to be
occupied as four or more dwelling units or which is occupied as the home or residence of four or more families
living independently from each other and maintaining separate cooking facilities.
Bathroom. An enclosed space containing one or more bathtubs, showers, or both, and which may also include
toilets, lavatories or fixtures serving similar purposes. A kitchen sink shall not be used as a substitute for the
required lavatory.
Bedroom. A room used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes and not as a kitchen, bathroom, living room,
closet, hallway, utility space, entry way, garage, patio or breezeway.
Building code. The official building codes of the city in effect at the time of construction; provided, however,
that all existing structures and equipment and any replacement or new installation must comply with the current
official building codes of the city to the extent required by said code.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/684
Building official. The chief building official or other designated authority charged with the administration and
enforcement of the building codes, and/or the building official's duly authorized representative.
Certificate of occupancy. A certificate issued by the building official authorizing occupancy.
City. The City of Frisco, Texas, and all areas within its corporate limits.
City council. The City Council of the City of Frisco, Texas.
Code official. The official who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this Code, and/or any duly
authorized representative.
Common area. The communal areas of the complex, including hallways, stairways, lobby areas, laundry rooms,
pool facilities, green spaces, recreation rooms and parking lots.
Condominium. A complex of individually owned residential units with undivided co-ownership of common
elements.
Congregate residence. Any building or portion thereof which contains facilities for living, sleeping and
sanitation (and may include facilities for cooking and eating) for occupancy by other than a family, such as a
shelter, a convent, a monastery, a dormitory, a fraternity or sorority house, a jail or a hospital.
Construction codes. The building code, electrical code, energy conservation code, fire code, fuel gas code,
mechanical code, property maintenance code, and plumbing code, collectively.
Dwelling unit. Any room or group of rooms providing complete, independent living facilities for the occupants
thereof and occupied, or which is intended or designed to be occupied, as the home or residence of one
individual, group of individuals, family or household, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping,
eating, cooking and sanitation.
Electrical code. The official electrical code of the city in effect at the time of construction; provided, however,
that all existing structures and equipment and any replacement or new installation must comply with the current
official electrical code of the city to the extent required by said code.
Energy conservation code. The official energy conservation code of the city in effect at the time of construction;
provided, however, that all existing structures and equipment and any replacement or new installation must
comply with the current official energy conservation code of the city to the extent required by said code.
Exterminated and/or extermination. The control and elimination of insects, rodents and vermin by eliminating
their places of harborage and by removing or making inaccessible, materials that may serve as their food and by
poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping or by any other approved means of pest elimination.
Fire chief. The city fire chief and/or his designated representative.
Fire code. The official fire code of the city in effect at the time of construction; provided, however, that all
existing structures and equipment and any replacement or new installation must comply with the current official
fire code of the city to the extent required by said code.
Floor space. The total area of all habitable space.
Fuel gas code. The official fuel gas code of the city in effect at the time of construction; provided, however, that
all existing structures and equipment and any replacement or new installation must comply with the current
official fuel gas code of the city to the extent required by said code.
Garbage. Refuse, animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/684
Graffiti. Words, phrases, designs, symbols, letters or drawings written, painted or scratched on sidewalks, fences,
walls, windows, walls of buildings, trees or other structures or items.
Hot water. Hot water supplied to plumbing fixtures at a temperature of not less than 110 degrees Fahrenheit.
Infestation. The presence within or continuous, to a dwelling unit of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests.
Kitchen. Space used for cooking or preparation of food.
Landlord. The owner or lessor of a multi-family dwelling complex and additionally includes a management
company or managing agent (including an onsite manager) of a multi-family dwelling complex.
Litter. Garbage, refuse and rubbish and all other waste material.
Mechanical code. The official mechanical code of the city in effect at the time of construction; provided,
however, that all existing structures and equipment and any replacement or new installation must comply with
the current official mechanical code of the city to the extent required by said code.
Multi-family dwelling complex. Any building or group of buildings that provides three or more dwelling units
owned by the same person on a single platted lot, or if the land on which the building or buildings is not platted,
then any building or group of buildings that provides three or more dwelling units owned by the same person on
a contiguous tract of land under a common ownership.
(1) The term also includes any accessory structures and facilities incidental to the use thereof,
including but not limited to yards, courts, parking areas, storage buildings, equipment buildings, mail
rooms, laundry facilities, swimming pools, spas, ponds, cabanas, play rooms and play yards,
recreational and picnic facilities, public assembly rooms, garages, carports, fences, walls, and all
other similar building structures and facilities on the premises.
(2) The term shall not include hotels, motels, or congregate residences. The term shall also not
include a premises that is inspected by a state or federal governmental entity for compliance with the
provisions of any state or federal law or regulation regulating the fitness of said premises for human
habitation if at least 50 percent of the dwelling units of the premises are subject to said state or
federal law or regulation. For purposes of this definition, the term “state or federal governmental
entity” shall mean the government of the United States; a department, division, agency or subdivision
of the United States government; the State of Texas; or a political subdivision of the State of Texas.
Also for purposes of this definition, the term “state or federal law or regulation” shall mean a law,
rule, regulation or standard of (a) the government of the United States; (b) a department, division,
agency or subdivision of the United States government; (c) the State of Texas; or (d) a political
subdivision of the State of Texas other than the city.
Multi-family dwelling license. The license issued by the building official pursuant to this article and referred to
as “license” in this article.
Occupancy. The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized or occupied.
Occupant. Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space within a building.
Owner. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or
recorded in the official records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise
having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of such person if ordered to take possession
of real property by a court.
Person. An individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, business trust, estate trust,
partnership or association, two or more persons having a joint or common interest, or any other legal or
commercial entity.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/684
Plumbing. Includes all of the following supplied facilities, equipment, and devices: gas pipes, toilets, lavatories,
sinks, laundry tubs, catch basins, wash basins, bathtubs, shower baths, waste sewer pipes and sewerage system,
septic tanks, drains, vents, traps, and any other fuel-burning or water-using fixtures and appliances, including
private fire hydrants, together with all connections to water, wastewater, sewer, or gas.
Plumbing code. The official plumbing code of the city in effect at the time of construction; provided, however,
that all existing structures and equipment and any replacement or new installation must comply with the current
official plumbing code of the city to the extent required by said code.
Potable water. Water duly approved as satisfactory and safe for drinking by the public works department of the
city.
Premises. A lot, plot or parcel of land, including any structures thereon.
Property manager. A person who has managing control of real property; in a condominium regime, the term
shall include the council of owners, the homeowner association or the entity having control over the common,
co-owned elements.
Refuse. Refers to all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes) including, but not limited
to, garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid market and
industrial wastes.
Regular license fee. The monetary fee a multifamily dwelling complex licensee must pay per dwelling unit per
year.
Resident manager. An onsite manager or agent of a property manager who is the person with whom the tenant
normally deals concerning the rental agreement or apartment building use of the property.
Rubbish. Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper,
wrapping, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar
materials.
Secure. To lock all exterior doors and windows within 24 hours after such units become vacant and exercise
reasonable care to maintain such locks as necessary to deter unauthorized entrance into any unoccupied
dwelling.
Structure. That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially
built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner.
Swimming pool. Any structure, basin, chamber, or tank containing an artificial body of water for swimming,
diving, or physical fitness, or recreational bathing and having a depth of two feet or more at any point. This
phrase does not include lakes or creeks.
Telephone answering service. A service company, mechanical service, or any other service, that establishes
contact with or gives instructions how to establish contact with an appropriate person when an occupant, official,
or emergency response service needs prompt assistance.
Tenant. Any person who occupies a dwelling unit for living or dwelling purposes with the landlord's consent.
Uninhabitable. A condition that exists which could possibly threaten the life, health, safety, or general welfare of
the occupant.
Utility company. The entity providing gas, electric service, water or sanitary sewer to a master metered dwelling.
Washateria. A self-service laundry room accessible to all residents and which contains two or more pairs of
washers and dryers.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/684
(Ordinance 08-09-86, sec. 3, adopted 9/15/08)
Sec. 18-423 Minimum inspection standards
At a minimum, any multi-family dwelling complex inspected under the authority of this article must comply
with the standards set forth in this section in order to pass inspection.
(a) Structural integrity of premises. All structures in a multi-family dwelling complex must be
structurally sound and comply with the applicable construction codes as required by law. All permits
required for any replacements or new installations must be obtained.
(b) Egress required. All dwelling units shall be provided safe and unobstructed means of egress
leading to safe and open space at ground level. All windows must meet the applicable requirements
of the construction codes. When an unsafe condition exists through lack of, or improper location of
exits, the administrator may require the installation of additional exits.
(c) Bedroom window required. Every bedroom in a dwelling unit must have at least one window or
opening facing directly to the outdoors which is capable of being easily opened by any occupant as
far as it was originally designed to open.
(d) Screening required. Every window in any dwelling unit which is used for ventilation purposes
directly to or from outdoor space shall be equipped with an insect-proof screen when central airconditioning
is not provided to said unit.
(e) Painting, waterproofing and repair to prevent deterioration. All exterior surfaces must be
painted, waterproofed, and/or maintained in good repair as necessary in order to prevent deterioration
including but not limited to the following items: loose siding with holes or excessive cracks, rotted
boards which allows air or water to penetrate rooms, loose roof covering, holes or leaks in roof,
rotting, sagging, or deteriorating supports for steps, stairs, and porches, balconies, or other similar
structures.
(f) Railings, stairs, steps, balconies, porches. All railings, stairs, steps, balconies, porches, or
landings must be designed and maintained as specified in the applicable construction codes. Any
holes, cracks and other defects in stairs, porches, steps and balconies must be repaired.
(g) Floors, walls, ceiling and all supporting structural members. All floors, walls, ceilings, and
supporting structural members must be maintained in a sound condition, free of holes, breaks, or
loose surface materials, and capable of bearing imposed loads safely.
(h) Plumbing, electrical, heating, and air conditioning systems. All installed systems in each
dwelling unit in the multi-family dwelling complex must maintain all plumbing, electrical, heating,
and air conditioning systems in compliance with the applicable construction codes and all necessary
permits obtained. All such systems must meet the following requirements:
(1) Sink, lavatory required. All kitchen sinks and lavatory basins must be connected to the
municipal water supply and approved sanitary sewer systems. Such sink and lavatory basin
shall be installed so as not to be a health or sanitation hazard.
(2) Bathroom fixtures. All units must be provided with a flush water toilet and a bathtub or
shower connected to the municipal water supply and approved sanitary sewer systems. Such
flush water toilet and bathtub or shower shall be installed so as not to be a health and sanitation
hazard.
(3) Fixtures connected to hot, cold water. Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin and bathtub or
shower required by the provisions of this article shall be connected with both hot and cold water
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/684
lines.
(4) Water-heating equipment. Water-heating equipment shall be provided and maintained in
operating condition and capable of providing an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every
required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility at a temperature of not less than
110 degrees Fahrenheit.
(5) Boilers. All boilers must meet all state law requirements and have the inspection
certification posted in accordance with the state department of licensing and regulation boiler
division laws and regulations.
(6) Ventilation, flues and vent attachments. All ventilation, flues and vent attachments must
function properly.
(7) Connections. All connections of plumbing fixtures and heating equipment must be in
accordance with the applicable construction codes as required by law.
(8) Sewage and wastewater disposal. Wastewater disposal systems must be properly installed
and maintained. Sewage must not be allowed to back up into the building or accumulate on the
property. All sewage pipes and connections must be free of leaks. All wastewater lines must be
properly capped.
(9) Electrical service supply lines. Each dwelling unit must be connected to supply lines for
electrical service and said lines must be maintained in operating condition. Each electrical
meter must be permanently marked to designate the unit and/or building it is servicing.
Markings must be durable, easily readable, in contrasting colors, and remain visible at all times.
(10) Heating and cooking equipment. All heating and cooking equipment must be maintained
in safe operating condition.
(11) Electrical circuits and outlets. All electrical circuits and outlets must be maintained in
compliance with the applicable construction codes as required by law. Ground fault interrupters
must be properly installed where required.
(12) Natural gas service liners. All natural gas service lines to each dwelling unit must be
maintained in compliance with the applicable construction codes.
(13) Security devices. Security devices must be installed and maintained in accordance with
V.T.C.A., Property Code Ch. 92 subch. D, including keyless deadbolt locks, door viewers,
window and door locks, and sliding glass door security.
(14) Lighting. Exterior illumination shall be provided at appropriate points adjacent to all
building entrances, including individual dwelling units, stairwells, and hallways. Lighting shall
be sufficient to illuminate area where hazards may reasonably exist, and shall be operable
between a half-hour after sunset and a half hour before sunrise. If control mechanisms for such
lighting are not accessible by each tenant, such illumination shall be activated and deactivated
by a photo cell or seasonally-adjusted timer switch, not operable by individual tenants of the
multi-family dwelling complex. A landlord shall repair all inoperable exterior lighting fixtures
within a reasonable period of time after being notified that the fixture is not working, in no
instance shall a reasonable period of time be deemed to mean more than seven days.
(i) General maintenance; grounds and premises. The exterior and grounds of any multi-family
dwelling complex must be maintained in compliance with all applicable provisions of this Code. In
addition to any requirements of said code, the exterior and grounds of any multi-family dwelling
complex must comply with the following minimum requirements:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/684
(1) Graffiti. All buildings, structures, and grounds must be maintained free of graffiti.
(2) Extermination of insects, rodents or other pests. Every multi-family dwelling complex
must be properly inspected and exterminated for any observed pests a minimum of twice a year
or more frequently as needed to maintain the premises free from rodents, insects, and vermin.
All pest control must be performed by a properly licensed pest control operator in accordance
with applicable state laws and regulations.
(3) Garbage and refuse collection. Except when placed curbside for collection in accordance
with all applicable requirements of the city, any outside storage of garbage must be in a
container that is constructed of durable, rodent-proof material and that has an intact lid. When
placed outside for the purposes of curbside collection, all garbage and refuse must meet all
applicable requirements of the city. Any commercial container must meet all applicable city
requirements regarding enclosure and/or screening of the container.
(4) Elimination of hazards. There must not be any hole, excavation, sharp protrusion, or other
object or condition that exists on the land and is a health or safety hazard.
(5) Stagnant water. Each multi-family dwelling complex must provide drainage on the
premises sufficient to prevent standing water on the premises.
(6) Dead trees and tree limbs. All dead trees and tree limbs that pose a health or safety hazard
must be removed from the premises.
(7) Vacant interior structures. The interior of a vacant structure or vacant portion of a
structure must be maintained free from rubbish and garbage. All vacant or unoccupied dwelling
units must be secured from unauthorized entry by the installation and maintenance of
appropriate locking devices and intact doors and windows which are proportioned to securely
and completely fit the openings.
(8) Overgrown vegetation; junk and litter; junk vehicles. Grounds must be maintained free of
overgrown vegetation; junk and litter; and junk vehicles in accordance with the current nuisance
ordinance, as it currently exists or may be amended, of the city.
(9) Fences and retaining walls. All fences, gates and retaining walls must be maintained in
good repair.
(j) Fire safety. All multi-family dwelling complexes shall meet the following minimum
requirements with regard to fire safety:
(1) Parking lot and fire lane markings. Parking lots, fire lanes and required paved areas must
have legible parking stripes and must be maintained in accordance with the fire code.
(2) Posting of addresses. Approved numbers and/or addresses shall be provided for all new
and existing buildings so that the number and/or address is legible, in contrasting colors, and
clearly visible from the public roadway. Such numbers and/or addresses must comply with the
fire code.
(3) Smoke and fire detection systems; alarm systems. All fire and smoke detection systems
and fire alarm systems required by the fire code must be installed in accordance with the fire
code. At a minimum, such systems must be maintained in operating condition and in
accordance with any applicable fire code requirements. Battery powered smoke detectors must
be maintained in operating condition with adequately charged batteries properly installed.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/684
(4) Extinguishers. All fire extinguishing appliances, fire hydrants, and portable fire
extinguishers must be installed and maintained in compliance with the fire code. Automatic fire
suppression systems shall be inspected annually. Backflow prevention devices shall be tested by
a certified backflow prevention tester.
(5) Storage of combustible, flammable materials. Combustible and flammable materials and
all equipment or appliances containing flammable material must be properly stored in
accordance with the fire code.
(k) Swimming pools. All swimming pools must be maintained in compliance with all applicable
city ordinances.
(Ordinance 08-09-86, sec. 4, adopted 9/15/08)
Sec. 18-424 License required
No person shall own, operate, manage, or maintain a multi-family dwelling complex without a valid multifamily
dwelling license from the city, issued by the administrator. A license that has been revoked, that has
expired, or that has lapsed for any reason is not valid. A suspended license is not valid during the period of
suspension.
(a) Issuance of license. The administrator shall issue a multi-family dwelling license within ten
business days of receiving a complete application; provided that the information provided on the
application indicates that the multifamily dwelling complex complies with all of the requirements of
this article and all fees required by this article are paid.
(b) Licenses not transferable. A multi-family dwelling license is not transferable from one person
to another or from one location to another location, except as otherwise authorized by this article. A
multi-family dwelling license shall authorize the operation of the multi-family dwelling complex
only at the location and for the owner to which it is granted.
(c) Application for a multi-family dwelling license shall be made in writing on the form provided
by the administrator. A separate application is required for each multi-family dwelling complex for
which a license is sought. An application shall be made for a license for each multi-family dwelling
complex that is constructed and for each time there is a change in ownership of a multi-family
dwelling complex.
(d) A multi-family dwelling unit application fee is due with each application for a multi-family
dwelling license.
(e) For purposes of this section, a “change in ownership of a multi-family dwelling complex”
occurs when more than fifty percent of the equity interest of a multi-family dwelling complex is
owned by a person or persons other than the person or persons listed on the last multi-family
dwelling license application on file for that multi-family dwelling complex.
(f) Posting of licenses. A valid multi-family dwelling license shall at all times be available on the
premises for inspection and shall at all times be displayed in public view in the business office.
(g) Licenses–Duration.
(1) Each license, including without limitation any renewal of a license, issued under this
article shall expire one year following the effective date of the license. Each license shall
specify on its face the effective date of the license and the date of expiration.
(2) Any multi-family dwelling license that is not renewed before its expiration date may be
renewed only upon payment of both the annual license fee and the required late fee.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/684
(Ordinance 08-09-86, sec. 5, adopted 9/15/08)
Sec. 18-425 Fees
(a) Submission of payment. The requirements for licenses and administrative fees of this article shall require
the payment to be submitted to the administrator.
(b) Types of fees imposed. There is an annual license fee of five dollars per unit to be charged for the initial
issuance of a multi-family dwelling license and for each annual renewal of a multi-family dwelling license.
There is hereby imposed a late fee of $100.00 to be charged when the annual license fee is not paid before the
expiration of the existing multi-family dwelling license. The annual license fee associated with the initial
issuance of a multi-family dwelling license may be prorated. In the event any of the inspections authorized in
this article requires a reinspection due to noted violations, then, after the first inspection, there shall be a
reinspection fee of $150.00 for each additional reinspection required to ensure the correction of said violations.
(c) Nonrefundable. Any and all fees imposed in conjunction with this article are not refundable.
(Ordinance 08-09-86, sec. 6, adopted 9/15/08)
Sec. 18-426 Inspections
Necessary to determine compliance with minimum building and property maintenance standards in accordance
with the International Property Maintenance Code and other applicable city codes.
(a) Inspection authority. The administrator is authorized to conduct such inspections as the
administrator deems necessary to ensure compliance with all provisions of this article. The
administrator shall have the right of entry at any reasonable hour upon the premises. The
administrator shall have the authority to inspect all unoccupied dwelling units upon giving reasonable
notice to the owner, landlord, resident or property manager. The administrator shall have the
authority to inspect any occupied dwelling unit when, upon reliable information, the administrator
has reason to believe that violations of this article or of state law exist that involve serious threats to
life, safety, health or property.
(b) Inspection frequency. Inspections shall be performed annually for the enforcement of this
article. The administrator shall provide 30-day notice prior to the inspection date. Notice shall
include an inspection checklist.
(c) Inspection based on complaint. In addition to any other authority granted by this article, the
administrator shall have the authority to inspect based on complaints or other credible information
indicating the possibility of a violation of this article.
(d) Inspection areas. Inspections shall be performed in areas such as; all building exteriors, all
exterior and interior common areas, vacant dwelling units and comparative samples of occupied
dwelling units upon receipt of consent by the unit's tenant or other recourse as provided by law.
(Ordinance 08-09-86, sec. 7, adopted 9/15/08)
Sec. 18-427 Minimum responsibilities of occupant
At a minimum, an occupant shall:
(a) Maintain those portions of the interior of a dwelling unit under the occupant's control free from
rubbish, garbage, conditions that would encourage infestation of insects, rodents or vermin and other
unsanitary conditions;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/684
(b) Maintain the dwelling unit and all plumbing equipment and facilities provided in a clean,
sanitary condition at all times;
(c) Not alter a dwelling unit or its facilities so as to create a nonconformity with this article.
(Ordinance 08-09-86, sec. 8, adopted 9/15/08)
Sec. 18-428 Landlord/tenant inspections
(a) The landlord or their designee of a multi-family dwelling complex shall inspect each dwelling unit within
the multi-family dwelling complex.
(1) The inspection of a dwelling unit shall be conducted with the unit's tenant when the occupancy
of the unit changes.
(2) The landlord shall sign each inspection report, and shall require a tenant to sign the report for
the tenant's dwelling unit. If the tenant disagrees with any notation made by the landlord on the
report, the landlord shall permit the tenant to make written comments on the report prior to signing it.
The landlord shall provide the tenant with a copy of the report after it is signed by the tenant and the
landlord.
(3) The minimum building and property maintenance standards established by the International
Property Maintenance Code and other applicable city codes shall be covered by the inspection,
including but not limited to the following items:
a. Electrical facilities.
b. Plumbing facilities.
c. Heating facilities.
d. Ventilation.
e. Smoke detectors.
f. Occupancy limitations.
g. Means of egress.
h. Handrails and guardrails.
i. Exterior property areas.
j. Rubbish and garbage.
(4) The failure of a landlord to make inspections as required by this section, to maintain records of
the inspections, and to permit inspection of those records pursuant to subsection (b) of this section is
a violation of this article.
(b) A landlord shall maintain reports of the inspections conducted pursuant to subsection (a) of this section for
all dwelling units within the multi-family dwelling complex.
(1) The reports shall be in a form acceptable to the administrator.
(2) The report shall include places for marking whether the dwelling unit complies with the
inspection standards set by this section and shall include the names of all persons occupying the
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/684
dwelling unit other than overnight guests.
(c) The report shall also include:
(1) The names of designated employees or other authorized persons who shall be assigned to
respond to emergency conditions;
(2) The telephone number where said employees can be contacted during any 24-hour period.
Emergency conditions shall include fire, natural disaster, flood, collapse hazard, burst pipes or violent
crime; and
(3) A notice for reporting code violations to the city as follows:
“TO REPORT UNRESOLVED VIOLATIONS OF THE CITY'S MULTI-FAMILY
HOUSING CODE FOR THESE PREMISES, CONTACT THE CITY OF FRISCO BUILDING
INSPECTIONS DIVISION”.
(d) The landlord shall maintain the inspection reports required by this section on the premises of the multifamily
dwelling complex and shall make them available to the administrator for inspection at all reasonable
times. If there is no business office on the premises of the multi-family dwelling complex, the landlord shall
maintain reports at the landlord's central business office, and shall make them available to the administrator for
inspection at the multi-family dwelling complex at all reasonable times.
(Ordinance 08-09-86, sec. 9, adopted 9/15/08)
Sec. 18-429 Compliance with applicable codes
(a) Multi-family dwelling complexes must comply with all applicable construction codes.
(b) Each multi-family dwelling complex must comply with all applicable current health, fire and safety
ordinances of the city at all times.
(Ordinance 08-09-86, sec. 10, adopted 9/15/08)
Sec. 18-430 Failure to comply
(a) Failure to comply with any provision of this article may result in the probation, denial, suspension, or
revocation of a multi-family dwelling license.
(b) Probationary status. Multi-family dwelling complexes that either (i) fail to pass both an inspection and the
associated reinspection or (ii) fail to continually maintain compliance with the provisions of this article will be
placed on a probationary status until such time as it is determined that the multi-family dwelling complex passes
inspection and remains in compliance.
(1) While a multi-family dwelling complex is in probationary status, no dwelling unit of said
multi-family dwelling complex may be occupied by different occupants or newly occupied until the
dwelling unit has passed an inspection by the administrator.
(2) Probationary status may be removed after the multi-family dwelling complex successfully
passes two routine inspections and demonstrates continual compliance with the provisions of this
article.
(c) Denial of license. Upon determination that a multi-family dwelling complex does not comply with the
provisions of this article, the administrator shall notify the owner or landlord of the multi-family dwelling
complex of existing violations. If the multi-family dwelling complex does not have a license or is applying for
the renewal of an existing license, the administrator may deny the issuance of the requested license until the
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/684
violations are corrected. Whenever a license is denied, the applicant shall be offered an opportunity for a hearing
with the administrator within 20 days of receipt of a request for a hearing. The request for a hearing, however,
must be made in writing within ten days of receiving notice that the license was denied.
(d) Failure to pay fees. The administrator may suspend or deny a license for the failure to pay any fee required
by the provisions of this article until such time as the appropriate fee is paid.
(e) Suspension of license. The administrator may, without warning, advance notice or hearing, suspend any
license to operate a multi-family dwelling complex if the operation of the multi-family dwelling complex
constitutes an imminent hazard to public health or safety. Upon suspension of a license, the owner may not
continue to allow new tenants to occupy any unit until the license is reinstated. Whenever a license is suspended,
the holder of the license shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing with the administrator within twenty days
of receipt of a request for a hearing.
(1) Notice of suspension. Whenever a license is suspended, the holder of the license, or the
responsible person shall be notified in writing that the license is, upon service of the notice,
immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for
a hearing is filed with the administrator by the holder of the license within ten days after the service
of the notice in accordance with the provisions of this article. If no written request for hearing is filed
within said ten-day period, the suspension is sustained.
(2) Duration. Suspension of a multi-family dwelling license shall continue until the administrator
determines, after an inspection, that the reasons for suspension no longer exist, and until all
applicable fees required by this article have been paid, as applicable.
(3) Other remedies reserved. Suspension of a multi-family dwelling license shall not preclude the
administrator from taking any other enforcement action authorized by law.
(f) Public utility services. When it is determined by the administrator that an imminent threat to health or
safety exists, the administrator may notify all public utility companies serving the multi-family dwelling
complex of the health or safety hazard and request that all public utility services affected by the hazard be
discontinued for some or all of those dwelling units at peril.
(g) Revocation of license. The administrator, after providing opportunity for a hearing, may revoke a license
for repeated or serious violations of any of the requirements of this article or for interference with the
administrator in the performance of the administrator's duties.
(Ordinance 08-09-86, sec. 11, adopted 9/15/08)
Secs. 18-431–18-444 Reserved
ARTICLE VII. VACANT AND SUBSTANDARD STRUCTURES
Sec. 18-445 Purpose
This article is adopted so that the city council may promote the public health, safety, and general welfare within
the city through the proper securing of vacant structures and the regulation of substandard buildings. By
requiring the securing of vacant structures and the repair, removal, and/or demolition of substandard buildings,
the city council seeks to protect property values and prevent bodily injury, death, and property damage within
the city limits. (Ordinance 09-10-59, sec. 2, adopted 10/6/09)
Sec. 18-446 Definitions
As used in this article, the following terms shall be defined as follows:
Appraised value means the value given the structure by the applicable county's tax assessor's office.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/684
Artistic boarding means painting material used to secure door, window, or other openings to resemble the
opening which they are covering. Refer to standards for securing and artistic board-up.
Building means any structure of any kind or any part thereof, including a wall, slab, porch, foundation, the
collapsed remains of a structure, or any other portion of a building, wall, or fence that was erected for the
support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattel or property of any kind.
City means the City of Frisco, Texas.
City council means the City Council of the City of Frisco.
Demolish means to tear down, destroy, dismantle, or otherwise abolish the existence of a building or structure in
a lawful manner and to remove all remaining pieces, parts, rubbish, and traces of the building or structure.
Diligent effort means best or reasonable effort to determine the identity and address of an owner, a lien holder, or
a mortgagee including a search of the following records:
(1) County real property records of the county in which the building is located;
(2) Appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the building is located;
(3) Records of the secretary of state;
(4) Assumed name records of the county in which the building is located; and
(5) City utility records.
Minimum housing standards means those standards found in the city's adopted standard building, electrical,
plumbing, gas, mechanical, and fire prevention codes.
Owner means any person, agent, firm or corporation, named in the real property records of the county where the
building is located as owning or having a financial interest in the property.
Securing means measures that assist in making the property inaccessible to unauthorized persons, including but
not limited to the repairing of fences and walls, erecting fences or walls, chaining/pad locking of gates, the repair
or artistic boarding of door, window or other openings. Refer to standards for securing and artistic board-up.
Structure means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work
artificially built or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, or any part thereof, including a
wall, slab, portion, foundation, or the collapsed remains of a structure.
Vacant means a property which is lacking habitual presence of human beings who have a legal right to be on the
property, or at which substantially all lawful business operations or residential occupancy has ceased. In
determining whether a property is vacant, it is relevant to consider, among other factors, the percentage of
overall square footage of any building on the property or floor to the occupied space, the condition and value of
any items in the property and the presence of rental or for sale signs on the property; provided that multi-family
residential property containing three or more dwelling units shall be considered vacant when the majority of all
of the dwelling units become unoccupied and a majority remain unoccupied. A property shall not be considered
vacant which is being currently marketed by a licensed real estate professional hired by the former or current
occupant of the property (currently marketed shall mean that the structure is listed on the multiple listing service,
the structure is available to prospective buyers for viewing, and a reasonable asking price has been disclosed.
The building official may use the assessed market value of the property as last determined by the tax assessor to
determine if the asking price disclosed by the owner is reasonable), and to which the water service has not been
shut-off.
(Ordinance 09-10-59, sec. 2, adopted 10/6/09)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/684
Sec. 18-447 Securing vacant structures
(a) Owners shall have the responsibility for maintaining all vacant structures, including dwellings units,
dwellings, principal buildings, pools or spas, and accessory buildings in a locked or closed condition so that they
cannot be entered without an unlawful break-in. If a structure is vacant, the building official may, to assure
compliance with this section, order an owner to board additional areas of the structure.
(1) Owners shall obtain a permit prior to boarding.
(2) If a structure is vacant, boarding of a structure shall be required for all doors and windows on
ground level and those doors and windows accessible to grade by stairs or permanently fixed ladders
or within ten feet of grade.
(3) Boards shall be cut and attached in accordance with standards for securing and artistic boardup.
(4) At least one door boarded at the grade level shall be maintained with locks or hinges to permit
entry for inspection purposes.
(5) Boards shall be painted in accordance with standards for securing and artistic board-up.
(6) Screening or alternate methods of boarding may be permitted when approved by the building
official.
(7) The owner of a structure boarded under this section shall be required, upon notification, to
provide entry to the structure to the building official at least once every 12 months, for inspection
purposes, or at any time when the structure has been unlawfully entered.
(8) The owner of a structure boarded under this section shall notify the building official in writing
no later than ten days after the sale of the structure or the unboarding of the property.
(9) The owner shall also properly post a no-trespass sign on the property where the vacant structure
is located as required by the police department.
(b) In all cases where a building or structure constitutes a nuisance to the general public because it is vacant
and open to unauthorized entry, the building official may notify the owner to secure the building or structure
within 24 hours. In the event the owner fails to secure the building or structure in that time, the building official
may take whatever measures are necessary to secure the building. The cost of such measures shall be recovered
in the same manner as described in section 18-456 of this article.
(c) Alternatives to boarding. The building official may determine if a method such as fencing is better suited
to properly secure the structure.
(Ordinance 09-10-59, sec. 2, adopted 10/6/09)
Sec. 18-448 Emergencies
(a) Emergency defined. For the purpose of this article, an emergency is hereby defined as any case where it
reasonably appears there is immediate danger to the health, life, safety or welfare of any person because of a
dangerous condition which exists in violation of this article.
(b) Authority. In any emergency case, the building official shall have the power to take emergency measures
to abate or to correct such dangerous condition. The emergency power herein granted shall include power to
cause the immediate vacation of any building and the summary correction of any emergency condition which
exists in violation of this article, including but not limited to demolition of dangerous buildings.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/684
(c) Emergency order not appealable. No appeal to the construction board of appeals shall lie from an
emergency order, and such order shall not be reviewed or stayed other than by the district court of the county in
which the premises or structure is located on which the emergency condition exists.
(d) Costs of abatement. The costs of emergency abatement shall be recovered as provided in section 18-456 of
this article for the recovery of costs.
(Ordinance 09-10-59, sec. 2, adopted 10/6/09)
Sec. 18-449 Substandard declaration
If the construction board of appeals finds that a structure qualifies as a substandard structure, as defined and
described herein, such structure shall automatically be deemed to be a danger to the public health and welfare, a
public nuisance, and in violation of this article. Compliance is required with any orders issued by the
construction board of appeals relating to the repair, removal, or demolition of the substandard structure.
(Ordinance 09-10-59, sec. 2, adopted 10/6/09)
Sec. 18-450 Inspections
An inspection shall be made of any building located within the city which is suspected of being in violation of
this article. The city's building official or fire marshal is hereby authorized to conduct inspections of buildings
suspected of being in violation of this article and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions
of this article. If the city's building official, or fire marshal believe that a structure is substandard, as described
and defined herein below, they shall provide the notice and schedule a hearing before the construction board of
appeals, as described herein. (Ordinance 09-10-59, sec. 2, adopted 10/6/09)
Sec. 18-451 Notice of violation
(a) Whenever the chief building official believes that a structure violates this article, a public hearing by the
construction board of appeals shall be provided to determine whether the building should be declared a
substandard structure.
(b) A notice of the violation shall be sent to the occupant, if any, and record owner/s, lien holder/s or
mortgagee/s. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be served by personal delivery or by certified mail, return
receipt requested. Notice to the occupant of the property does not require the occupant's name.
(c) The city shall make a diligent effort to discover each mortgagee and lien holder before issuing notice of
the hearing.
(d) Notice shall be served to all unknown owners, lien holders, or mortgagees, by posting a copy of the notice
on the front door of each affected structural improvement situated on the property and as close to the front door
as practicable.
(e) If the owner's address is different than the address shown for the property involved, notice shall be served
to the other address of the owner. Service of this notice may be accomplished by the first class U.S. mail or by
personal delivery to any occupant of the property who is above the age of 18 years.
(f) The notice of violation shall be filed in the official public records of real property in the county in which
the property is located.
(g) The notice shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the owner of the property;
(2) The names of all persons to whom notice is being served;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/684
(3) The street address and legal description of the premises;
(4) The date of inspection;
(5) The nature of the violation;
(6) The date, time and location of the hearing; and
(7) A statement that the owner, lien holder, or mortgagee will be required to submit at the public
hearing proof of the scope of any work that may be required to comply with the city's building
ordinances and fire code and the time it will take to reasonably perform the work.
(h) After all attempts to notify owners, lien holders and mortgagees under this article have been made and
documented, any refusal to accept or claim hand-delivered, mailed or posted notice will not affect the validity of
the notice.
(Ordinance 09-10-59, sec. 2, adopted 10/6/09)
Sec. 18-452 Application of standards
The construction board of appeals is authorized to find that a structure is a substandard structure if:
(1) The building or structure has been damaged by fire, earthquake, tornado, wind, flood, vandals
or any other cause, to such an extent that the structural strength or stability thereof is subject to
partially or fully collapsing.
(2) The building or structure was constructed or maintained in violation of any provision of the
city's building codes, fire code or any other applicable ordinance or law of the city, county, state, or
federal government.
(3) Any wall or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb
line passing through the center of gravity falls outside of the middle one-third of its base.
(4) The foundation or the vertical or horizontal supporting members are 25 percent or more
damaged or deteriorated.
(5) The nonsupporting coverings of walls, ceilings, roofs, or floors are 50 percent or more
damaged or deteriorated.
(6) The structure has improperly distributed loads upon the structural members, or they have
insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
(7) The structure or any part thereof has been damaged by fire, water, earthquake, wind, tornado,
vandalism, or other cause to such an extent that it has become dangerous to the public health, safety
and welfare.
(8) A portion of a building or structure remains on a site when construction or demolition work is
abandoned.
(9) A door, aisle, passageway, stairway, fire escape or other means of egress is not of sufficient
width or size, or is damaged, dilapidated, obstructed or otherwise unusable, or so arranged so as not
to provide safe and adequate means of egress in case of fire or panic.
(10) The structure, because of its condition, is unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous to the health, safety
or general welfare of the city's citizens including all conditions conducive to the harboring of rats or
mice or other disease carrying animals or insects reasonably calculated to spread disease.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/684
(11) The structure has been found to contain molds which are known to be harmful to humans, and
that remediation of such mold contamination would exceed 50 percent of the value of the structure.
(12) Whenever the building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, tornado, earthquake or
flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become:
a. An attractive nuisance to children;
b. A harbor for vagrants, criminals or trespassers; or as to
c. Enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful acts.
(13) A portion of the building or member or appurtenance thereof (e.g. porch, chimney, signs) is
likely to fall, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or
damage property.
(14) The building or structure has any portion, member or appurtenance, ornamentation on the
exterior thereof which is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or
fastened in place so as to be capable of safely resisting wind pressure, snow, ice, or other loads.
(15) The electrical system is totally or partially damaged, destroyed, removed or otherwise made
inoperable, unsafe or hazardous.
(16) The plumbing system is totally or partially damaged, destroyed, removed or otherwise made
inoperable or unsanitary.
(17) The mechanical system or any portion of the mechanical system is totally or partially
damaged, destroyed, removed or otherwise made inoperable or unsafe.
(18) The building or structure, because of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration or
damage, is detrimental to the sale, loan or taxable values of surrounding properties or which renders
such surrounding properties uninsurable or which constitutes a blighting influence upon the
neighborhood or which constitutes an eyesore so as to deprive owners or occupants of neighboring
property of the beneficial use and enjoyment of their premises or which presents an appearance
which is offensive to persons of ordinary sensibilities.
(Ordinance 09-10-59, sec. 2, adopted 10/6/09)
Sec. 18-453 Hearing
(a) To determine if a structure is substandard, there shall be a public hearing scheduled with the construction
board of appeals. The date of the hearing shall not be less than ten days after notice is made, as described in
section 18-451.
(b) If at the public hearing evidence is provided that a substandard structure exists, the city shall require the
owner, lien holder, or mortgagee of the building to repair, remove, or demolish the building within 30 days,
unless it is proven at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be done in 30 days.
(c) If the construction board of appeals allows more than 30 days for the building to be repaired, removed, or
demolished, the construction board of appeals shall establish specific time schedules for the work to be
commenced and finished and shall require the owner, lien holder, or mortgagee to secure the property in a
reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed, as determined by the building
official.
(d) The construction board of appeals shall not allow the owner, lien holder or mortgagee more than 90 days
to repair, remove, or demolish the building unless a detailed plan and time scheduled for the work are submitted
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/684
at the hearing and it is proven at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be completed within 90 days.
Additionally, the owner, lien holder, or mortgagee must submit work progress reports to demonstrate compliance
with the time schedule established.
(e) In any case where the construction board of appeals finds that 50 percent or more of the value of the
structure is damaged or deteriorated, a building shall be demolished or removed, and in all cases where a
structure cannot be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the provisions of this article, it shall be
demolished or removed.
(Ordinance 09-10-59, sec. 2, adopted 10/6/09)
Sec. 18-454 Appeal
In accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code sec. 214.0012, the owner, lien holder, or mortgagee shall
have the right to appeal the decision made at the hearing to a district court. A notice of appeal must be filed with
the district court within 30 calendar days from the date the order is mailed to the owner, lien holder or
mortgagee, as provided herein. The petitioner shall provide the city with evidence that an appeal has been made
to district court within 30 days. (Ordinance 09-10-59, sec. 2, adopted 10/6/09)
Sec. 18-455 Notice of repair, removal, or demolition
(a) If the building is ordered to be repaired, removed, or demolished, the city shall promptly mail a copy of the
order by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of the building and to any lien holder or mortgagee
of the building.
(b) Within ten days after the date that the order is issued, the city shall:
(1) File a copy of the order in the office of the city secretary; and
(2) Publish a notice in a newspaper where the building is located stating:
a. The street address or legal description of the property;
b. The date of the hearing;
c. A brief statement indicating the results of the order; and
d. Instructions as to where a complete copy of the order may be obtained.
(c) If demolition or removal of the building or structure is ordered, demolition or removal shall not occur until
the municipal court judge has issued a seizure and demolition warrant supported by a probable cause affidavit
stating that:
(1) The city has complied with the procedures set forth in this article;
(2) Demolition has been ordered by the city; and
(3) The time for appeal of the order to district court has expired and no appeal has been taken or, in
the alternative, the order was appealed to district court but the appeal has been finally resolved in a
manner that does not prevent the city from proceeding with removal or demolition.
(Ordinance 09-10-59, sec. 2, adopted 10/6/09)
Sec. 18-456 Demolition, removal, and repair expenses
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/684
(a) Whenever it is discovered upon reinspection that the owner, mortgagee or lien holder has failed to either
repair, remove, or demolish the building within the allotted time, the city, or its authorized agent, may repair,
remove, or demolish said building or cause the same to be done and charge the expenses incurred in doing such
work or having the same done to the owner of said land.
(b) If the owner fails or refuses to comply with the demand for compliance in the notification within the
requirements of such notification. The city may do work or make improvements required to abate violation, pay
for the work done or improvements made, and charge the expenses to the owner of the property as provided
herein. The property owner will have 20 days to reimburse the city from the completion date of such work to
abate the violation(s) at the property.
(c) In the event the owner fails or refuses to pay such expenses charged to the owner, within 20 days after the
abatement work is completed, a lien may be obtained. The lien and other expenses incurred to the City of Frisco
may be filed against the property. Expenses will include, but not be limited to, an administrative fee of $150.00,
fees to file lien, fees to release lien, postage fees, courier fees, legal fees, and any other fees charged to the City
of Frisco.
(d) If such work is done at the expense of the city, then said expense shall be assessed against any salvage
resulting from the demolition of the building and against the lot, tract, or parcel of land, or the premises upon
which such expense was incurred, and shall be considered a lien against the property as described in section 18-
457.
(e) For the purposes of this section, any repair, alteration or improvement made to a building by the city will
only be to the extent necessary to bring the building into compliance with the city's minimum building and fire
code standards and only if the building is a residential building with ten or fewer dwelling units; provided
however, the city may elect to obtain a judicial determination by a decree of a court of competent jurisdiction of
the existence, in fact, of a public nuisance in cases contemplated by this article. Such judicial determination may
include any available remedy for the abatement of such a nuisance.
(Ordinance 09-10-59, sec. 2, adopted 10/6/09)
Sec. 18-457 Assessment of lien
(a) When the city incurs expenses to repair, remove, or demolish a building under this article, the city places a
lien against the property on which the building is located, unless it is a homestead as protected by the Texas
Constitution. The lien arises and attaches to the property when the notice of the lien is recorded and indexed
with the county clerk of Collin or Denton County, Texas. The notice shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the owner, if that information can be determined with a reasonable
effort;
(2) A legal description of the property on which the building was located;
(3) The amount of expense incurred by the city;
(4) The balance due; and
(5) The date on which said work was done or improvements made.
(b) The city shall have a privileged lien on such lot, lots, or other premises or real estate upon which said
building was located, to secure the expenditure so made, which said liens shall be second only to tax liens and
liens for street improvements; and said amount shall bear ten percent interest from the date such statement was
filed. It is further provided that for any such expenditure and interest, as aforesaid, suit may be instituted and
recovered, and foreclosure of said lien may be made in the name of the city; and the statement of expenses so
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/684
made, as aforesaid, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for such work
or expense.
(c) The lien is extinguished if the property owner or another person having an interest in the legal title to the
property reimburses the city for the expenses.
(Ordinance 09-10-59, sec. 2, adopted 10/6/09)
Secs. 18-458–18-459 Reserved
ARTICLE VIII. RESERVED*
Secs. 18-460–18-471 Reserved
ARTICLE IX. FENCES
Sec. 18-472 Purpose
This article provides uniform standards for the erection and maintenance of fences. All fences in this article shall
be erected and maintained in accordance with these standards. The general objectives of these standards are to
promote health, safety, welfare, convenience and enjoyment of the public, and in part to achieve the following:
(1) Safety. To promote the safety of persons and property by providing that fences do not:
a. Create a hazard due to collapse, fire, decay or abandonment;
b. Obstruct firefighting or police observation ability;
c. Create traffic hazards by confusing or distracting pedestrians or motorists; or
d. Become obstacles that hinder the ability of pedestrians, bicyclists or motorists to read
traffic signs.
e. Improve the long-term sustainability of residential structures.
(Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-473 Jurisdiction
This article shall apply in all zoning districts within the city. (Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-474 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases will have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them by this section:
Approved fence materials. Materials normally manufactured for, used as, and recognized as, fencing materials
such as: wrought iron or other decorative metals suitable for the construction of fences, fired masonry, concrete,
stone, metal tubing, wood planks, chainlink and vinyl composite manufactured specifically as fencing materials.
Fence materials must also be materials approved for exterior use that are weather- and decay-resistant. The
provisions of this article are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to prohibit any design or
method of construction not specifically prescribed by this code, provided that any such alternative has been
approved by the chief building official, or his designee. An alternative material, design or method of
construction shall be approved where the chief building official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and
complies with the intent of the provisions of this code, and that the material, method or work offered is, for the
purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this article in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire
resistance, durability and safety.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/684
Chief building official. The City of Frisco Chief Building Official of Development Services or designee.
City. The City of Frisco.
Code. The Code of Ordinances of the City of Frisco, Texas.
Dilapidated fence. A fence which is decayed, deteriorated, or has fallen into partial ruin.
Director of engineering services. The person(s) so designated by the city manager to provide oversight for and
have responsibility of the engineering services department.
Easement. A right created by grant, reservation, agreement, prescription, or necessary implication, which one
has in the land of another, and may be dedicated by plat or implied by right. It is either for the benefit of
appurtenant land such as for the right to cross, or egress, such as a public utility easement, or in specific, such as
an exclusive utility easement. An easement may or may not have descriptive metes and bounds.
Fence. An artificially constructed barrier enclosing, separating, or screening areas of land, serving as a boundary,
a means of protection, a buffer, a decorative element, a means of visually modifying the view, and/or for
confinement. Except where otherwise required in this code, regulations governing the height, location and
opacity of fences also applies to walls, hedges or landscaping used in lieu of a fence or in combination with a
fence. A fence is any part of a fence including the base, footings, supporting columns, post, braces, structural
members, or any other of its appendages.
Fence contracting. Engaging in the business of erecting, maintaining, constructing, or reconstructing fences for
which a permit is required.
Fence contractor. A person, who for remuneration, erects, maintains, constructs, or reconstructs a fence on the
premise of another. It does not mean the owner who owns or leases the premises on which the fence is located.
Front yard. A yard located in front of the front elevation of a building and extending across a lot between the
side yard lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the front property line and the outside wall
of the main building.
Lot, corner. A lot which has at least two (2) adjacent sides abutting for their full lengths on a street, provided
that the interior angle at the intersection of such two (2) sides is less than one hundred thirty-five degrees (135°).
Lot, depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner lot.
Lot, key. A corner lot that is so designed that the lots located directly behind it face the side street of the corner
lot and are not separated by an alley.
Opacity. Is the degree of openness which light or views are blocked measured perpendicular to the fence for
each fence section between supports.
Public right-of-way (ROW). A strip of land which is used as a roadbed for street, alley or a highway and is
intended for use by the public at large, or land set aside as an easement or in fee, either by purchase, agreement
or condemnation. Generally, describes an area used for the provision of streets and utilities. Unless otherwise
specified, the term right-of-way shall refer to a public right-of-way.
Rear yard. The area extending across the rear of a lot measured between the lot lines and being the minimum
horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the outside wall of the main building. On both corner
lots and interior lots, the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/684
Repair. A repair to a fence shall be defined as maintenance to a fence where replacement of materials does not
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the fence and does not change the scope, location or dimensions of the fence.
Repairs shall be made using the same material, or material with comparable composition, color, size, shape and
quality of the original fence to which the repair is being made.
Residential district. A district where the primary purpose is residential use and is defined in the comprehensive
zoning ordinance excluding multifamily.
Retaining wall. A wall not laterally supported at the top that resists lateral soil loads and other imposed loads.
Screening. A method of visually modifying the view of a structure, building, feature or use by methods such as
fencing, walls, berms, densely planted vegetation or a combination of these methods.
Screening wall. A wall or architectural extension that may be part of the structure or a stand-alone feature that
screens from view the interior of a property so that visibility through the wall shall be prevented from the
exterior side of the wall or architectural extension.
Setback. The distance from the property line or the right-of-way line of all streets adjacent to the premises on
which a fence is located to the part of the fence closest to the property line or right-of-way line.
Side yard. The area between the building and side line of the lot and extending from the front lot line to the rear
lot line and being the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the outside wall of the side of the
main building.
Street. Any dedicated public thoroughfare that affords the principal means of access to abutting property.
Vision or visibility triangle. The corner visibility triangle is defined at an intersection by extending the two ROW
lines from their point of intersection to a distance. These two points are then connected with an imaginary line to
form the corner visibility triangle as shown in figure 3. If there are no curbs existing, then the triangular area
shall be formed by extending the property lines for a distance of thirty feet (30') from their point of intersection.
Yard. An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by
any portion of a structure from the ground upward. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width
of the side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the shortest horizontal distance between the
lot line and the main building shall be used.
(Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-475 Permits
(a) Required. It is unlawful for any person to construct, repair, replace, or cause to be constructed, repaired, or
replaced, a fence or any part of a fence in the city without first obtaining a fence permit from the chief building
official. No permit is required for repairs as defined by this article.
(b) Unlawful securing of permits. No registrant under this article shall for any purpose allow its registration,
by name or any other identification, to be transferred to, assigned to, or in any manner directly or indirectly used
by, any person, and corporation or business entity other than the one to whom the registration was issued.
(c) Approved plans. The application, plans, specifications, computations and other data filed by an applicant
for a permit shall be reviewed by the development services department. When a permit is submitted where plans
are required, the chief building official or his designee shall endorse in writing or stamp the plans and
specifications “reviewed.” Such reviewed plans and specifications shall not be changed, modified or altered by
any person without authorization from the chief building official or his designee, and a person shall do work
regulated by this article in accordance with the approved plans.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/684
(d) Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is
commenced within one hundred and eighty (180) days after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such
permit is suspended, abandoned or lacks the required, by the inspections department, inspections for a period of
one hundred and eighty (180) days after the time the work is commenced. The chief building official or his
designee may extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days on written
request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action
from being taken. No applications shall be extended more than once. Changes, alterations, or adjustments in the
permit or in the work authorized by the issuance of the permit, after it has been issued, shall not extend the
original expiration date established upon the original issuance of the permit.
(e) Suspension or revocation. The chief building official or his designee may, in writing, suspend or revoke a
permit issued under the provisions of this article when the permit was issued in error, on the basis of incorrect
information, or in violation of any applicable law.
(f) Validity of permit. The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans, specifications and
computations is not a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this article or of any
other city ordinance. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this article or any
other city ordinance are not valid.
(g) Construction documents. Construction documents, special inspection and structural observation programs,
and other data shall be submitted in one or more sets, as required by the chief building official, with each
application for a permit. When required by the chief building official or his designee the applicant shall also
provide additional information as required by the building code. The construction documents shall be prepared
by a registered design professional where required by the statutes of the jurisdiction in which the project is to be
constructed. Where special conditions exist, the chief building official is authorized to require additional
construction documents to be prepared by a registered design professional. Exception: the chief building official
is authorized to waive the submission of construction documents and other data not required to be prepared by a
registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that reviewing of
construction documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with this code.
(h) Availability of plans. One set of approved plans, specifications, and a copy of the permit shall be made
available, by the applicant, for inspection of the work authorized by the permit. The said set of approved plans,
specifications and permit shall be kept on the work site by the applicant during the construction process.
(i) Other laws. The owner or the owner's authorized agent who applies for a permit to construct a fence must
comply with all the requirements of this article and the requirements of the building code. The provisions of this
article shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law.
(Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-476 Contractor's registration required
(a) It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of fence contracting without a valid contractor's
registration. Property owners are not required to register as a contractor.
(b) The chief building official shall establish procedures, forms and standards with regard to the content,
format and number of copies of information constituting an application for a contractor registration.
(c) Every contractor registration provided for in this code shall expire one (1) year following the date of its
issuance, and shall be renewed by the chief building official upon application.
(Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-477 Contractor's license; revocation
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/684
(a) The chief building official or his designee may revoke or suspend a fence contractor's registration for
either of the following reasons:
(1) The registrant violates the requirements of this article twice within a twelve-month period.
(2) The registrant fails to obtain permits and/or inspections twice within a twelve-month period.
(b) A contractor whose registration has been revoked or suspended may be reinstated by the chief building
official or the construction board of appeals on an appeal. The registration may only be reinstated if the
contractor corrects all violations and pays all applicable fees.
(Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-478 Appeal process for registration suspension
(a) Building official's order, requirement, decision or determination. Appeals from an order, requirement,
decision or determination of the building official shall be made in writing to the city manager's office within
seven working days of the order, requirement, decision or determination of the chief building official. The city
manager shall notify the chief building official and the appellant of the placement of the appeal on the first
available construction board of appeals agenda in compliance with the Texas Open Meetings law.
(b) Board's decision. Appeals from a decision of the board shall be made in writing to the city council within
seven working days of the written decision of the board. The city secretary shall notify the chief building official
and the appellant of the placement of the appeal on the first available city council agenda in compliance with the
Texas Open Meetings law. The decision of the city council is final.
(Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-479 Application for permit
(a) Application. Any person making application for a fence permit shall complete a permit application,
provided by the chief building official or his designee. The chief building official shall establish procedures,
forms and standards with regard to the content, format and number of copies of information constituting an
application for a contractor registration.
(b) Expiration of plan review. Application for which no permit is issued within ninety (90) days following the
date of application shall expire by limitation, and plans and other data submitted for review may be returned to
the applicant or destroyed by the chief building official. The chief building official may extend the time for
action by the applicant for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days on written request by the applicant showing
that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. No applications
shall be extended more than once.
(c) Contractor submittal requirements. All permit applications applied for by a contractor for work or
installations are required to have:
(1) Written and signed statement from the homeowner; and/or
(2) Copy of a contract (or agreement) signed and ‘dated' by both parties: the homeowner and
contractor.
(d) Licensed subcontractor requirements.
(1) When the proposed scope of work requires licensed subcontractor(s), the application must
include:
a. Written, dated, and signed statement from the subcontractor; and/or
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/684
b. Copy of a contract (or agreement) signed and ‘dated' by both parties: subcontractor,
contractor and/or homeowner.
(2) Permits will not be processed without contractor and homeowner written validation.
(Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-480 Fees
(a) Investigation. When a person begins any work for which a permit is required by this article without first
obtaining a permit, the permit application fee shall double to be equal to the amount of the permit fee whether or
not a permit is issued before the chief building official may issue a permit for the work. Payment of the fee shall
not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of this article nor from any penalty prescribed
by law.
(b) Permit fees. Permit fees shall be designated by the city consolidated fee schedule.
(Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-481 Encroachment on public property
No person shall construct a fence, guy wire, brace or any fence post upon, or into public right-of-way or
property that the city or the general public has dominion and control over, owns or has an easement over, under,
around or through. (Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-482 Fence not to create a traffic hazard
It is unlawful to erect, maintain, suffer or permit any fence on any corner lot in such a manner as to create a
traffic hazard or restrict visibility. Failure of the owner, agent or occupant to remove such obstruction within the
specified time limit required on the receipt of notice to do so is a violation of this article. (Ordinance 12-08-46,
sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-483 General requirements
(a) No fence material shall be used to construct a fence except for those listed and regulated in this article or
other city ordinances.
(b) Fence sections essentially parallel with a public street shall have their back side (the side with the exposed
posts and rails) oriented to the interior of the residential lot to minimize their exposure to the public. Exception:
posts and rails may be oriented to the exterior of the residence when concealed within construction that is
consistent with and complementary to the construction of the fence. Visual depictions of construction shall be
required for review of appearance prior to issuance of a permit.
(c) No fence shall be erected on public right-of-way, within any drainage easement, or visibility, access and
maintenance easements unless otherwise authorized by the director of engineering services.
(Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-484 Residential zoning district regulations
These sections (18-484 to 18-484.8) shall apply in all residential zoning districts within the city. (Ordinance 12-
08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-484.1 Height limitation
(a) Rear yard.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/684
(1) It is unlawful for any person to construct, erect, maintain, suffer, or permit a fence in any rear
yard or along any rear yard lot line which fence exceeds eight feet (8') in height as defined in section
18-484.8.
(2) Decorative gate embellishments are allowed. They shall not exceed the height of the fence by
more than two feet (2').
(b) Side yard. It is unlawful for any person to construct, erect, maintain, suffer, or permit a fence in any side
yard or along any side yard lot line which fence exceeds eight feet (8') in height as defined in section 18-484.8.
(Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-484.2 Construction in front yards
(a) Requirements. All fences constructed in the front yard of a residential property shall:
(1) Be no taller in height than forty-eight inches (48") as defined in section 18-484.8.
(2) Allow minimum fifty percent (50%) opacity.
(3) Not impede the vision triangle.
(4) Not allow vertical support posts and gates to extend more than four inches (4") above the top of
the fence intersection.
(b) Decorative gates. A decorative gate over four feet (4') in height in the front yard requires the approval of
the chief building officials or designee.
(c) Key lots. There are special restrictions for fences on key lots.
(1) Refer to figure 1 along with the definition in the definitions section for an explanation of a key.
(2) A fence, that is more than 50% opaque and constructed of tubular steel or wrought iron and not
exceeding eight (8) feet in height, may be located up to five (5) feet from the property line of the side
of the house on a key lot.
(3) A solid fence, not exceeding eight (8) feet in height, may be located at the setback line (front
yard setback shall be used for key lots) as defined by zoning ordinance as it is currently written or
may be amended. It is the property owner's responsibility to ensure proper setbacks are maintained.
(4) Figure 2 illustrates the difference between property lines and setback lines for determining
fence locations for key lots.
Figure 1. Determining if a lot is a key lot
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/684
Figure 2. Locating fences on key lots
(Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-484.3 Temporary fences
Temporary fences are prohibited in residential districts, except where required by code for construction,
excavation or life safety issues. (Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-484.4 Sight visibility triangle
The corner visibility triangle is defined at an intersection by extending the two ROW lines from their point of
intersection to a distance as shown. These two points are then connected with an imaginary line to form the
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/684
corner visibility triangle. If there are no curbs existing, then the triangular area shall be formed by extending the
property lines for a distance of thirty feet (30') from their point of intersection. A fence on the corner of a major
thoroughfare must have a 40 ft x 40 ft visibility triangle.
Figure 3. Visibility Triangles
(Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-484.5 Prohibited fences
The following types of fences are prohibited in a residential district. It is unlawful for any person to erect,
maintain, or permit a fence that:
(1) Is electrically charged in any manner, except that single-strand wires designed to conduct
electricity through an approved low-voltage regulator shall be allowed along the fence's interior for
the purposes of securing pets within a fenced yard.
(2) Has barbed wire in or on it.
(3) Has concertina wire in or on it.
(4) Has razor wire in or on it.
(5) Has in it or on it, barbs, projections, broken glass, or anything reasonably capable of causing
harm to persons or animals.
(Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-484.6 Perimeter walls
(a) Where a fence intersects a screening wall and the height of the fence exceeds the height of the screening
wall, the height of the fence shall transition to the height of the screening wall over a distance of twenty feet
(20').
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/684
(b) Exception: The chief building official may make exceptions to the twenty feet (20') transition where
terrain and lot orientation does not allow for an orderly transition. Visual depictions of construction shall be
required for review prior to issuance of a permit.
Figure 4. Connecting to perimeter walls
(Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-484.7 Access for residential garbage collection
(a) Access must be maintained upon a residential lot for the access and collection of trash and recycling
containers.
(b) Residential lots that enclose the driveway with a gate shall:
(1) Provide a separate area where trash and recycling containers are accessible for collection as
approved by the environmental services division; or
(2) Leave the gate open on collection days so that trash and recycling containers are accessible for
collection.
Residents that wish to install a gate and do not provide a separate accessible area for trash and recycling
containers must complete a waiver that they understand that failing to leave the gate open for collection can be a
reason for denial of service.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/684
(c) Residential lots that do not provide an accessible location for the collection of refuse containers may be
refused service.
(d) Residential lots with a pool shall have an interior fence as required by code to protect access to the pool if
a gate has to be left open for collection of trash and recycling containers.
(Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-484.8 Determining fence height and opacity
(a) Measurement. Fence height is measured to include the body of the fence, plus allowing a maximum of six
inches (6") (on average between posts) above the natural grade (i.e., for drainage purposes). Fence posts are
permitted to extend a maximum of four inches (4") above the body of the fence. Columns are permitted to
extend a maximum of twelve inches (12") above the body of the fence.
(b) Elevations. In the event that the fence height has been elevated through the use of a retaining wall, the
fence height is measured from the ground level at the highest point as shown below. The creation of a berm or
other method for the primary purpose of increasing the elevation of the fence is not allowed.
Figure 5. Determining fence height
(c) Opacity. Is the degree of openness which light or views are blocked measured perpendicular to the fence
for each fence section between supports.
Figure 6. Opacity of fences
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/684
(Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-485 Nonresidential zoning districts
(a) Fences constructed in nonresidential zoning districts must meet requirements found in the zoning
ordinance.
(b) Height restrictions. A fence in a nonresidential zoning district may not exceed eight feet (8') in height nor
be less than six feet (6') in height and meet the requirements of the zoning ordinance as it currently exists or may
be amended.
(c) Fences in districts zoned agricultural or industrial may also contain the following material:
(1) Fence arms
(2) Barbed wire as accessory to other fencing material
(3) Razor wire with special applications
(4) Chainlink
(5) Other material that may be approved for use in that district by the chief building official or
his/her designee unless approved by a site specific zoning case or approved by a variance.
(6) Fences on parcels used for agricultural purpose may contain barbed wire or other material
approved by the chief building official or his/her designee.
(Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-486 Fire hydrant and utility clear zone
(a) Any area three feet (3') in radius around any fire hydrants and fire hose connections must be kept free of
any fencing that could impede access to or use of the hydrant or fire hose connection.
(b) A fence must not impede access to public utilities or metering devices.
(Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-487 Fences in floodways
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/684
Fences are not permitted in floodway areas as designated on FEMA's flood boundary and floodway map.
(Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-488 Drainage
A fence must not adversely affect drainage or create debris build-up. (Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted
8/6/12)
Sec. 18-489 Conflicts between this article and zoning regulations
In all cases of conflict between this article and the zoning regulations of the city, including but not limited to the
zoning ordinance, as amended, concerning construction and maintenance of fences, the most restrictive shall
prevail. In all cases of conflict between this article and any planned development ordinance, the planned
development ordinance shall prevail. (Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-490 Fence construction and materials
(a) No person shall construct a fence that is not able to structurally support fencing materials as required in the
building code as currently exists or as amended.
(b) Gates or other openings in the fence should be at least three feet (3') in width for egress.
(c) A person building a fence shall comply with the requirements of the building code and all other city
ordinances with regard to construction, materials, and workmanship.
(d) No permit is required for a person constructing a masonry fence or masonry retaining wall less than
twenty-four inches (24") in height. Retaining walls greater in height than thirty-six inches (36") shall be in
compliance with a design submitted by a registered engineer. Any portion of a retaining wall must not interfere
or alter any drainage swale between lots.
(e) A person constructing a fence shall build it of rigid construction with acceptable materials approved by the
building code.
(f) Chainlink fencing shall be a minimum size of eleven (11) gauge or greater.
(g) A person constructing a masonry fence (including concrete block) shall make the exterior surfaces free
from sharp projections.
(h) No person shall construct a wall or fence that exceeds two feet (2') in thickness, unless approved by the
chief building official. Cavities or spaces within a wall or fence shall not be used for the support, storage, shelter,
or enclosure of animals, or personal property.
(i) A person constructing a fence shall use only approved materials and construction methods that ensure
uniform construction throughout. Once the person has established a pattern of materials and construction method
he or she shall continue such method throughout the entire length of the section from corner post to corner post.
(j) A person constructing or maintaining a fence or wall enclosure around a swimming pool, hot-tub, or spa
shall comply with the minimum requirements of section 18-495 of this article.
(Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-491 Wooden fence standards
(a) All vertical posts on fences over four (4) feet in height shall be galvanized steel with a minimum two (2)
three-eighths (3/8ths) inch diameter, a minimum fifteen (15) gauge thickness, and set in a concrete footing.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/684
Picket fences, split rail fences, ranch style or agricultural fences, or other types of decorative fences approved by
the building official or his/her designee shall be permitted to use wood posts.
(b) Concrete footings shall be a minimum of eight (8) inches in diameter.
(c) For fences less than seven (7) feet in height, posts shall be spaced at a maximum of eight (8) feet on center,
set in a concrete footing of no less than twenty-four inches (24") deep.
(d) For fences that are seven (7) feet or greater in height, posts shall be spaced at a maximum of six (6) feet on
center, set in a concrete footing of no less than thirty-six inches (36") deep.
(e) Fence posts attached to or supported by other structures, including retaining walls, shall be provided with
foundation and anchorage to prevent movement of structure or retaining wall.
(f) All materials shall be securely fastened, vertical boards to horizontal stringers, stringers to vertical posts,
[trim board to] top rail, to ensure an ongoing attractive appearance and safe condition, free from rot, rust,
vandalism and other sources of decay.
(g) The bottom of the fence shall be designed to prevent ground to wood contact. This can be achieved
through the use of a concrete strip poured between the fence supports or by raising the pickets to provide a
minimum of two inches between the bottom of the pickets and the ground. A kick board may be used to cover
the gap between the bottom of the pickets and the ground. This kick board may have ground contact if treated
and must be approved for ground contact.
(h) All wood material shall be stained, pressure treated, painted, or adequately sealed to prevent decay.
(Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-492 Prohibited fence materials
(a) No person shall use rope; string; wire products including but not limited to chicken wire, hog wire, wire
fabric, and similar welded or woven wire fabrics; chain; live bamboo; netting; cut or broken glass; paper;
unapproved corrugated metal panels; galvanized sheet metal; plywood; or fiberglass panels in any fence or any
other materials that are not manufactured specifically as fencing materials. The chief building official or his
designee may require the applicant to provide the manufacturer's standards to establish the intended use of a
proposed fencing material.
Exceptions:
(1) A dog window may be installed in a fence no larger than two hundred eighty-eight (288) square
inches with corrosion resistant material capable of restraining the dog.
(2) Temporary fences made of wire, not in excess of thirty-six inches (36"), in residential districts
are permitted for residential garden uses only.
(b) No person shall construct a fence of damaged, or unsafe materials.
(c) No person shall weave or use slats of any material, including but not limited to metal, fiberglass, and
bamboo through a chainlink fence to create a blind fence, screening fence or any other type of fence addressed
in this article in a residential district.
(d) Used materials, equipment and devices shall not be reused unless, it can be determined by the chief
building official that, they meet the requirements of the building code for new materials.
(e) No person shall construct a fence of metal panels on a residentially zoned property.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/684
(Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-493 Maintenance and standard of fences
A fence or fences shall be maintained by the owner of the property in compliance with the requirements of this
article including but not limited to the following maintenance standards:
(1) A fence shall not lean more than one inch out of vertical for each foot of height as measured
from the top of the fence.
(2) The owner shall replace broken, damaged, removed or missing parts of a fence within ten (10)
days of the day the owner received notice from the chief building official or his designee, with the
same material, or material with comparable composition, color, size, shape and quality of the original
fence to which the repair is being made. No permit is required for repairs as defined in this article.
The chief building official or his designee may, upon written notice from the owner that unusual
circumstances prevent the timely repair of a fence, extend the replacement time as required. The chief
building official or his designee shall not extend the replacement time longer than reasonably
necessary. The owner requesting a replacement time extension shall provide the chief building
official or his designee a written scope and schedule detailing materials and estimated time period of
the completed replacement for approval.
(3) A fence shall be maintained in sound structural condition as a whole or completely removed,
including post(s).
(4) Property owners shall maintain fences, including those existing prior to the adoption of this
article, at all times in a state of good repair, safe and secure condition, with all braces, bolts, nails,
supporting frame and fastenings free from deterioration, termite infestation, rot, rust or loosening,
and able to withstand at all times the wind pressure for which they were designed.
(5) Property owners shall regularly paint fence supports, gates, structural members and exterior
surfaces that are covered with paint to prevent rusting, peeling or blistering surfaces.
(6) Existing fences that were constructed prior to the adoption of this article that were constructed
with materials not currently permitted by this article may be maintained as long as no part of the
fence is or becomes unsafe, dilapidated, or a public nuisance. If the chief building official or his
designee determines the fence is unsafe, dilapidated, or a public nuisance the fence must be repaired
with materials approved by this article or be removed.
(7) The repairs/maintenance must be made in complete sections extending a minimum of support
post to support post. If the chief building official or his designee determines the extent of repair on
any existing fence (materials in noncompliance) is in excess of fifty percent (50%) of the total fence,
then the entire fence must be replaced with materials approved by this article. A rolling twelve-month
time period shall be used to determine if over fifty percent (50%) of a fence has been repaired.
(8) The construction of a fence or wall on the property line shall not preclude the property owner's
responsibility to maintain and keep the area between the property line to the back of curb or edge of
the pavement or center of alley, free and clear of debris and high weeds.
(Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-494 Requirements for nonconforming fences, walls, gates, and columns
Replacement of legal nonconforming fences, walls, gates, and columns shall be subject to the requirements in
this article. Exceptions may be granted by an approved PD ordinance for the neighborhood.
(1) A permit shall not be required if:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/684
a. Repair of short sections of legal nonconforming fences, walls, gates, or columns when
repairs are less than two fence panels or a maximum of sixteen (16) feet;
b. Replacement of fence does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total fence length; or
c. A rolling twelve-month time period is used between repairs or replacement.
(2) The replacement of any nonconforming structure shall be prohibited if the chief building
official determines that a public safety hazard exists or the city engineer determines that the structure
encroaches in an easement or public right-of-way. Any fence, wall, gate, or column constructed
without a lawfully issued permit is a violation of the municipal code.
(Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-495 Swimming pool and spa enclosure requirements
The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety and welfare by requiring:
(1) Residential swimming pools, or spas and similar structures eighteen inches or more in depth
designed for wading, swimming or other recreational purposes located on any residential premises
within the city to be enclosed in the manner prescribed herein; and
(2) Any residential cesspool, seepage pit, well or similar type of shaft, having a diameter in excess
of eight (8) inches to be securely covered at all times when the same is unattended.
(Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-495.1 Definitions
For the purpose of this section, the following definitions are applicable:
Aboveground or on-ground pool. See definition of “swimming pool.”
Approved safety swimming pool cover. A power-operated safety pool cover that meets all of the performance
standards of the American Society for Testing and Materials International (ASTM), in compliance with
Underwriters Laboratories Inc. (UL) Standard F 1346-91, Standard Performance Specification Covers and
Labeling Requirements.
Barrier. Is a permanent fence, enclosure, wall, building wall or combination thereof that completely surrounds
the swimming pool and obstructs access to the swimming pool.
Grade. Is the underlying surface, such as earth or a walking surface.
Permanent fence or enclosure. Is a wall, building wall or combination thereof that is fixed firmly, firm,
established, safe, secure, constant and even, long lasting.
Permanent swimming pool or spa cover. Is a cover that is equipped with manual or electrical source or system
and is approved from a recognized testing agency.
Separation fence. Is a barrier that separates all doors of a dwelling unit with direct access to a swimming pool
from the swimming pool.
Spa. A spa/hot tub is an outdoor structure containing a body of water in an artificial or semi-artificial receptacle
or other container having a capacity for water exceeding twenty-four (24) inches in depth at any point, used
primarily for recreation or relaxation purposes, such as a hot tub, built above or below the surface of the ground
elevation.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/684
Swimming pool. Is any constructed or prefabricated structure intended for swimming or bathing, twenty-four
(24) inches or more in depth. Such structure includes in-ground, aboveground and on-ground swimming pools,
and fixed-in-place wading pools, regardless of the presence of any water.
Swimming pool, indoor. Is a swimming pool that is totally contained within a structure and surrounded on all
four sides by walls of said structure.
Swimming pool, outdoor. Is any swimming pool that is not an indoor pool.
(Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-495.2 Barrier fence requirements
(a) Required. Every person in possession of residential land within the city, whether as owner, purchaser under
contract, lessee, tenant or licensee, upon which is situated a swimming pool, spa or similar facility shall meet the
requirements of this article.
Exception: The pool is equipped with an approved power safety cover and complies with AG107.1 Standards.
(b) Minimum height. Barrier fence height shall be a minimum of forty-eight (48) inches as measured on the
side of the barrier that faces away from the swimming pool.
(c) Bottom clearance. The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier shall be
two (2) inches, measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the pool, or four (4) inches, when grade
is a solid surface, such as concrete or wood.
(d) Openings. Vertical openings in the barrier shall not allow passage of a four (4) inch diameter sphere.
Spacing between vertical members shall not exceed 1-3/4 inches in width. Decorative cutouts shall not exceed 1-
3/4 inches in width. Solid barriers, such as masonry or stone wall, shall not contain indentations or protrusions
except for normal construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints.
(e) Closely spaced horizontal members. For barriers in which the horizontal members of the fence are spaced
less than forty-five (45) inches apart, the horizontal members shall be placed on the pool side of the barrier
(pickets shall be located on the outside of the fence with the posts being on the inside). Spacing between vertical
members shall not exceed 1-3/4 inches in width. Should the pickets be located on the inside of the fence,
measures shall be taken to render the fence non-climbable. Where there are cutouts within vertical members,
spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed 1-3/4 inches in width.
(f) Widely spaced horizontal members. Where the barrier is composed of horizontal members and the distance
between the tops of the horizontal members is greater than forty-five (45) inches, the vertical spacing shall not
allow a four (4) inch diameter sphere to pass between the pickets. Where there are decorative cutouts within
vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed 1.75 inches in width.
(g) Diagonal members. Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members, such as a lattice fence, the
maximum opening by the diagonal members shall not be more than 1-3/4 inches in width.
(h) Chainlink dimensions. Maximum mesh size for chainlink fences shall be 2-1/4 inches square unless the
fence is provided with slats fastened at the top or the bottom which reduce opening to no more than 1-3/4 inches.
Chainlink fencing shall be a minimum size of eleven (11) gauge or greater.
(Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-495.3 Gates
(a) Construction. The gate must meet the same construction requirements as the barrier fence.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/684
(b) Locking device. All gates shall be equipped to accommodate a locking device.
(1) Pedestrian gates. All pedestrian yard gates must have self-closing, self-latching gates and must
open away from the pool.
(2) Non-pedestrian gates. The gate must meet the same construction requirements as the barrier
fence.
a. There shall be a maximum of one.
b. It shall have a self-latching device and remain locked at all times when the pool area is not
in use.
c. Gates over four (4) feet wide, such as double-gates for vehicles, must be padlocked if not
self-closing/self-latching.
(c) Latching mechanism. Where the release mechanism of the self-latching device is located less than fiftyfour
(54) inches from the bottom of the gate:
(1) The release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate at least three (3) inches
below the top of the gate.
(2) The gate and barrier shall have no opening greater than 1/2 inch within eighteen (18) [inches]
of the release mechanism.
Figure 7. Fence and gate requirements overview
(Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-495.4 Barrier climb hazards
Pool/spa enclosures barriers shall be located and constructed so as to prohibit permanent structures such as
walls, equipment, or similar objects from being used to climb the barrier. There shall be no less than thirty-six
(36) inches between the pool/spa and any permanent structure or similar objects. Barrier climb hazards such as
walls and fence section with elevation changes causing and containing horizontal members to be less than forty9/
6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 222/684
five (45) inches shall be rendered non-climbable within thirty-six (36) inches of a climb hazard. (Ordinance 12-
08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-495.5 Using house wall as a part of a barrier
(a) Doors. Doors with direct access to the pool through that wall shall be:
(1) Self-closing and self-latching and must swing outward from the pool area. A simple latch or
lock located a minimum of fifty-four (54) inches above the floor, or a double-keyed dead bolt at any
height is acceptable;
(2) Equipped with an alarm which produces an audible warning when the door and its screen are
opened. The alarm shall sound continuously for a minimum of thirty (30) seconds immediately after
the door is opened and be capable of being heard throughout the house during normal household
activities. The alarm shall be equipped with a manual means to temporarily deactivate the alarm for a
single opening. Such deactivation shall last no more than fifteen (15) seconds. The deactivation
switch shall be located at least fifty-four (54) inches above the threshold of the door; or
(3) The pool shall be equipped with a powered safety cover in compliance with ASTM F 1346.
(b) Sliding glass doors. All sliding glass doors shall be self-closing and self-latching with an approved
automatic door closer; or:
(1) Provide a separate fence;
(2) Replace the sliding glass door with a self-closing hinged door; or
(3) Bolt the door shut (Option is not available if this is the only door to the pool area from the
room). Removable pins or locks which prevent the door from opening are not sufficient to meet this
safety code.
(c) Window latches. Window latches must be at 54 inches minimum above floor; or
(1) Except for bedroom egress windows, screwed in “stops” (not thumb screws) may be used to
limit window openings to four (4) inches; or
(2) Except for bedroom egress windows, provide a screwed-in-place wire mesh screen.
(d) Windows. Windows, where the bottom edge is less than 60 inches above the pool desks and in within five
(5) feet of the water's edge, must be tempered glass.
(e) Animal or doggie doors. Animal or doggie doors are not allowed if they allow direct access to the pool.
Exception: The door is alarmed or the pool has a cover as described in subsection (a).
(f) Areas outside of windows or doors that otherwise cannot be made to comply with barrier and egress
requirements must be fenced.
(Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-495.6 Indoor swimming pools
For an indoor swimming pool, protection shall comply with the requirements of section 18-495.4. (Ordinance
12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-495.7 Aboveground pools
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 223/684
All aboveground pools, with non-climbable sides not less than forty-eight (48) inches high above the finished
grade, may be located on a single-family residential property without requiring an interior fence, wall or barrier
between the pool and the dwelling. Where an aboveground pool structure is used as a barrier or where the barrier
is mounted on top of the pool structure, and the means of access is a ladder or steps, then the ladder or steps
either shall be capable of being secured, locked or removed to prevent access, or the ladder or stops shall be
surrounded by a barrier that meets the requirements of an in ground pool. When the ladder or steps are secured,
locked or removed, any opening created shall not allow the passage of a four (4) inch diameter sphere.
(Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-495.8 Spas
For all spas/hot tubs, protection shall comply with all requirements in this article.
Exception: A spa or hot tub equipped with a listed safety cover which complies with the American Society for
Testing and Material-Emergency Performance Specification (ASTM F1346-91) shall be exempt from the
requirements of this article.
(Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
Sec. 18-496 Penalties
Any person, firm, corporation or business entity violating this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction thereof shall be fined a sum not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) if the violation
relates to the public health, sanitation or dumping of refuse, otherwise the fine shall be a sum not exceeding five
hundred dollars ($500.00). The city retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state
and federal law. Each day any violation of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 12-08-46, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 8/6/12)
CHAPTERS 19–21
RESERVED
CHAPTER 22
BUSINESSES AND BUSINESS REGULATION*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 22-1 Request for issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy (TCO)
(a) Requests for a TCO shall be submitted, in writing, to the building official at least 45 calendar days prior to
the projected opening date of the business. The applicant shall complete the required application and submit with
any additional documentation as required by the building official. The application shall be signed by the legal
property owner, or designated representative, and by the owner of the business requesting the TCO. Only one
TCO may be issued for any project prior to the issuance of the final letter of acceptance.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 224/684
Upon submission of the request for the TCO, and no later than 30 days prior to the date of the projected opening
date of the business, a mandatory meeting with the applicant(s) and all city departments involved will be
scheduled to define all outstanding items necessary for project completion and/or approval of the TCO. Two
copies of preliminary as-built plans shall be provided to the city at this time.
In addition to any other documents and/or requirements deemed necessary by the director of engineering, all
documents required by the final acceptance checklist, provided by the engineering services department, all
impact, escrow and inspection fees and a final plat with signatures must be submitted prior to the issuance of a
TCO.
(b) Administrative fee. A nonrefundable fee in the amount of $1,500.00 shall be due at the time of application
submittal. This fee shall be paid with planning and development services department.
(c) Expiration. A TCO shall expire on the 30th day after issuance. One extension of not more than an
additional 45 calendar days may be granted upon written request and approval of the building official.
Occupancies with an expired TCO shall be considered being in violation of the International Building Code, as
adopted by the city, and subject to penalty provisions. Penalties include the termination of the right to occupy the
premises if the requirements for project completion have not been met.
(d) Savings/repealing clause. All provisions of any ordinance in conflict with this section are hereby repealed
to the extent they are in conflict; but such repeal shall not abate any pending prosecution for violation of the
repealed ordinance, nor shall the repeal prevent a prosecution from being commenced for any violation if
occurring prior to the repeal of the ordinance. Any remaining portion of conflicting ordinances shall remain in
full force and effect.
(e) Penalty provision. Any person, firm, corporation or business entity violating this section shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction therefor, shall be fined a sum not exceeding $2,000.00, and each
and every day that such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense; provided, however, that such
penal provision shall not preclude a suit to enjoin such violation. Frisco retains all legal rights and remedies
available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law.
(Ordinance 08-09-85, secs. 2-4, adopted 8/15/08)
Secs. 22-2–22-18 Reserved
ARTICLE II. FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS*
Sec. 22-19 Purpose
The purpose of these rules is to safeguard public health and provide to consumers food that is safe, unadulterated
and honestly presented. (Ordinance 08-09-87, sec. 2, adopted 9/15/08; Ordinance 16-04-35, sec. 2, adopted
4/19/16)
Sec. 22-20 Adoption of the Texas Food Establishment Rules
The city hereby adopts by reference the provisions of the current Texas Food Establishment Rules set forth in 25
Texas Administrative Code chapter 228, as amended, which establish regulations regarding, among other things,
food, food establishments, mobile food units, food trucks and temporary food establishments, save and except
the deletions and additions set forth below. The Texas Food Establishment Rules (“TFER”) are made a part of
this article as if fully set forth herein. Copies of the TFER are on file in the office of the city secretary, being
marked and designated as the 2015 TFER, published by the Texas Department of State Health Services. The
following deletions and additions to the TFER are hereby approved and adopted:
Section 228.2 Definitions is amended as follows:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 225/684
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivation shall have the
meaning given below (regardless of the case used, whether upper or lower case), unless the context
clearly indicates otherwise:
(1) AUTHORIZED AGENT OR EMPLOYEE - the employees or agents of the regulatory
agency.
(2) BED AND BREAKFAST LIMITED -
(i) an establishment with up to five (5) or fewer rooms for rent;
(ii) an establishment that serves breakfast to overnight guests; and
(iii) an establishment that provides for guest stays of up to 14 consecutive calendar
days, but that does not offer weekly rates.
(3) CONCESSION STAND - a food establishment operated on a seasonal basis for the
purpose of providing food at sporting events associated with an independent school district,
university, community college, nonprofit organization, privately owned school or the City of
Frisco.
(4) EVENT - a unique public gathering of persons at which food products will be served or
offered directly to consumers, such as a seasonal sale, marketing event, festival, bazaar,
carnival, circus, fundraiser, public exhibition, celebration, sporting event, or other public
gathering which is civic, political, public or educational in nature and for which an appropriate
regulatory authority is required to grant permission for the operation of the event, whether by
permit, license or other official written document.
(5) FOOD TRUCK - a mobile food unit (MFU), as defined herein, that is permitted to operate
at one location for a period of time exceeding fifteen (15) minutes under this section or other
City of Frisco ordinance, as they exist or may be amended.
(6) FRISCO, CITY OF FRISCO or MUNICIPALITY - the City of Frisco, Texas.
(7) LAW - any applicable local, state and/or federal law, statute, ordinance, resolution, rule,
regulation and/or requirement, as it/they currently exist, may be amended or in the future
arising.
(8) LIMITED FOOD ESTABLISHMENT - an operation that is required by any regulatory
agency to be inspected by the local regulatory authority, but which does not meet the definition
of food establishment; or an operation meeting the definition of bed and breakfast limited, as
amended.
(9) MISBRANDED - the presence of any written, printed, or graphic matter, upon or
accompanying food or containers of food, which is false or misleading, or which violates any
applicable state or local labeling requirement, as they exist or may be amended.
(10) MOBILE FOOD UNIT (MFU) - a vehicle-mounted, self-contained food service
operation, designed to be readily moveable (including catering trucks) and used to store,
prepare, display, serve or sell food. Mobile food units must completely retain their mobility at
all times. A mobile food unit does not mean a stand or a booth.
(11) MOBILE FOOD VENDOR - any person who operates or sells food from a stationary
cart, or trailer-mounted on chassis, but without an engine, for period of fifteen (15) days or
greater per year. Mobile food vendors who operate for fourteen (14) days or less shall be
considered temporary food establishments. Mobile food vendors shall operate under the
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 226/684
guidelines set forth in the City of Frisco Zoning Ordinance, as it exists or may be amended, in
addition to meeting the requirements for food establishments set forth in these rules. Mobile
food vendors that are approved to operate within the enclosed venue of outdoor concerts,
athletic stadiums or fields and entertainment venues are exempt from sections 3.02.01(20)(f),
(g), (i), (j) and (k) of the City of Frisco Zoning Ordinance.
(12) PRIVATE EVENT - an event at which food and/or beverages are offered to participants
and:
(i) That is held on publicly or privately owned premises or a location operated by an
organization, group, club, association or institution that is not available for use by the
general public and where entry to the event is governed by regulations or invitation of that
organization, group, club, association or institution; or
(ii) Where food and/or beverages are offered, sampled, sold or given only to event
volunteers and/or event staff.
(13) REGULATORY AUTHORITY or LOCAL REGULATORY AUTHORITY - the City of
Frisco, Texas, or its authorized designee.
(14) RETAIL ONLY - a business offering only foods which are prepackaged, nonpotentially
hazardous (PHF/nonTCFS).
(15) ROADSIDE FOOD VENDOR - a person who operates a mobile retail food store from a
temporary location adjacent to a public road or highway. Food is not prepared or processed by a
roadside food vendor. A roadside food vendor is classified as a food truck under this section.
(16) RULES, STATE RULES, TEXAS FOOD ESTABLISHMENT RULES or “TFER” - the
Texas Food Establishment Rules adopted by the Texas Department of State Health Services,
codified at 25 Texas Administrative Code chapter 228, as amended.
Section 228.31 Responsibility is amended as follows:
(a) Responsibility; food manager certification requirements.
(1) Responsibility, assignment. Food establishments that serve, sell, or distribute only
prepackaged foods, nonpotentially hazardous beverages and foods such as sno-cones or
popcorn, and temporary food establishments, are exempt from the certified food protection
manager requirement. Concession stand operators must successfully take and pass a food safety
class, such as food handler certification class, approved by the City of Frisco, or a class that
educates food service workers which is approved by the regulatory authority, before operating a
concession stand. Proof of successful course completion may be required of food
establishments that are exempt from the certified food protection manager requirement under
this subsection if the regulatory authority determines that the food establishment is capable of
causing foodborne illness or increased public health risk.
(2) A food establishment shall provide proof of food protection manager certification to the
regulatory authority prior to opening the establishment.
(3) A food establishment shall have thirty (30) days to meet the certified food protection
manager requirement upon the transfer or termination of a certified food protection manager.
(4) In the event of a change in ownership of a food establishment, the new owner/operator of
a food establishment shall provide proof to the regulatory authority that the appropriate number
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 227/684
of certified food protection managers will be on duty within thirty (30) days of the change of
ownership.
(5) A concessionaire or temporary food establishment must have a certified food handler on
duty during all hours of operation.
...
(c) Bed and breakfast limited. The owner/operator of a bed and breakfast limited shall successfully
complete a food protection manager certification course approved by the regulatory authority and
submit proof of certification to the regulatory authority when applying for a permit.
Section 228.43 Hair restraints is amended as follows:
(a) Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, all food employees, regardless of title,
position or establishment's own policy, shall wear hair restraints such as hats, hair coverings or nets,
beard restraints, and clothing that covers body hair, that are designed and worn to effectively keep
their hair from contacting exposed food; clean equipment, utensils, and linens; and unwrapped singleservice
and single-use articles. Methods which only partially restrain hair, such as braids, hair ties, or
visors, shall only be used in conjunction with one of the approved hair restraint methods listed above.
(b) This section does not apply to food employees such as counter staff who only serve wrapped or
packaged foods or beverages, bartenders, hostesses and wait staff if they present a minimal risk of
contaminating exposed food; clean equipment, utensils, and linens; and unwrapped single-service and
single-use articles.
Section 228.70 Preventing contamination by consumers is amended as follows:
(a) Food display. Except for nuts in the shell and whole, raw fruits and vegetables that are intended
for hulling, peeling or washing by the consumer before consumption, food on display shall be
protected from contamination by the use of packaging; counter, service line, or salad bar food guards
that comply with NSF standards; completely enclosed display cases; or other means approved by the
regulatory authority. A letter may be required from the fabricator or installer of any food guard
required by this subsection to confirm compliance with NSF standards if compliance is not evident
through the use of labels or listings posted directly on the food guard by the authority approved to
affix such label or listing.
...
Section 228.106 Functionality of equipment is amended as follows:
...
(x) Acceptability. Food equipment certification, classification. Food equipment that is certified or
classified for sanitation by an American National Standards Institute (ANSI)-accredited certification
program will be deemed to comply with sections 228.101–228.106 of this title. Food equipment shall
display certification label(s) from an ANSI-accredited certification program or express approval is
required from the regulatory authority for use. A letter may be required from the fabricator or
installer of such equipment to confirm compliance with ANSI-accredited certification program if
compliance is not evident through the use of labels posted directly on the equipment by the authority
approved to affix such label.
Section 228.107 Equipment, numbers and capacities is amended as follows:
(a) Cooling, heating, and holding capacities. Equipment for cooling and heating food, and holding
cold and hot food, shall be sufficient in number and capacity to provide food temperatures as
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 228/684
specified under subchapter C of this chapter (relating to food), provided, however, that the regulatory
authority may calculate capacities required for limited food establishments or for any food
establishment in order to ensure food is held at proper temperatures. This may include a requirement
for a limited food establishment to provide a single refrigerator that complies with section 228.106(x)
of this title to maintain student food brought in to be maintained at all times under mechanical
refrigeration.
(1) Businesses that sublet, rent or share space adjacent to or within an existing food service
operation shall have separate refrigeration units to serve each business adequately.
(b) Manual warewashing, sink compartment requirements.
(1) Except as specified in paragraph 3 of this subsection, a sink with at least three
compartments shall be provided for manually washing, rinsing and sanitizing equipment and
utensils. If a mechanical warewashing machine as specified by the rules in this section is
provided and approved to accomplish proper washing and sanitizing of equipment and utensils,
this does not allow for exemption from the requirement of at least one three-compartment sink.
The sink shall have each compartment labeled as to its function and use with a sign affixed to
each compartment. The sink shall also have sanitizing instructions posted in an area adjacent to
the warewashing area.
(2) Sink compartments shall be large enough to accommodate immersion of the largest
equipment and utensils.
(3) Alternative manual warewashing equipment may be used when there are special cleaning
needs such as specialized equipment and its use is approved. Alternative manual warewashing
equipment may only be used in existing establishments having certificate of occupancy dating
before the effective date of this article and may include:
...
Section 228.143 Water quantity and availability is amended as follows:
...
(c) Hot water. Hot water generation and distribution systems shall be sufficient to meet the peak
hot water demands throughout the food establishment. Sizing of supply systems shall comply with
NSF standards approved by the regulatory authority.
Section 228.147 Plumbing, numbers and capacities is amended as follows:
(a) Handwashing facilities.
(1) Except as specified in paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subsection, at least one (1)
handwashing lavatory, a number of handwashing lavatories necessary for their convenient use
by employees in areas specified under section 228.148 of this title, and not fewer than the
number of handwashing lavatories required by the plumbing code, as it exists or may be
amended by the City of Frisco, shall be provided. Lavatories in addition to those defined herein
may be required by the regulatory authority.
...
(c) Service sink. At least one (1) floor-curbed cleaning facility, equipped with a floor drain, shall
be provided and conveniently located for the cleaning of mops or similar wet floor cleaning tools and
for the disposal of mop water and similar liquid waste.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 229/684
...
Section 228.148 Plumbing, location and placement is amended as follows:
(a) Handwashing facilities.
(1) A handwashing facility shall be located:
(A) to allow convenient use by employees in all food preparation, food dispensing and
warewashing areas; and
(B) in, or immediately adjacent to, toilet rooms; and
(C) such that at least one (1) handwashing facility shall be on each cook line, for direct
use by all employees while working on the cook line; and
(D) within every twenty-five (25) linear feet of unobstructed space in food preparation
and utensil washing areas, or as otherwise approved by the regulatory authority. Any door,
wall, partial wall, stairway or other barrier, fixed or moveable, shall be considered an
obstruction for the purposes of these rules.
(2) If a handwashing facility is located immediately adjacent to food preparation, serving, or
storage areas, an approved splash guard separating the handwashing facility from these areas
may be required by the regulatory authority.
(3) Dedicated food preparation sink. A minimum of one (1) sink shall be provided for food
preparation in food establishments that prepare raw animal proteins and/or that prepare fruits or
vegetables on site.
(4) At least one (1) waste sink shall be provided where blender, coffee or tea service is
performed.
...
Section 228.150 Sewage retention, drainage, and delivery is amended as follows:
...
(d) Grease trap, grease interceptor.
(1) A grease trap or grease interceptor is required unless otherwise approved by the
regulatory authority, and shall be located to be easily accessible for cleaning, operation, and
maintenance. The location of a grease trap or grease interceptor must be approved by the
regulatory authority and shall not be within an area where food is held, prepared, stored, or
transferred. Grease traps and grease interceptors shall be sized and installed in compliance with
the plumbing code. All grease traps and interceptors shall also be approved by the regulatory
authority prior to installation. Grease separators designed to be serviced manually by food
establishment employees shall not be permitted. Grease interceptors or separators located above
ground, beneath one (1) fixture, are prohibited unless otherwise approved by the regulatory
authority.
(2) Grease traps and grease interceptors shall be serviced within ninety (90) days of the food
establishment opening, undergoing extensive renovation, or change in ownership, and
subsequently at an interval necessary to ensure that sediment and floating materials do not
accumulate to impair the efficiency of the grease interceptor or trap; to ensure the discharge of
grease into public sewers does not exceed local discharge limits not to exceed 100mg/l; to
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 230/684
ensure no visible grease is observed in discharge; and not to exceed ninety (90) operational days
between servicing. Self-cleaning of grease interceptors by operators is expressly prohibited.
Grease traps and grease interceptors shall be completely evacuated a minimum of four (4) times
yearly, unless otherwise approved by the regulatory authority by written variance approval, and
liquid waste transportation paperwork documenting complete service of the grease interceptor
or trap shall be provided to the regulatory authority, or designee having jurisdiction, upon
request. Testing of effluent shall be done at the business owner's expense upon request by the
regulatory authority for failure to produce requested liquid waste transportation paperwork, or
should the regulatory authority have knowledge of a grease interceptor or trap dysfunction or
suspicion of misuse that allows grease to be discharged into the sewer system. Food
establishments shall enter into a contract with a waste hauler licensed by the state regulatory
authority having jurisdiction over waste haulers, to provide for regularly scheduled servicing.
No “will call” or “on call” scheduling shall be permitted for servicing, except for emergency
servicing when required to prevent imminent health hazard or the discharge of grease into the
sewer system. Liquid waste transportation documentation, as approved by the state regulatory
authority including, but not limited to, the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality or the
department, shall be kept on file for one (1) year in the food establishment for review by the
local regulatory authority.
...
Section 228.152 Refuse, recyclables, and returnables, facilities on the premises is amended as follows:
...
(b) Outdoor storage surface. An outdoor storage surface for refuse, recyclables, and returnables
shall be constructed of concrete and shall be smooth, durable, and sloped to drain.
(c) Outdoor enclosure. An outdoor enclosure for refuse, recyclables, and returnables, constructed
to City of Frisco specifications and being comprised of, among other requirements, one hundred
percent (100%) masonry, shall be provided, unless otherwise approved by the regulatory authority.
...
(f) Outside receptacles.
(1) Receptacles and waste handling units for refuse, recyclables, and returnables used with
materials containing food residue and used outside the food establishment shall be designed and
constructed to have tight-fitting lids, doors, or covers and be within an approved, as solely
determined by the regulatory authority, enclosure as to shield from public view. All outside
receptacles and waste handling units shall be approved by the regulatory authority prior to
construction, installation, or use.
...
(k) Storing refuse, recyclables, and returnables. Refuse, recyclables, and returnables shall be stored
in receptacles or waste handling units so that they are inaccessible to insects and rodents and shielded
from public view by an approved, as solely determined by the regulatory authority, enclosure. Food
waste shall be securely bagged prior to placing in receptacle or waste handling unit. All methods of
storing and recycling waste shall be approved by the regulatory authority.
...
(m) Outside storage prohibitions.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 231/684
...
(2) Cardboard or other packaging material that does not contain food residues and that is
awaiting regularly scheduled delivery to a recycling or disposal site may be stored outside
without being in a covered receptacle if it is stored so that it does not create a rodent harborage
problem, is shielded from public view by an approved enclosure, and approved by the
regulatory authority.
...
(p) Maintaining refuse areas and enclosures. A storage area and enclosure for refuse, recyclables,
or returnables shall be maintained free of unnecessary items, as specified under section 228.186(n) of
this title (pertaining to physical facilities), and obstructions, and shall be clean.
...
Section 228.171 Indoor areas, surface characteristics is amended as follows:
Except as specified in section 228.222(j) and (k)(1) of this title, materials for indoor floor, wall, and
ceiling surfaces under conditions of normal use shall be:
...
(3) nonabsorbent for areas subject to moisture such as food preparation areas, areas used for
the storage or transportation of open containers of food, walk-in refrigerators, warewashing
areas, toilet rooms, mobile food unit servicing areas, and areas subject to flushing or spray
cleaning methods.
Section 228.172 Outdoor areas, surface characteristics is amended as follows:
(a) Walking and driving areas. The outdoor walking and driving areas shall be surfaced with
concrete or other material approved by the regulatory authority.
...
Section 228.173 Floors, walls, and ceilings is amended as follows:
...
(d) Floor carpeting, restrictions and installation.
(1) Floors and floor coverings of all food preparation and utensil-washing areas, walk-in
refrigeration units, dressing rooms, locker rooms; and toilet rooms provided for employee use
shall be constructed of smooth durable material such as terrazzo, ceramic, quarry tile, or
equivalent, with a six (6) inch coved tile base installed integral and flush with finished floor,
and shall be maintained in good repair. Top-set, square or thin-lip installations of coved base
tiles are prohibited. Sealed concrete, sheet vinyl, vinyl products or VCT may not be used in
these areas. Epoxy resin and other poured monolithic floors, and other durable seamless
flooring systems may be used in these areas installed to a finished product thickness of a
minimum of one-quarter (1/4, 0.25) inch when approved by the regulatory authority prior to
installation. Poured monolithic floors and seamless flooring systems shall be constructed to a
finished product thickness of a minimum of one-quarter (1/4, 0.25) inch with coved base
monolithic, integral, and flush with floor. The regulatory authority may impose additional
requirements such as, but not limited to, the addition of nonskid additives and may approve
alternative minimum thicknesses of floors and base if it is proven in writing that a finished
product of different thickness and/or additives render the same or increased standards. Written
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 232/684
documentation of compliance with these requirements shall be submitted to the regulatory
authority at time of installation and no later than the date of issuance of the certificate of
occupancy. Durable grades of sheet vinyl or other approved vinyl products may be used in dry
storage areas if approved by the regulatory authority, and shall be maintained in good repair. In
dedicated janitorial, laundry, or mechanical areas, sealed concrete may be used in lieu of the
above listed materials if approved by the regulatory authority. Food areas within food
establishments that are temporarily set up for use during specified hours during each day or one
day such as buffet lines or bar service areas may be exempt from this rule. Food areas of a food
establishment that are used for sole purpose of class instruction and where consumption of food
on premises is minimal and of secondary to primary instruction use may be exempt from this
rule.
At least one (1) floor drain must be provided, with total number of required drains to be
approved by the regulatory authority. Properly installed, trapped floor drains shall be
provided in floors that are water flushed for cleaning or that receive discharges of water or
other fluid waste from equipment, or in areas where pressure spray methods for cleaning
equipment are used. Properly trapped floor drains shall be provided in all toilet rooms and
in food preparation areas in compliance with any and all applicable laws. Floors must be
graded to drain properly.
(2) Prohibited floor covering. The use of sawdust, wood shavings, peanut hulls, or similar
material as a floor covering is expressly prohibited.
...
(f) Wall and ceiling coverings and coatings.
(1) Wall and ceiling covering materials shall be attached so that they are easily cleanable.
Walls where excessive heat from equipment such as grills, griddles, fryers or gas burners must
be covered with stainless steel sheets from floor to ventilation hood, unless otherwise approved
by regulatory authority. Walls in areas where food is not prepackaged at all times, shall be
nonabsorbent, easily cleanable and covering must be approved by the regulatory authority. Wall
coatings, including epoxy paint, are not approved as wall coverings in areas where uncovered
food is located, stored, transferred, processed, passed, cooked, prepared or sold. Wall coatings,
including epoxy paint, may be used in areas where food is prepackaged at all times or in
nonfood storage areas with approval by the regulatory authority. Ceilings in areas where food is
not prepackaged at all times shall be nonabsorbent, easily cleanable and covering must be
approved by the regulatory authority. Ceiling coatings, including epoxy paint, are not approved
as ceiling coverings in areas where uncovered food is located, stored, transferred, processed,
passed, cooked, prepared or sold, except in areas such as bars, temporary buffet lines and other
areas if approved by the regulatory authority. Exception to this rule may be made for food
establishments that are used for sole purpose of instructional and where consumption of food on
premises is minimal and of secondary use.
(2) Concrete, concrete blocks or bricks, when used in areas of a food establishment not open
to the general public, shall be used only where nonfood activities occur such as can washing or
outdoor janitorial use or storage areas. Concession stands may use concrete, concrete blocks, or
bricks for indoor wall construction if finished and sealed to provide a smooth, nonabsorbent,
easily cleanable surface and resealed for maintenance in a timely manner or when mandated by
the regulatory authority.
(3) Wall surfaces in dedicated bar service areas of a food establishment and toilet rooms
provided for employee or worker use shall be durable, nonabsorbent and easily cleanable to a
minimum height of four (4) feet. Wall coatings including epoxy paint may only be used above
forty-eight (48) inches.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 233/684
...
(i) Indoor areas, food service segregated where exterior openings are open to the environment.
Where the construction of a food establishment allows for a door, wall or outdoor environment left
exposed, the food service areas of the food establishment shall be fully enclosed by 4 walls and
tightfitting openings including entry and exit.
(j) All shelving and millwork within food service areas of the food establishment shall be rendered
washable and impervious.
Section 228.174 Functionality is amended as follows:
...
(e) Outer openings, protected.
...
(3) ...
...
(D) protected by auto-activated air curtain.
(4) ...
...
(C) other effective means approved by the regulatory authority such as a fan which
protects such opening and is documented to do so by a registered mechanical engineer.
...
(6) If drive-through service is provided by the food establishment, all drive-through windows
shall be solid and self-closing.
...
Section 228.175 Handwashing sinks is amended as follows:
...
(b) Handwashing cleanser, availability. Each handwashing lavatory or group of two (2) adjacent
lavatories shall be provided with a supply of hand cleaning liquid or powder provided through a wallmounted
dispenser. Bar soap is expressly prohibited.
...
Section 228.184 Distressed merchandise, segregation and location is amended as follows:
Products that are held by the permit holder for credit, redemption, or return to the distributor, such as
damaged, expired, spoiled, or recalled products, shall be segregated and held in designated areas that
are separated from food, equipment, utensils, linens, and single-service and single-use articles. Such
products shall be clearly marked that they are not to be used or served.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 234/684
Section 228.186 Premises, buildings, systems, rooms, fixtures, equipment, devices, and materials is amended as
follows:
...
(o) Prohibiting animals.
(1) Except as specified in paragraphs (2), (3), and (4) of this subsection, live animals may not
be allowed on the premises of a food establishment. This prohibition includes, but is not limited
to, brief entry for purposes of picking up take-out food or the entry of the interior of any store
where food is offered for sale or any establishment where a sign is posted prohibiting animals
other than service dogs.
...
(4) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, a food establishment with an outdoor
patio under its exclusive ownership or control may permit dogs to be present in the outdoor
patio area of the food establishment if the food establishment obtains from the regulatory
authority a variance waiving the prohibition against dogs on the premises of the food
establishment and complies with the following conditions and standards:
(A) Except as allowed under section 228.186(o)(2) of this title, no dog may be present
in the interior of the food establishment or on any playground area designated for children
on the premises of the food establishment.
(B) A separate entrance must be provided from the outside of the food establishment to
the outdoor patio so that a dog has direct access to the patio without entering the interior
of the food establishment or any playground area of the food establishment. A dog may
not be allowed within seven (7) feet of any entrance to the interior of the food
establishment, except when necessary to enter or exit the patio.
(C) Signs must be posted at each and every public entrance of the food establishment
and at each and every patio entrance so that the signs are easily visible to the public at all
times. The sign at each public entrance of the food establishment must be located within
36 inches of the door handle and must state in 1-inch lettering in the color red: “DOGFRIENDLY
PATIO - DOG ACCESS ONLY THROUGH OUTDOOR PATIO GATE.
NONSERVICE DOGS PROHIBITED.” The sign at each patio entrance must be affixed
directly to the fence or other enclosure that is adjacent to the patio entrance gate and
located within 12 inches of the gate latch when the gate is closed, and shall state in 2-inch
lettering in the color red: “DOG-FRIENDLY PATIO.” The background color for all signs
required by this subsection shall be white in color and display the approved city logo. The
owner/operator shall obtain all signs required by this subsection from the city. The fee for
each sign required by this subsection shall be $25.00. All signs required by this subsection
shall be replaced at owner/operator expense in a timely manner so as to comply with this
subsection.
(D) Doors equipped with self-closing devices must be provided at all entrances to the
outdoor patio from the interior of the food establishment and must be kept closed when
not in use.
(E) No food preparation, including mixing drinks or serving ice, may be performed in
the outdoor patio area, except that a beverage glass may be filled on the patio from a
pitcher or other container that has been filled or otherwise prepared inside the food
establishment.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 235/684
(F) The outdoor patio must be continuously maintained free of visible dog hair, dog
dander, and other dog-related waste or debris. The outdoor patio must be hosed down or
mopped with a product approved under the rules at the beginning of each shift during
which food or beverages will be served (breakfast, lunch, dinner, or late-hours), not less
frequently than every 12 hours, except that cleaning under this subsection is not required
if no dog has been present on the outdoor patio since the last cleaning.
(G) All table and chair surfaces shall be nonporous, easily cleanable material and
cleaned and sanitized with a product approved under the rules. Spilled food and drink
shall be removed from the floor or ground within five (5) minutes of the spill.
(H) Waste resulting from a dog's bodily functions must be cleaned up immediately with
a product approved under the rules and not harmful to dogs within five (5) minutes of
each occurrence. All dog waste must be disposed of outside of the food establishment and
outside of any patio in an appropriate waste receptacle. Equipment used to clean the
outdoor patio must be kept outside of the food establishment and outside of any patio.
Exterior storage of such equipment must be screened from public view.
(I) While on duty, wait staff or other food handlers at the food establishment may not
pet or have contact with any dog.
(J) A dog must be kept on a leash, or in a secure bag or container specifically designed
to carry and provide continuous restraint of dogs while providing adequate ventilation,
and must remain under continuous physical control of the owner or other responsible adult
while in the outdoor patio area. The dog must be wearing a collar or harness with a
current rabies tag attached to it.
(K) A dog is not allowed on a seat, table, countertop or similar surface in the outdoor
patio area.
(L) A dog is not allowed to be tied to anything affixed or nonaffixed as a means to be
restrained.
(M) A dog may not have contact with any nondisposable dishes or utensils used for
food service or preparation at the food establishment.
(N) A dog may not be given any food (including, but not limited to, dog kibble,
biscuits, and edible treats) while in the outdoor patio area, but may be given water in a
disposable container.
(O) The food establishment shall notify and maintain written procedures regarding the
notification of the City of Frisco's Animal Control Division of any local rabies control
incident as required by chapter 14 (animals) of the Frisco Code of Ordinances, or any
other incident in which two or more dogs are involved in any altercation where they
physically come into contact with each other, regardless of whether any of the animals are
injured.
(P) The flooring of a patio where dogs are permitted shall be constructed only of sealed
concrete or other nonporous, approved material and have no covering that would inhibit
thorough cleaning.
(Q) A food establishment shall not permit dogs to be present in the outdoor patio area
of the food establishment if:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 236/684
(i) The regulatory authority determines that a health hazard or nuisance will or has
resulted; or
(ii) The food establishment is in violation of this title or state law.
(R) Variance required.
(i) Except as allowed under section 228.186(o)(2) of this title, any food
establishment that allows dogs on its premises without a variance is in violation of
this article. The owner or operator of a food establishment with an outdoor patio
under the establishment's exclusive ownership or control may apply to the regulatory
authority for a variance waiving the prohibition against dogs on the premises of the
food establishment. The variance application shall be on a form provided by the
regulatory authority. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
variance application fee.
(ii) An inspection must be performed by the regulatory authority to ensure that the
food establishment complies with the conditions and standards set forth in section
228.186(o)(4) of this title.
(iii) A variance granted under this subsection is nontransferable. The variance
shall expire two (2) years after the date it is granted by the regulatory authority
unless it is sooner revoked by the regulatory authority or terminated by the food
establishment. A variance may be renewed through the application process set forth
in subsection (i) of this section.
(iv) The regulatory authority shall deny or revoke a variance if:
1. The application for variance contains a false statement;
2. The food establishment does not hold a valid permit issued under this
article;
3. The regulatory authority determines that a health hazard or nuisance will
result or has resulted from the variance;
4. The food establishment failed to pay a required fee at the time it was due
under this article;
5. The food establishment is in violation of any term or condition of the
variance as established by the regulatory authority, this title, or state law.
(v) If the regulatory authority denies or revokes a variance, the regulatory
authority shall notify the applicant in writing by personal service or regular United
States mail. The notice must include the reasons for the denial or revocation.
(vi) A food establishment whose variance under this subsection is denied or
revoked may appeal by requesting a hearing within ten (10) days after service of the
notice of the denial or revocation. Such request shall be in writing, shall specify the
reasons why the variance should not be denied or revoked and shall be filed with the
regulatory authority. A hearing shall be conducted by the regulatory authority within
fifteen (15) days from receipt of the appeal.
(S) Nothing in this section shall be construed to waive or limit the regulatory authority's
governmental immunity from suit or from liability.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 237/684
(p) Except where allowed under section 54-24 of the Code of Ordinances, ash trays, pipes,
hookahs or other smoking paraphernalia shall not be made available for use to patrons of a food
establishment.
Section 228.221 Mobile food units is amended as follows:
(a) Mobile food unit provisions.
(1) General. ...
(A) Limited operating area, limited duration of operation.
(i) Except when classified as a mobile food vendor in compliance with the City of
Frisco Zoning Ordinance or as a food truck under this section or other City of Frisco
ordinance, as they exist or may be amended, a mobile food unit shall not operate at
one location for a period of time exceeding fifteen (15) minutes. A mobile food unit
shall not operate at any location in which such operation would be prohibited under
the City of Frisco Zoning Ordinance or any other ordinance, as they exist or may be
amended.
(ii) Except when located in a fixed, permanent area as allowed under separate City
of Frisco ordinance, one or more food trucks may operate on nonresidential private
property, no closer than 10 feet from each other at any point, for so long as the
services available on site and for use by the food truck staff and patrons remain fully
accessible and usable, except that a food truck must report to its central preparation
facility at least once per day for servicing on the days the food truck operates or as
otherwise limited by other City of Frisco ordinance. These services include rodentproof
trash containers serviced by a commercial waste hauler and nontemporary
restroom facilities plumbed in accordance with the plumbing code, as it exists or
may be amended, with a sufficient supply of soap, towels and hot water. The
location of the site of operation of each food truck shall not impede traffic; shall not
be in a fire lane; shall not allow a customer line to queue into a driving pathway or
street; and is subject to relocation by the regulatory authority if the location poses a
hazard to any patron. Each food truck must obtain a health permit type “food truck.”
Each permit in each location is valid for six (6) months. Renewal of a permit per
location is not automatic and must be requested by submitting a new application.
The application may be denied if a history of noncompliance with these rules is
shown. The food establishment application of type “food truck” shall be completed
in full and submitted with the following for each operational period:
a. Letter from property owner or authorized property management company
providing written approval for each food truck to occupy the designated
premises for the duration of allowed timeframe under each permit; and
b. Letter from a permanent business establishment that holds a valid
certificate of occupancy and that is located on the same platted lot as the site of
operation of the food truck; such letter must state that the establishment's
permanent restroom facilities will be allowed for public use by any food truck
operator or patron. In lieu of a letter from a permanent business establishment,
the property owner or authorized property management company may provide
a letter stating that the owner or company will provide temporary restroom
facilities for public use by any food truck operator or patron. The location of
such temporary restroom facilities will be subject to regulatory authority
approval.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 238/684
(B) Pushcarts. Pushcarts providing food other than prepackaged, nonpotentially
hazardous food shall operate only when classified as a mobile food vendor in compliance
with the City of Frisco Zoning Ordinance, as it exists or may be amended.
...
(4) Initial permitting inspection.
(A) The regulatory authority shall require a mobile food unit or food truck to obtain an
inspection from the Frisco Fire Department prior to seeking a permit from the regulatory
authority. Proof of fire department inspection and approval must be provided when
submitting a completed permit application to the regulatory authority. The regulatory
authority shall then require a mobile food unit or food truck to come to a location
designated by the authority for inspection. The mobile food unit or food truck must be
totally operable at the time of inspection, including but not limited to handwash/warewash
facilities, fire suppression-related facilities, generator, fuel facilities, refrigeration and
wastewater disposal. A mobile food unit or food truck may not operate within the limits of
the City of Frisco without a valid permit. The following documents shall be submitted
with the completed permit application:
i. Written consent to a background check;
ii. Copy of central preparation facility document;
iii. Certificate of liability insurance, $100,000.00 minimum;
iv. Copy of valid driver's license;
v. Copy of successful completion of food manager or food handler certification,
where required, from accredited and approved vendor;
vi. Proof of fire department inspection and approval;
vii. List of food items offered if not prepackaged;
viii. A signed affidavit acknowledging that sales made in Frisco shall be
designated on the individual sales tax returns for the owner of the mobile food unit
or food truck; and
ix. Any other documents requested by the regulatory authority in the interest of
public health.
(B) Once compliance with these rules has been met and documented by inspection,
applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of permit. Failure of the required mobile
food unit inspection will require reinspection at a cost of fifty and no/100 dollars ($50.00)
per reinspection until approved.
(C) The owner/operator of a mobile food unit shall display a mobile food unit permit,
affixed directly to the mobile food unit, and shall keep on file in the mobile food unit the
placard for the current valid permit.
(D) The owner/operator of a mobile food unit shall inform the regulatory authority
immediately upon changing or discontinuing use of a central preparation facility and shall
immediately cease operations until a commissary letter verifying use of a new central
preparation facility has been approved by the regulatory authority. Failure to provide a
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 239/684
new commissary letter to the regulatory authority may result in the revocation of the food
establishment permit.
(E) Renewal of permit per location is not automatic and must be requested by
submitting a new application. Application may be denied if a history of noncompliance
with these rules is shown.
...
(c) Servicing area and operations.
(1) Protection.
...
(D) The surface of the servicing area shall be constructed of a smooth nonabsorbent
material, approved by the regulatory authority, such as concrete, and shall be maintained
in good repair, kept clean, and be graded to drain.
(E) Potable water servicing equipment shall be installed in the servicing area, as
required by any and all applicable laws, and stored and handled in a way that protects the
water and equipment from contamination.
...
Section 228.222 Temporary food establishments is amended as follows:
...
(c) Ice. Ice that is consumed or that contacts food shall be made under conditions meeting the
requirements of these rules (pertaining to food). The ice shall be obtained only in chipped, crushed,
or cubed form and in single-use safe plastic or wet-strength paper bags filled and sealed at the point
of manufacture. Ice for consumption shall be held in the bags until it is dispensed, and shall be
dispensed in a way that protects it from contamination. Ice shall not be used as a coolant for
potentially hazardous foods at a temporary food establishment operating for more than four (4) hours.
Regardless of event duration, ice shall not be used as a coolant for uncooked animal products.
(d) Equipment and utensils.
(1) Design and construction. Events less than or equal to four (4) hours long in duration shall
use equipment and utensils designed and constructed to be durable and to retain their
characteristic qualities under normal use conditions. Events greater than four (4) hours long in
duration shall use equipment and utensils in compliance with section 228.106(x) unless
otherwise approved by the regulatory authority.
...
(l) Adequate restroom facilities. The regulatory authority may require written proof, by notarized
letter or other means, that adequate restroom facilities will be provided for the use of employees and
patrons of a temporary food establishment.
(m) Protection from contamination by consumers.
(1) Condiments provided for the customer's use, such as relish, sauces, catsup, mustard, etc.
shall be shelf-stable and shall be dispensed as single serving packets or from squeeze-type
containers.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 240/684
(2) Baked goods shall be portioned and wrapped prior to sale.
(n) Refuse. Covered refuse containers must be provided, made of nonabsorbent material, and
rodent-proof. Food waste shall be securely bagged. Refuse collection areas and servicing must be
approved by the regulatory authority.
Section 228.244 Facility and operating plans is amended as follows.
(a) ...
(1) ...
...
(3) the remodeling of a food establishment, whenever a food establishment is constructed or
extensively remodeled; whenever modifications, additions, or reductions are made to areas
regulated by these rules; or whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food
establishment. Extensive remodeling means that twenty (20) percent or greater of the area of
the food establishment is to be remodeled.
(b) Contents of the plans and specifications. The plans and specifications shall include the
following whether existing or not:
(1) proposed layout;
(2) equipment arrangement and schedule including type and model of proposed equipment;
(3) finish schedule of all floors, walls and ceilings;
(4) manufacturer's equipment specification sheets for all equipment;
(5) grease interceptor proposed location;
(6) water heater calculations and proposed size;
(7) grease waste storage receptacle location;
(8) waste receptacle or dumpster enclosure location;
(9) mechanical, electrical and plumbing plans;
(10) menu of all food items offered; and
(11) Other plan requirements to be submitted where applicable include proof of location of
consumer advisory and submittal of bare hand contact policy.
...
(e) Review of plans. The approved plans and specifications must be followed in construction,
remodeling, modification and/or conversion of a food establishment. All work must be inspected by
the regulatory authority for compliance with these rules. After compliance with these rules is deemed
to be met, a food establishment permit may be approved. Failure to follow the approved plans and
specifications will result in a permit denial, suspension or revocation.
(f) Plan review fee. If a determination is made by the regulatory authority that no building permit
is required, a plan review fee shall be assessed for any plan review required to ensure compliance
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 241/684
with these rules. This fee shall be assessed at a rate of fifty and no/100 dollars ($50.00) per hour, with
a minimum charge of one (1) hour. Additional plan review required by changes, additions, or
revisions to plans approved under a building permit, will be assessed a plan review fee at the rate of
fifty and no/100 dollars ($50.00) per hour, with a minimum charge of one (1) hour.
Section 228.249 Inspection frequency, performance-based and risk-based is amended as follows:
(a) The regulatory authority shall inspect each food establishment at least once every six (6)
months, and may inspect as often as necessary to ensure the health and safety of the public.
Establishments classified as limited food establishments, concessions, kiosks and mobile food
vendors shall be inspected as needed in order to provide inspection documentation to any requesting
regulatory agency. Limited food establishments not requiring such documentation shall be reviewed
once per year to confirm limited food establishment status and proper food protection manager
certification.
...
Section 228.251 Report of findings is amended as follows:
...
(e) Public information. Except as specified in section 228.245 of this title, the regulatory authority
shall treat the inspection report as a public document and shall make it available for disclosure to a
person who submits a written request to the office of the city secretary of the City of Frisco, as
required by law.
...
Section 228.253 Priority item/priority foundation item, time frame for correction is amended as follows:
(a) Timely correction.
(1) ...
(A) Risk violation fee; fee for timely correction. Should corrective action not be
completed, observed and documented on site by an inspector at the time of inspection, one
or more subsequent inspections will be required until compliance is observed and
documented. The fee for each inspection of each noncompliant item or condition shall be
fifty and no/100 dollars ($50.00).
...
(b) Verification and documentation of correction.
...
(3) When the total cumulative demerit value of an establishment exceeds thirty (30) demerits,
defined as “failing,” the establishment shall initiate immediate corrective action on all identified
priority or priority foundation violations and shall initiate corrective action on all other
violations within forty-eight (48) hours. One (1) or more reinspections shall be conducted at
reasonable time intervals to assure correction of each violation known to have increased risk for
foodborne illness, as defined by the Centers for Disease Control. There shall be a separate
reinspection fee of two hundred fifty and no/100 dollars ($250.00) for each reinspection for
correction until all risk factors are under managerial control. The reinspection fee shall be paid
no later than the business day immediately following each reinspection. The reinspection fee is
required to be paid for each failure occurrence. Each reinspection shall be scored.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 242/684
...
Section 228.256 Investigation and control is amended as follows:
(a) ...
...
(2) requiring appropriate medical examinations, including collection of specimens for
laboratory analysis, of a suspected employee and other employees. Such laboratory analysis,
examinations by a physician, transportation, costs and applicable fees shall be the responsibility
of the employee or establishment suspected.
(Ordinance 08-09-87, sec. 4, adopted 9/15/08; Ordinance 16-04-35, sec, 4, adopted 4/19/16)
Sec. 22-21 Application for permit and fees
(a) Any person desiring to operate a food establishment must make a written application for a permit on forms
provided by the regulatory authority. The application must contain the name and address of each applicant, the
location and type of the proposed food establishment and the applicable fee. An incomplete application will not
be accepted. Applications for temporary food establishments must be received by the regulatory authority ten
(10) days prior to the proposed event. Failure to provide all required information, falsification of required
information, may result in denial or revocation of the permit. A fee of fifty and no/100 dollars ($50.00) will be
incurred for failing to timely submit a temporary food establishment permit application, which must be
submitted at least ten (10) days prior to the event.
(b) Any person or business required to or desiring to have review of any variance or plan as required by
regulatory authority or by the state including HACCP plan or bare hand contact policy plan shall pay a fee of
one hundred and no/100 dollars ($100.00).
(c) Requirement. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food establishment in the city unless he
possesses a valid food establishment permit issued by the regulatory authority.
(d) Posting. A valid food establishment permit shall be posted in public view in a conspicuous place at the
food establishment for which it is issued.
(e) Permit nontransferable. A food establishment permit issued under this article is not transferable. Upon
change of ownership of a business, the new business owner will be required to meet current standards set forth
in this article, state law or regulation before a food establishment permit is issued.
(f) Multiple permits.
(1) A separate permit shall be required for every fixed, mobile, or temporary food establishment
with separate and distinct facilities and operations, as determined by the regulatory authority, whether
situated in the same building or at separate locations.
(2) Separate and distinct lounge operations in a food facility require a separate food establishment
permit from food operations. However, multiple lounges on the same floor in the same building and
under the same liquor license will not require a separate food establishment permit.
(g) Any person desiring to renew an existing food establishment permit must make written application for
renewal of permit on forms provided by the regulatory authority. Renewals of permits are required on an annual
basis, except where otherwise stated. An incomplete application for renewal will not be accepted. No food
establishment permit renewal shall be issued until all outstanding fees required under this article, such as fees
levied for reinspections for compliance, permit renewal late fees and plan review fees, have been paid.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 243/684
(h) Prior to the approval of an initial permit, a change of ownership, or upon completion of additions,
remodels, or modifications as specified in section 228.244, the regulatory authority shall inspect the food
establishment to determine compliance with this article. A food establishment that does not comply with this
article will be denied a food establishment permit. Food establishments with an existing food establishment
permit that do not comply with this article may be denied the renewal of a food establishment permit. The
owner/operator of a food establishment must pay a preoperational inspection fee as set by the fee schedule.
Failure to follow the approved plans and specifications will result in denial, suspension or revocation of a food
establishment permit.
(i) The regulatory authority shall classify each food establishment at the time of application, and assess food
establishment permit fees, due at the time of plan submittal or at health permit application if only change of
ownership applies and in no case later than prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy, according to the
table below:
Permit Subtype Fee Amount Permit Duration
Restaurant $500.00 1 year
Convenience $250.00 1 year
Daycare $300.00 1 year
Grocery $650.00 1 year
Mobile food unit – hot $400.00 1 year
Mobile food unit – cold $300.00 1 year
Temporary $50.00 1 event/14 day maximum
Concession $50.00 Seasonal/annual (1)
Limited food establishment $100.00 1 year
Mobile food vendor $400.00 1 year
Food truck $200.00 6 months
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 244/684
Health reinspection fee $250.00 Each - for reinspection
Risk violation fee $50.00 Each violation, each day
(j) Concession stands shall be permitted for a length of time corresponding to the duration of the sporting
season for which they are permitted. Concession stands owned, operated, and maintained by a single public
entity, such as an independent school district, university, community college, or the city, shall be permitted on an
annual basis.
(k) Nonfixed establishments that provide only nonpotentially hazardous foods, sold or served in original
packaging, shall be required to obtain a food establishment permit of the type “mobile food unit - cold” and may
not operate in any location for more than fifteen (15) minutes unless otherwise in compliance with section
228.221(a)(1)(A)(i).
(l) Limited food establishments must obtain a food establishment permit as specified in subsection (c) of this
section.
(m) Food establishments operated by a public entity, such as an independent school district, university,
community college, or the city, may be exempt from paying the food establishment permit fee, if approved by
the regulatory authority.
(n) A food establishment that is not permanently permitted by the regulatory authority, but that is a recognized
charitable or philanthropic organization, or that has attained 501(c)(3) status from the Internal Revenue Service,
may be exempt from paying the temporary food establishment fee for a permit for a temporary event, if
approved by the regulatory authority.
(o) Fee exemptions granted under subsections (m) or (n) do not exempt any food establishment from the
requirement of applying for, obtaining, and displaying a food establishment permit or from complying with the
provisions of this section or any other applicable law.
(p) Except as noted in subsection (i), food establishment permits of the type “concession” shall expire at the
end of the sporting season for which they are permitted, food establishment permits of the type “temporary”
shall expire on the last day of the event for which they are issued, but under no circumstances shall exceed
fourteen (14) calendar days. All other food establishment permits shall expire annually on the date one (1) year
from the date of issuance. The regulatory authority shall assess a permit renewal late fee of fifty percent (50%)
of the food establishment permit fee on any yearly food establishment permit that is renewed within thirty (30)
days following expiration. Food establishment permit renewals received thirty-one (31) days or greater
following the expiration date shall be assessed a permit renewal late fee of one hundred percent (100%) of the
yearly permit fee. Food establishments that fail to renew annual permits within sixty (60) days following
expiration may be subject to involuntary closure. The assessment of this late fee shall not release a food
establishment from any other penalties imposed under this article.
(Ordinance 08-09-87, secs. 5–6, adopted 9/15/08; Ordinance 16-04-35, sec. 5, adopted 4/19/16)
Sec. 22-22 Suspension of permit/appeal
(a) The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice or hearing, suspend any permit to operate a food
establishment if the operation of the food establishment constitutes an imminent hazard to public health.
Suspension is effective upon service of notice. A food establishment inspection report may serve as notice.
When a permit is suspended, food operations shall immediately cease. The regulatory authority shall post and
maintain at the entrance of the food establishment, notice of the conditions therein, or require the owner,
operator, or person in charge of the establishment to post and maintain, at the entrance of the establishment,
notice that the establishment is closed. Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit or the person in
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 245/684
charge shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that
an opportunity for an appeal hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the
regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within ten (10) days from the date the notice is received.
(b) If no written request for an appeal hearing is filed within ten (10) days, the suspension is sustained until
compliance with this article is met. It is the responsibility of the permit holder to request a reinspection once full
compliance with this article has been met. A reinspection must be performed by the regulatory authority to
ensure compliance prior to ending the suspension. Additional reinspections may be required if compliance is not
met. The request for each reinspection must be made to the regulatory authority and a reinspection fee of two
hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be paid before each inspection is performed. The regulatory authority
may end the suspension at any time if reasons for suspension no longer exist and all fees have been paid.
(Ordinance 08-09-87, sec. 7, adopted 9/15/08; Ordinance 16-04-35, sec. 6, adopted 4/19/16)
Sec. 22-23 Revocation of permit/appeal
(a) The regulatory authority may, after providing an opportunity for an appeal hearing, revoke a permit for
serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of these rules and/or for interference with the regulatory
authority in the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify the holder of
the permit or the person in charge, in writing, of the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation and that
the permit shall be revoked at the end of the ten (10) days following service of such notice unless a written
request for an appeal hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within such ten
(10) day period referred to in the notice.
(b) If no request for an appeal hearing is filed within the ten (10) day period referred to in the notice, the
revocation of the permit becomes final.
(Ordinance 08-09-87, sec. 8, adopted 9/15/08; Ordinance 16-04-35, sec. 7, adopted 4/19/16)
Sec. 22-24 Administrative process
(a) A notice, as required by this article, is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or
the person in charge via hand-delivery, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested,
or when it is sent via Federal Express or any courier service that provides a return receipt showing the date of
actual delivery to the last known address of the holder of the permit. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the
records of the regulatory authority.
(b) The hearings provided for in these rules shall be conducted by the regulatory authority at a time and place
designated by it. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the regulatory authority shall make final
findings, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of
the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit by the regulatory authority.
(Ordinance 08-09-87, sec. 9, adopted 9/15/08; Ordinance 16-04-35, sec. 8, adopted 4/19/16)
Sec. 22-25 Appeal
All appeals from final suspension or revocation of a food establishment permit shall be made in writing to the
city manager or his designee. The appeal shall be filed in writing within ten (10) days of the occurrence of the
suspension or revocation. The city manager or his designee shall attempt to hear the appeal within thirty (30)
days after notice of the appeal. The city manager shall have the power to reverse a decision of the regulatory
authority where he finds that such a reversal will not affect the health and/or welfare of the public. All decisions
of the city manager or his designee shall be subject to review by the city council at one of its regularly scheduled
meetings. The decision of the city manager or his designee will be final unless reversed by the city council. The
city council's failure to take action on any such appeal shall constitute approval of the decision by the city
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 246/684
manager or his designee. (Ordinance 08-09-87, sec. 10, adopted 9/15/08; Ordinance 16-04-35, sec. 9, adopted
4/19/16)
Sec. 22-26 Penalty provision
Any person, firm, corporation or business entity violating this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and on conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding two thousand and no/100 dollars
($2,000.00). Each continuing day's violation under this article shall constitute a separate offense. The penal
provisions imposed under this article shall not preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin the violation. The city
retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law. (Ordinance 08-09-87,
sec. 11, adopted 9/15/08; Ordinance 16-04-35, sec. 10, adopted 4/19/16)
Secs. 22-27–22-57 Reserved
ARTICLE III. PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS*
DIVISION 1. IN GENERAL
Sec. 22-58 Purpose
This article regulates the time, place and manner for the solicitation of funds and the distribution of handbills.
The provisions of this article, however, shall not apply to:
(1) The regular delivery of newspapers, magazines, or other items which have been subscribed to
by the persons receiving them or by occupants of the premises to which they are delivered;
(2) The interruption of service notices by utility companies;
(3) The distribution of mail by the United States government;
(4) The service of any lien foreclosure; or
(5) Governmental notices of any character distributed by the City of Frisco or any other
governmental entity.
(Ordinance 08-07-67, sec. 3, adopted 7/15/08)
Sec. 22-59 Definitions
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them by this
section:
Business day means any calendar day except Saturday, Sunday or any state or national holiday.
Charitable purpose means philanthropic, religious or other nonprofit objectives, including the benefit of poor,
needy, sick, refugee or handicapped persons; the benefit of any church or religious society, sect, group or order;
the benefit of a patriotic or veterans' association or organization; the benefit of any fraternal, social or civil
organization, or the benefit of any educational institution. “Charitable purpose” shall not be construed to include
the direct benefit of the individual making the solicitation. “Charitable purpose” shall not be construed to include
the benefit of any political group or political organization which is subject to financial disclosure under state or
federal law.
Consumer means an individual who seeks or acquires real or personal property, services, money, or credit for
personal, family or household purposes.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 247/684
Consumer transaction means a sales transaction in which one or more of the parties is a consumer.
Deposit or depositing a handbill means to place, distribute, handout, or circulate any type of handbill.
Handbill, commercial means and includes any printed or written matter, any sample or devise, dodger, circular,
leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original copies of any matter or
literature, which:
(a) Advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity, service, or thing;
(b) Directs attention to any business, mercantile, commercial establishment, or other activity for
the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof;
(c) Directs attention or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, group,
fundraiser, or other event whether the purpose of directing attention and advertising is for private
gain or for raising funds for a charitable purpose; or
(d) Contains information that is of a noncommercial nature, but remains predominantly and
essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertisement purposes, for private
gain, or for raising funds for a charitable purpose.
Handbill, noncommercial means and includes any printed or written matter, any sample or devise, dodger,
circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original copies of any
matter or literature, pertaining to any speech not included in the definition of commercial handbill.
Noncommercial handbills include, but are not limited to, handbills containing exclusively political and religious
speech.
Handbill distributor means and includes any person engaging or engaged in the business for hire or gain of
distributing commercial handbills, other than newspapers distributed to subscribers thereof, and any person
receiving compensation directly or indirectly for the distribution of such commercial handbills.
Handbill sponsor means and includes the person, firm, or corporation who is utilizing commercial handbills as a
medium of advertising or spreading a message.
Home solicitation transaction means:
(a) A consumer transaction for the purchase of goods, services, or realty, payable in installments or
in cash, in which the merchant engages in a personal solicitation of the sale to the consumer at a
residence in person and the consumer's agreement of offer to purchase is given at the residence to the
merchant; or
(b) Any request for funds made by a person soliciting to the occupant of a residence at a place of
residence and the solicitor is unknown to the occupant or owner of the residence at which the request
for funds is made. A home solicitation transaction shall not include a sale made pursuant to a
preexisting revolving charge account or retail charge agreement, or a sale made pursuant to prior
negotiations between the parties at a business establishment at a fixed location where goods or
services are offered or exhibited for sale; or a sale where the consumer initiated a request for an
appointment for the merchant to send a representative to his or her residence; or a sale of realty in
which transaction the purchaser is represented by a licensed attorney or in which the transaction is
being negotiated by a licensed real estate broker.
Individual or person means an individual, a person, a group of two or more individuals, a proprietorship, a
partnership, a corporation, a limited liability company, an association, or other legal entity.
Job placement activities means any request, offer, enticement, or action which announces the availability for or
of employment or seeks to secure employment. As defined herein, “job placement activities” shall be deemed
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 248/684
complete when made whether or not an actual employment relationship is created.
Merchant means a party to a consumer transaction other than a consumer.
Residence means any living unit, occupied for residential purposes by one or more persons, contained within any
type of building or structure.
Solicit funds or solicitation of funds or solicitation shall mean any home solicitation transaction; any request for
the donation of money, property, or anything of value, or the pledge of a future donation of money, property, or
anything of value; or the selling, or offering for sale, or the purchasing, or offering to purchase, of any property,
real or personal, tangible or intangible, whether of value or not, including, but not limited to, goods, books,
pamphlets, tickets, publications or subscriptions to publications, or taking or attempting to take orders for the
future deliver of goods, merchandise, wares, services, or personal property. A solicitation of funds is complete
when the solicitation is communicated to any individual then located within the corporate limit of the city.
Expressly excluded from the meaning of “solicit funds” or “solicitation of funds” or “solicitation” is any offers
of membership in any organization.
All terminology used in this article and not specifically defined above, shall retain its meaning in conformance
with the latest volume of Webster's Collegiate Dictionary.
(Ordinance 08-07-67, sec. 4, adopted 7/15/08)
Secs. 22-60–22-70 Reserved
DIVISION 2. PERMITS
Sec. 22-71 Permits required for solicitation and commercial handbill distribution
(a) Except as otherwise provided, a permit is required for an individual to personally, or through an agent or
employee:
(1) Solicit funds; or
(2) Distribute any commercial handbill in or upon another's property.
(b) A permit is not required for:
(1) The distribution of noncommercial handbills;
(2) The solicitation of funds for charitable purposes by any organization or association from its
members;
(3) The solicitation of funds for charitable purposes by a person when such solicitation occurs on
premises owned or controlled by the person soliciting funds or with the permission of the person who
owns or controls the premises, when previously invited to the premises for the solicitation;
(4) The solicitation or distribution of commercial or noncommercial handbills on a public sidewalk
designed for pedestrian use; or
(5) The issuance of any announcement or advertisement that charitable solicitation will occur or
which announces or advertises an event at which unannounced charitable solicitation will occur.
(Ordinance 08-07-67, sec. 5, adopted 7/15/08)
Sec. 22-72 Application for permit
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 249/684
(a) Permit applications must be submitted in writing to the city police department, and shall include the
following:
(1) The name of the person applying, their residence and business addresses and their residence
and business telephone numbers;
(2) If different from the person applying, the name of the handbill sponsor if the permit is for the
purpose of distributing commercial handbills and the name of the merchant if the permit is for the
purpose of solicitation;
(3) In regards to any handbill sponsor and/or merchant, the following:
a. If a natural person, the business and residence addresses and telephone numbers.
b. If a partnership:
1. The names of all partners;
2. The name, principal business address;
3. Telephone number of the partnership and the agent for service of process; and
4. The state of formation.
c. If a corporation or limited liability company, the person applying must state:
1. The mailing address and telephone number of the principal place of business and the
registered agent;
2. The mailing address, business location, telephone number and name of the individual
in charge of the local office of such entity, if any;
3. The names of all officers and directors or trustees of such corporation, or of all
members (if member managed), managers and officers of such limited liability company;
and
4. The state of incorporation or formation.
d. If an association or any other entity, the person applying must state:
1. The mailing address and telephone number of the principal place of business and the
agent for process of service;
2. The names of all members/owners of the association unless they exceed ten in
number, in which case the application shall so state and the person registering may
alternatively list the names and business addresses and telephone numbers of the officers
and directors or trustees of the association; and
3. If the association is part of a multi-state organization or association, the mailing
address and business location of its central office shall be given, in addition to the mailing
address and business location of its local office.
e. The city police department may request satisfactory documentation of an individual's
authority to represent the partnership, corporation, association or business entity.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 250/684
(4) In addition to all of the other permit application requirements in this section, if the application
is for a child of 13 years of age or younger, the following information must also be attached to the
application:
a. A copy of the parental consent form required by V.T.C.A., Labor Code sec. 51.0145, as it
exists or may be amended;
b. Documentation showing that the state employment commission has granted a hardship
exemption if required under V.T.C.A., Labor Code ch. 51; and
c. The name, address and telephone number of all persons who will be responsible for
supervising the child pursuant to V.T.C.A., Labor Code sec. 51.0145, as it exists or may be
amended.
(5) The names, mailing address, and telephone number of all individuals who will be in direct
charge or control of the solicitation of funds or distribution of commercial handbills and responsible
for ensuring compliance with this article.
(6) The time period within which the solicitation of funds or distribution of commercial handbills
is to be made, giving the date of the beginning of solicitation or distribution, and its concluding date.
(7) A description of the methods and means by which the solicitation of funds or distribution of
commercial handbills is to be accomplished.
(8) The names of other communities in which the applicant has solicited funds or distributed
commercial handbills in the past six months.
(9) The nature of merchandise to be sold or offered for sale or the nature of the services to be
furnished.
(10) Whether such applicant, upon any such order so obtained, will demand, accept, or receive
payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery.
(11) A statement to the effect that if a permit is granted, such permit will not be used or represented
to be an endorsement or approval by the city or any of its officers or employees.
(12) Any other information which the city deems necessary for the administration of this article.
(b) Each applicant shall appear in person and provide proof of identification through submission of a valid
driver's license or other valid, official photo identification deemed acceptable by the city police department.
(c) The application must be accompanied by a copy of a valid states sales tax certificate, if applicable.
(d) Information provided by the applicant in accordance with the provisions of this article shall be subject to
verification by the city police department.
(e) All applications, whether or not a permit is issued, shall be considered public record and shall be available
for inspection by members of the public during regular business hours and copies may be obtained at cost in
accordance with the Texas Public Information Act. Redactions of personal identification numbers may be
required under state law.
(Ordinance 08-07-67, sec. 6, adopted 7/15/08)
Sec. 22-73 Permit fee and exemptions
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 251/684
(a) Except as otherwise provided, every application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee
of fifty dollars ($50.00) to compensate the city for the cost of administering this article, and such fee will not be
refunded if a permit is not issued. No permit provided for by this article shall be issued until such fee has been
paid by the applicant, unless an exemption applies.
(b) The following applicants are not required to pay a permit fee:
(1) Commercial travelers who sell or exhibit for sale goods, wares or merchandise to persons
selling and dealing in the same within the city.
(2) Persons selling agricultural products, meats, poultry, or other articles of food grown or
produced by such persons.
(3) Individuals operating under licenses granted by a state agency.
(4) A duly authorized, nonprofit, “charitable organization”, as defined in V.T.C.A., Civil Practice
and Remedies, sec. 84.003(1), as it exists or may be amended, and registered as such with the state's
secretary of state or the Internal Revenue Service, seeking to use such permit for charitable purposes
only. Proof of such registration status must be provided to the city upon application.
(Ordinance 08-07-67, sec. 7, adopted 7/15/08; Ordinance 14-05-25, sec. 2, adopted 5/6/14)
Sec. 22-74 Permit issuance, denial, duration, and form
(a) When an application is filed with the city police department, the city police department shall review the
application.
(b) The city police department shall approve the application and issue the permit unless:
(1) The application fails to comply with a provision of this article;
(2) A previous permit issued under this article was revoked within the past 12 months;
(3) The city police department determines that the applicant has been convicted of a felony;
(4) The city police department determines that the applicant has furnished false information or
identification;
(5) The applicant has a warrant out for their arrest;
(6) A court of law has issued an emergency protective order against the applicant; or
(7) The applicant is a registered sex offender.
(c) The city police department shall notify the applicant of their decision to approve or deny a permit
application within ten business days of the receipt of the application. Notification of the decision shall be given
in writing and either sent via U.S. mail to the applicant's address as listed on the permit application or delivered
to the applicant in person.
(d) If the application was turned in as incomplete, the city police department shall not grant or deny the
application but shall return the application with an explanation of what additional information/documentation is
needed to process the application. The incomplete application and explanation shall be sent within ten business
days of the receipt of the application to the applicant's address as listed on the permit application or it shall be
delivered to the applicant in person.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 252/684
(e) A permit requested under this section shall be issued for the length of time requested, not to exceed six
months.
(f) The city shall prescribe the form of the permit. The permit may contain a photo of the applicant. The
following shall be printed prominently on each permit:
“The issuance of this permit is not an endorsement by the City of Frisco or any of its officers or employees.”
Each permit shall bear a permit number that corresponds with the city's files containing the application filed by
the applicant.
(Ordinance 08-07-67, sec. 8, adopted 7/15/08; Ordinance 14-05-25, sec. 3, adopted 5/6/14)
Sec. 22-75 Permit suspension or revocation
(a) If a permit holder fails to comply with this article, the Frisco Police Department will take the following
action:
(1) For a first offense under this article, any permit issued hereunder to the offender shall be
suspended for a period not to exceed 30 days. The chief of police, or his/her designee, shall
determine the number of days of the suspension.
(2) For a second offense under this article within a 12-month period, any permit issued hereunder
to the offender shall be revoked, and such offender shall not be eligible to apply for another permit
for a period of 12 months from the date of revocation.
(b) If a permit holder is arrested and charged with a felony, the permit shall be suspended until final
disposition of the criminal charges.
(1) Upon conviction or acceptance of deferred adjudication by the court, the permit shall be
revoked.
(2) If the permit holder is found innocent or the charges are dismissed, the suspension of the permit
shall be lifted.
(c) Upon suspension or revocation the permit holder shall tender the permit to the city police department until
completion of the suspension or successful appeal of the suspension or revocation.
(Ordinance 08-07-67, sec. 9, adopted 7/15/08)
Sec. 22-76 Appeal from denial, suspension or revocation
Should an applicant be denied a permit or have a permit suspended or revoked, he/she may appeal that action to
the city manager by submitting a letter within ten business days of the denial, suspension or revocation. The city
manager, or his/her designee, shall review the appeal at a staff level and make a determination within ten
business days of receiving the appeal request and shall have the authority to uphold or reject the action
complained of and order that the permit be granted or reinstated. However, should the city manager uphold the
denial, suspension or revocation, he/she shall schedule a hearing before the city council at a regular or special
meeting within 30 days of the denial, unless the applicant withdraws the appeal in writing. Such hearing shall be
an administrative hearing, and adherence to formal rules of evidence shall not be required. The decision of the
city council may be appealed as allowed by law to any court with jurisdiction. (Ordinance 08-07-67, sec. 10,
adopted 7/15/08)
Secs. 22-77–22-90 Reserved
DIVISION 3. SOLICITATION
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 253/684
Sec. 22-91 Solicitor's and handbill distributor's identification
Each solicitor and handbill distributor shall carry with him/her and produce upon the request of any citizen, city
employee, or city official, the following information and identification:
(1) The permit issued by the City of Frisco pursuant to this article;
(2) A copy of the valid state sales tax certificate, if applicable; and
(3) A valid driver's license or other valid, official photo identification.
(Ordinance 08-07-67, sec. 11, adopted 7/15/08)
Sec. 22-92 Solicitation and distribution
(a) Except as otherwise prohibited, the distribution of any handbill, including noncommercial and commercial
handbills may only be distributed by:
(1) Handing the noncommercial handbill or commercial handbill directly to the owner, occupant,
or any other person then present in or upon such premises; or
(2) Depositing the noncommercial handbill or commercial handbill in a secure manner to prevent
such handbill from being blown or drifting about the premises, except that mailboxes may not be
used when prohibited by federal postal laws or regulations.
(b) An individual, directly or through an agent or employee, may not:
(1) Throw, cast or scatter any commercial handbill or noncommercial handbill, or leave any
commercial handbill or noncommercial handbill unattended that is not securely affixed to the place of
deposit.
(2) Solicit funds or distribute commercial or noncommercial handbills at a place of residence
during the following hours unless invited to do so by the occupant or owner of the residence:
Monday–Friday: Before 9:00 a.m. and after the earlier of dusk or
9:00 p.m.
Saturday and Sunday: Before 10:00 a.m. and after the earlier of dusk or
9:00 p.m.
For purposes of this section, dusk means thirty (30) minutes after sunset.
(3) Solicit funds or distribute commercial handbills after the revocation or expiration of any permit
issued or during the suspension or any permit issued, as hereinafter provided.
(4) Solicit funds or distribute commercial handbills for a purpose other than what was represented
in the application upon which the permit was issued.
(5) Represent that the issuance of a permit by the city constitutes an endorsement or approval of
the solicitation or distribution by the city or its officers or employees.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 254/684
(6) Distribute any commercial handbill or noncommercial handbill in or up on any premises which
are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant.
(7) Distribute any commercial handbill or noncommercial handbill upon any premises if requested
not to do so by the owner, occupant, or any other person then present in or upon such premises, or if
there is placed on such premises in a conspicuous place upon or near the main entrance to the
residence or premises, a card as provided in section 22-94 of this Code.
(8) Distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in any place, under any circumstances,
which does not have printed on the cover, front or back thereof, the name, address and telephone
number of the handbill sponsor who caused the same to be distributed; provided, however, that in the
case of a fictitious person or club, in addition to such fictitious name, the true names and addresses of
the owners, managers, or agents for the fictitious person or club sponsoring such commercial handbill
shall also appear thereon.
(9) Employ, hire, request, direct or cause, directly or indirectly, another person who does not have
a permit to distribute commercial handbills or solicit funds within the city.
(10) Distribute commercial handbills or solicit funds under the direction of another and not have a
supervisor who can arrive at the location where the person is distributing the handbills or soliciting
within ten minutes of being requested to appear, by the police or otherwise.
(11) Direct someone else to distribute commercial handbills or solicit funds and not provide a
supervisor who can arrive at the location where the person is distributing the handbills or soliciting
within ten minutes of being requested to appear, by the police or otherwise.
(12) Allow a person to use a permit issued in another person's name or to use a permit issued in
another person's name.
(Ordinance 08-07-67, sec. 12, adopted 7/15/08; Ordinance 14-05-25, sec. 4, adopted 5/6/14)
Sec. 22-93 Use of public right-of-way
(a) Solicitation of persons in vehicles. Except as permitted by state law, it shall be unlawful for any person to
peddle, sell, offer, or exhibit for sale any merchandise or service, whether for profit, for a charitable purpose or
otherwise to any person in a motor vehicle, truck, motorcycle or other vehicle (collectively hereinafter
“Vehicle”) while the Vehicle is located within a public right-of-way.
(b) Solicitation in public right-of-way. Except as permitted by state law, it shall be unlawful for any person to
solicit funds, donations, contributions, employment, business or a ride, whether for profit, for a charitable
purpose or otherwise, upon any public street, street right-of-way, median, traffic island, parkway, or other public
right-of-way, excluding sidewalks designed for pedestrian use, within the City of Frisco.
(c) Acknowledgement of state law. Frisco acknowledges that the state legislature has adopted V.T.C.A.,
Transportation Code sec. 552.0071, which became effective on May 3, 2005.
(d) Selling or attempting to sell on sidewalk/right-of-way. It shall be unlawful for any person to peddle, sell,
offer, or exhibit for sale any merchandise or service, whether for profit, for a charitable purpose or otherwise on
a public sidewalk or road without previous permission granted by the city manager, or his designee.
(Ordinance 08-07-67, sec. 13, adopted 7/15/08)
Sec. 22-94 Exhibiting card prohibiting solicitation and handbills of any type
(a) A person desiring that no merchant or other person engage in solicitation, a home solicitation transaction,
or distribution of commercial handbills, noncommercial handbills at his/her premises shall exhibit, in a
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 255/684
conspicuous place upon or near the main entrance to the premises (including but not limited to entrances to: an
apartment unit, building or complex; a single- or multi-family residential structure; private sidewalks; a
development with private streets; or areas maintained by a property owner's association) a weatherproof card,
not less than three inches by four inches in size bearing the words, “no advertisements”, “no solicitation”, or “no
handbills”, to indicate that the occupants of such premises do not desire to be molested or to have their right of
privacy disturbed, or to have a handbill of any type left upon the premises. The letters on such cards shall be not
less than two-thirds (2/3) of an inch in height.
(b) Every person upon going onto any premises shall first examine the premises to determine if any notice
prohibiting soliciting or distribution of commercial handbill or noncommercial handbill distribution is exhibited
upon or near the main entrance to the premises. If notice prohibiting solicitation or commercial handbill or
noncommercial handbill distribution is exhibited, the person shall immediately depart from the premises without
distributing, placing, or depositing any type of handbill or disturbing the occupant, unless the visit is the result of
a request made by the occupant.
(c) No person shall go upon any premises and ring the doorbell, or rap or knock upon the door or create any
sound in a manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of the premises, for the purpose of securing
an audience with the occupant and engaging in or attempting to engage in a solicitation or distribution
transaction, if a card, as described in this section, is exhibited in compliance with this section, unless the visit is
the result of a request made by the occupant.
(d) No person, other than the owner or occupant of the premises, shall remove, deface, or render illegible, a
card placed by the occupant pursuant to this section.
(e) Any merchant or person who has gained entrance to a premises, or audience with the occupant, whether
invited or not, shall immediately depart from the premises without disturbing the occupant further when
requested to leave by the occupant.
(Ordinance 08-07-67, sec. 14, adopted 7/15/08)
Sec. 22-95 Prohibition of job placement activities in unauthorized locations
(a) No person shall engage in or attempt to engage in job placement activities in an unauthorized location.
This section shall not apply to job placement activities concerning employment or business for the owner or
lawful tenants of the subject premises.
(b) For purposes of this section, an unauthorized location is any premises or place where the occupant or
owner has a notice posted, in both English and Spanish in a conspicuous place at each street entrance and exit to
such location not less than 18 by 24 inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height and not to
exceed, in total area, six square feet, containing a message in substantially the following form:
“It is unlawful to engage in job placement activities on these premises.”
(c) This section shall override other ordinances, excluding safety, structural integrity and traffic visibility
requirements, regulating the placement of signage, temporary or permanent, for the purpose of solicitation or job
placement in and throughout the City of Frisco.
(Ordinance 08-07-67, sec. 15, adopted 7/15/08)
Secs. 22-96–22-110 Reserved
DIVISION 4. TICKET SCALPING
Sec. 22-111 Ticket scalping prohibited
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 256/684
(a) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the following
meanings:
City property means any property that is owned or used by the City of Frisco, including but not limited to, parks,
grounds or buildings.
City right-of-way means any public alley, sidewalk, street, street right-of-way, median, traffic island, parkway, or
other public right-of-way within the City of Frisco.
Event means an event or happening of public entertainment or amusement.
Event sponsor means an owner, lessee, operator, promoter or manager of an event or the site of an event.
Resell means to sell a ticket for an event after it has been acquired from the event sponsor or from an individual,
entity or association authorized to sell the ticket by the event sponsor.
(b) Prohibited activities.
(1) Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to resell or offer to resell a
ticket to an event in any city right-of-way.
(2) Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to resell or offer to resell a
ticket to an event for a price in excess of the price authorized to be offered to the general public by
the event sponsor on:
a. Any city property;
b. On any property owned, leased or managed by the event sponsor; or
c. The area within the boundaries of State Highway 121, Preston Road (State Highway 289),
Warren Parkway and Legacy Drive; or
d. The area within the boundaries of Lebanon Road, Preston Road (State Highway 289),
Eldorado Parkway and Legacy Drive.
(3) A person may resell or offer to resell a ticket to an event if that person does so on private
property and so long as that private property is not owned or leased by the event sponsor.
(Ordinance 08-07-67, sec. 16, adopted 7/15/08)
Secs. 22-112–22-235 Reserved
ARTICLE IV. DISPLAY AND SALE OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIALS
Sec. 22-236 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Display means to locate an item in such a manner that, without obtaining assistance from an employee of the
business establishment:
(1) It is available to the general public for handling and inspection; or
(2) The cover or outside packaging on the item is visible to members of the general public.
Minor means a person younger than 18 years of age.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 257/684
Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability company or any other
business entity.
Possession means actual care, custody, control or management.
Sexually explicit materials means books, pamphlets, newspapers, magazines, films or videocassettes, the cover
of which depict, in a manner calculated to arouse sexual lust or passion for commercial gain or to exploit sexual
lust or perversion for commercial gain, any of the following:
(1) Human sexual intercourse, masturbation or sodomy;
(2) Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts;
(3) Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, buttocks or that portion of the
female breast below the top of the areola; or
(4) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, whether covered or uncovered.
(Ordinance 97-10-19, sec. 2, adopted 10/21/97)
Sec. 22-237 Display of sexually explicit materials to minors
A person commits an offense if, in his establishment open to persons under the age of 18 years, he displays
sexually explicit materials. (Ordinance 97-10-19, sec. 3, adopted 10/21/97)
Sec. 22-238 Violation; penalty
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction therefor, shall be fined any sum not exceeding $500.00, and each and every
day that such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense; provided, however, that such penal
provision shall not preclude a suit to enjoin such violation. (Ordinance 97-10-19, sec. 4, adopted 10/21/97)
Secs. 22-239–22-269 Reserved
ARTICLE V. TEMPORARY OUTDOOR PARKING LOT/TENT SALES
Sec. 22-270 Parking lot sales/sidewalk sales; definition and regulations
Parking lot sale/sidewalk sale. For the purposes of this article, a parking lot sale/sidewalk sale is defined as the
sale of products, merchandise or services related to the trade of a business located in a shopping center or other
properly zoned district within the City of Frisco that is conducted on the parking lot or the sidewalk.
(1) Businesses and/or property owners are eligible to receive permits to hold up to four sidewalk
sales and two parking lot sales each calendar year, upon compliance with the terms of this article. The
calendar year commences January 1. Each parking lot sale/sidewalk sale shall be for no more than
seven consecutive days.
(2) Local schools, local religious organizations and local civic groups (i.e., Girl Scouts, Boy
Scouts, or local athletic teams, drama clubs, debate teams, etc.) who have permission by a business or
property owner to sell fundraising or sponsor-related items or services (i.e., car washes, annual Girl
Scout cookie sales, bake sales, etc.) in front of the business or property owners' premises are exempt
from the permit fee required to be paid with the permit application. These sales shall not count
toward the total parking lot sales/sidewalk sales allowed for the business and/or property owner in a
calendar year.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 258/684
(3) Pet stores, veterinarians or other domestic animal-related businesses located in the City of
Frisco who sell, provide adoption for, or give away domestic pets such as dogs, cats, rodents, fowl,
amphibians, and/or rabbits for outside sale or outside display at an animal-related business
establishment must meet the requirements of the current City of Frisco Zoning Ordinance and
Animal Control Ordinance as the ordinances currently exist or may be amended. Animal-related sales
and give-aways shall not count toward the total parking lot sales/sidewalk sales for an animal-related
business establishment.
(4) A parking lot sale/sidewalk sale may be held in retail, commercial-1, commercial-2, original
town commercial, nonresidential planned development districts or other areas approved by the
building official or his/her designee.
(5) A parking lot sale/sidewalk sale permit must be obtained from the development services
division prior to commencement of the sale. Other applicable permits in addition to the parking lot
sale/sidewalk sale permit may be required from other departments or divisions.
(6) The parking lot sale/sidewalk sale permit fee is $100.00 for each sale.
(7) A temporary tent may be installed for the parking lot sale/sidewalk sale with the issuance of a
temporary tent permit. See section 22-271 for temporary tent permit requirements.
(8) Written permission or a copy of the tenant's lease agreement that provides permission, for a
parking lot sale/sidewalk sale is required from the property owner and must accompany the parking
lot sale/sidewalk sale permit application seeking a permit for the temporary use on the property.
(9) Temporary lighting and/or security lighting may be used at a parking lot sale/sidewalk sale
location. Electrical permits are required for temporary power and any other electrical installations at
the premises. Electrical contractors must be a registered contractor with the city's development
services division. Electrical work installed requires inspection by a city building inspector.
Temporary lighting must meet the requirements of the City's Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, as it
currently exists or may be amended. Any lights located on the premises may not flash, travel, blink,
fade, move, or scroll.
(10) No required parking spaces, as set forth in applicable Frisco Ordinances, may be used for the
display of items at a parking lot sale.
(11) Sales items, display tables and stands, tents, jump houses and/or any other related items for
the parking lot/sidewalk sale shall not block any fire lanes, fire hydrants or public access areas.
(12) Sale items cannot reach a vertical height that exceeds four feet.
(13) Items for display located under a store canopy, which was installed in compliance with
applicable Frisco ordinances, on a permanent basis are exempt from this article.
(14) Sidewalks and pedestrian access ramps shall have six-foot clearance width at all times and
meet all Americans with Disabilities Act requirements as they currently exist or may be amended.
(15) An applicant who elects to have a parking lot sale/sidewalk sale must be the property owner or
a tenant of the property owner whose premises is being used.
(16) Signage displayed at a parking lot sale/sidewalk sale requires the issuance of sign permits.
Sign permit(s) must be obtained from the building inspection division prior to the display of any
signage at the parking lot sale/sidewalk sale. All signage must meet the requirements of the current
Frisco Sign Ordinance as it currently exists or may be amended.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 259/684
(17) If an applicant elects to serve or provide food and/or drinks at the parking lot/sidewalk sale, a
health permit must be obtained from the health and food safety division and meet all requirements of
the current Frisco Health Ordinance as it currently exists or may be amended.
(Ordinance 05-09-80, sec. 2, adopted 9/20/05)
Sec. 22-271 Temporary tent permit and temporary tent banner; definitions and regulations
Temporary tent. A tent or canopy cover is defined as a movable shelter consisting of cloth, plastic, canvas or
other light material stretched over supporting framework.
Temporary tent banner. A sign having characters, letters, or illustrations applied to plastic, cloth, canvas, or
other light material for the purpose of attracting patrons to a parking lot sale/sidewalk sale, temporary outdoor
seasonal sale or special event.
(1) Business and/or property owners are eligible to receive up to five temporary tent permits each
calendar year, upon compliance with the terms of this article. A calendar year commences January 1.
(2) Temporary tents may be erected in retail, commercial-1, commercial-2, original town
commercial, nonresidential planned development districts or other areas approved by the building
official or his/her designee.
(3) Temporary tent permits are required from the building inspection division prior to the
installation of a temporary tent and are valid for two consecutive weeks only.
(4) The temporary tent permit fee is $75.00 for each temporary tent installation.
(5) An applicant who has a valid temporary tent permit may elect to install one temporary tent
banner. The temporary tent banner may not exceed 48 square feet in area and must be securely
attached to the front, side or rear of the temporary tent. A temporary tent banner may not be attached
to vertical supports or poles of a temporary tent and must otherwise comply with Frisco's Sign
Ordinance, as it exists or may be amended. The temporary tent and temporary tent banner must be
removed no later than the date the temporary tent permit expires.
(6) Temporary tents must comply with the current fire code adopted by Frisco, as it currently exists
or may be amended, and a flame retardancy certificate must accompany each temporary tent permit
application.
(7) A 30-foot clearance must be maintained around the perimeter of the temporary tent at all times.
(8) Written permission or a copy of the tenant's lease agreement that provides permission for a
temporary tent and temporary tent banner is required from the property owner and must accompany
the temporary tent permit application seeking a permit for the temporary use on the property.
(9) No required parking spaces, as set forth in applicable Frisco Ordinances, may be used as a
location of the temporary tent installation.
(Ordinance 05-09-80, sec. 3, adopted 9/20/05)
Sec. 22-272 Temporary outdoor seasonal sale; definitions and regulations
Temporary outdoor seasonal sale. A temporary outdoor seasonal sale is for the sale of, including but not limited
to, firewood, nuts, pumpkins and gourds, wreaths, dried corn stalks, square hay bales, Christmas trees, Christmas
tree ornaments and crafts, illuminated and nonilluminated Christmas, Halloween, patriotic, or Easter yard art and
crafts, Valentine flowers, and Valentine-related gifts, crafts, yard art and similar seasonal products (“seasonal
products”) by city, civic, school, philanthropic, religious, or other non-profit organizations. Seasonal products
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 260/684
may lawfully be sold during periods approved by the building official or his/her designee at the time of permit
application. Philanthropic individuals or businesses and non-profit organizations may be required to provide a
copy of their valid federal and State of Texas Tax Identification Numbers with the application submittal for the
temporary outdoor seasonal sale permit at the discretion of the building official or his/her designee.
Local businesses within the city may grant permission to a person or entity eligible to receive a permit to hold a
temporary outdoor seasonal sale on their parking lots.
Temporary outdoor seasonal sales shall meet the all the permit requirements listed below:
(1) Temporary outdoor seasonal sales are allowed in retail, commercial-1, commercial-2, original
town commercial, nonresidential planned development districts or other areas approved by the
building official or his/her designee.
(2) Off-street parking must be provided on-site and be constructed of concrete.
(3) No required parking spaces, as set forth in applicable Frisco Ordinances may be used.
(4) Livestock (i.e., equine, cattle, sheep, goats, lambs, pigs, etc.), fowl, rodents, reptiles,
amphibians, or any other animal does not qualify for a temporary outdoor seasonal sale.
(5) Temporary lighting and/or security lighting may be used at a temporary outdoor seasonal sale
location. Electrical permits are required for temporary power and any other electrical installations at
the premises. Electrical contractors must be a registered contractor with the city's development
services division. Electrical work installed requires inspection by a city building inspector.
Temporary lighting must meet the requirements of the City's Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, as it
currently exists or may be amended. Any lights located on the premises may not flash, travel, blink,
fade, move, or scroll.
(6) Sales items, display areas, jump houses and/or any other related items in conjunction with the
temporary outdoor seasonal sale may not block any fire lanes, fire hydrants or public access areas.
(7) Sidewalks and pedestrian access ramps are required to have a minimum of six feet clearance at
all times and meet the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act as it currently exists or
may be amended.
(8) Any individual, business, firm, non-profit corporation, business entity, school, civic group, or
religious organization that elects to have a seasonal sale must obtain a temporary outdoor seasonal
sale permit from the development services division prior to the sale. A valid temporary outdoor
seasonal sale permit is required to be displayed at the premises.
(9) A temporary outdoor seasonal sale permit is valid for maximum of 45 consecutive days for
each sale.
(10) A temporary outdoor seasonal sale permit is $150.00 for each sale.
(11) Written permission must be obtained from the property owner and must accompany the
temporary outdoor seasonal sale permit application seeking a permit for the temporary use at the
property.
(12) Signs permits must be obtained from the development services division prior to the display of
any signage for a temporary outdoor seasonal sale. All signage must meet the requirements of the
city's sign ordinance as it currently exists or may be amended.
(13) Restroom facilities are required to be on-site at the temporary outdoor seasonal sale premises.
Restroom facilities are required to be within 100 feet from any point of sale or cash register. The
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 261/684
building official or his/her designee may require additional toilet facilities to be provided to
adequately provide for the number of patrons anticipated at the premises.
(14) If the applicant elects to install a temporary tent, a temporary tent permit must be obtained
prior to installation from the development services division and must meet all temporary tent
requirements as they currently exist or may be amended.
(15) If food and/or drinks are served a health permit must be obtained from the health and food
safety division and meet the requirements of the health ordinance as it currently exists or may be
amended.
(16) An individual, business, firm, non-profit corporation, entity or organization shall be required
to provide a liability insurance policy in amounts of not less than $50,000.00 for injury to a person
and $100,000.00 per accident. The building official or his/her designee shall require a certificate of
insurance that shows that such policy is in full force and effect prior to commencement of the
temporary outdoor seasonal sale and provides that Frisco shall receive notice of cancellation of the
insurance coverage. Non-profit organizations and government entities may have this requirement
waived at the discretion of the building official or his/her designee.
(17) An individual, business, firm, corporation, entity or organization shall deposit with the city
secretary a cash bond to Frisco in the amount of $1,000.00 or an equivalent surety bond issued by a
company authorized to do business in the State of Texas, conditioned upon the operation of the
temporary outdoor seasonal sale in accordance with the ordinances of the City of Frisco and the laws
of the State of Texas, and further conditioned to indemnify, keep and save harmless the City of
Frisco, its officers, agents and employees from all liability or causes of action which might arise by
virtue of the granting of such temporary outdoor seasonal sale permit or the operation of such
temporary outdoor seasonal sale, and further conditioned that no damage will be caused, suffered or
permitted by the temporary outdoor seasonal sale individual, business, firm, corporation, entity or
organization, its agents, officers, servants or employees to the streets, alleys, or public areas of the
City of Frisco or to any private property, and that no dirt, paper, litter or other debris will be
permitted to remain upon the streets, alleys or public ways of the City of Frisco or upon any private
property as a result of the operation of such temporary outdoor seasonal sale. In the event all the
terms of such bond are complied with, it shall be returned to the individual, business, firm,
corporation, entity, civic group, religious organization, or organization that has the temporary outdoor
seasonal sale at the completion of the term of the temporary outdoor seasonal sale.
(18) Non-profit organizations registered with the State of Texas or government entities may have
the cash bond requirement and/or the proof of liability insurance waived at the building official or
his/her designee's discretion.
(19) Equipment used for a temporary outdoor seasonal sale shall comply with the City's Noise
Ordinance, as it currently exists or may be amended.
(Ordinance 05-09-80, sec. 4, adopted 9/20/05)
Sec. 22-273 Special events
Special events requiring street closures or other participation from Frisco will be allowed only with city council
approval. (Ordinance 05-09-80, sec. 5, adopted 9/20/06)
Sec. 22-274 Other requirements
All federal, state, and local codes and ordinances will be adhered to by all participants and applicants.
(Ordinance 05-09-80, sec. 6, adopted 9/20/06)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 262/684
Sec. 22-275 Fees
The building official or his/her designee may add additional inspections and/or fees at his/her discretion, should,
in his/her sole opinion, any additional fees be necessary. (Ordinance 05-09-80, sec. 7, adopted 9/20/06)
Sec. 22-276 Notice of violation
In the event any owner, tenant, agent or person (hereinafter “owner”) responsible for or claiming or having
supervision or control over a parking lot sale/sidewalk sale, temporary tent, temporary outdoor seasonal sale, or
special event fails to comply with provisions of this article, the City of Frisco, by and through its code
enforcement division or designee, shall give notice of the violation to such owner. Such notice shall be given to
the owner in any one of the following ways:
(1) Verbal or written to the owner or responsible person;
(2) By posting notice at the site or sale location; or
(3) By letter addressed to the responsible owner on said application and/or property owner at
premises as recorded in the appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the property is
located.
(Ordinance 05-09-80, sec. 8, adopted 9/20/06)
Sec. 22-277 Citations; work or improvements by the City of Frisco; charges against owner
An applicant, owner, tenant, agent or individual who fails or refuses to comply with a demand for compliance
may be issued citations and/or their permit(s) may be suspended or revoked. The City of Frisco may do the work
or make improvements required to abate violations, pay for the work done or improvements made, and charge
all expenses to the owner, tenant, agent or individual. (Ordinance 05-09-80, sec. 9, adopted 9/20/06)
Sec. 22-278 Appeals
Any applicant who has been denied a permit or any person, whose permit has been suspended or revoked, shall
have the right to a hearing before the city manager or his/her designee. Request for a hearing must be made in
writing and received by the city manager or his/her designee within ten days of the date of the denial or the date
of the notice of suspension or revocation. The city manager, or his/her designee, may review the appeal at a staff
level and has the authority to reverse the decision of the building official or his/her designee and order that
permit be granted or to reinstate a suspended or revoked permit. (Ordinance 05-09-80, sec. 10, adopted 9/20/06)
Sec. 22-279 Penalty provision
Any person, firm, corporation or business entity that violates this article shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined a sum not exceeding $2,000.00 dollars. Each continuing
day's violation shall constitute as a separate offense. The penal provisions imposed under this article shall not
preclude the City of Frisco from filing suit to enjoin the violation. The City of Frisco retains all legal rights and
remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law. (Ordinance 05-09-80, sec. 12, adopted 9/20/06)
Sec. 22-280 Enforcement and interpretation; privilege
The building official or his/her designee shall enforce this article. The building official or his/her designee shall
be responsible for interpreting and administering sections 22-270, 22-271, and 22-272 of this article. The city
manager or his/her designee shall be responsible for interpreting and administering section 22-273 of this article.
The receipt of a permit required by this article is a privilege and not a property right. (Ordinance 05-09-80, sec.
13, adopted 9/20/06)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 263/684
CHAPTERS 23–25
RESERVED
CHAPTER 26
CIVIL EMERGENCIES*
Sec. 26-1 Organization
There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in
accordance with state law.
(1) An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the
director.
(2) The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management
within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this chapter. He may
delegate authority for execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such
execution shall remain with the director.
(3) The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consists of the officers
and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well
as organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed
among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management
plan.
(Ordinance 90-05-01, sec. 1, adopted 5/1/90)
Sec. 26-2 Emergency management director; powers and duties
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following:
(1) Conduct an on-going survey of actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property
within the city and an on-going program of identifying and requiring or recommending the
implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such
hazards if a disaster did occur.
(2) Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city,
and shall recommend for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary
for the implementation of such plan.
(3) The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven days except
by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or
terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed
promptly with the city secretary.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 264/684
(4) Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations, or directives which are necessary for carrying
out the purposes of this chapter. Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be disseminated
promptly by means calculated to bring its contents to the attention of the general public and, unless
circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city secretary.
(5) Direction and control of the operations of the emergency management organization as well as
the training of emergency management personnel.
(6) Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the
emergency management organization of the city.
(7) Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal,
emergency management organizations.
(8) Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city
to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan.
(9) Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the
representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and
execution, if, deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which said city is located and
with other municipalities within the county, for the county-wide coordination of emergency
management efforts.
(10) Supervision of, and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and
equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of
improving emergency management within the city.
(11) Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for
public shelter and other purposes.
(12) Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could
be used during a disaster, as provided for herein.
(13) Other requirements as specified in Texas Disaster Act 1975 (V.T.C.A., Government Code sec.
418.000 et seq.).
(Ordinance 90-05-01, sec. 2, adopted 5/1/90)
Sec. 26-3 Emergency management plan
A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan
shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign
responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers, and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of
this chapter. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state
division of emergency management of the state. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and
terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When
approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and
to maintain their portions of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan
shall be considered supplementary to this chapter and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster.
(Ordinance 90-05-01, sec. 3, adopted 5/1/90)
Sec. 26-4 Interjurisdictional program
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judges of the counties of Collin and Denton and the
mayors of the other cities in said counties in the formation of an emergency management council for the counties
of Collin and Denton and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of a joint emergency
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 265/684
management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers
necessary to participate in county-wide programs of emergency management insofar as said programs may affect
the city. (Ordinance 90-05-01, sec. 4, adopted 5/1/90)
Sec. 26-5 Override
At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in
effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the
latter may be inconsistent therewith. (Ordinance 90-05-01, sec. 5, adopted 5/1/90)
Sec. 26-6 Liability
This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace,
health, and safety and neither the city, the agents and representatives of said city, nor any individual, receiver,
firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out,
complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. Any
person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to
the city a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or
parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice
enemy attack or natural or manmade disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly
liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license,
privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. (Ordinance 90-05-01, sec.
6, adopted 5/1/90)
Sec. 26-7 Commitment of funds
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management
activity authorized by this chapter without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right
to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council unless
during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the
city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life, or property. (Ordinance 90-05-01, sec.
7, adopted 5/1/90)
Sec. 26-8 Offenses; penalties
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency
management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or to do
any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this chapter.
(b) It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or other means
of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to do so
has been granted to such person by the proper officials.
(c) Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or
the termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the
penalties imposed by this chapter.
(d) Convictions for violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by fine not to exceed
$200.00.
(Ordinance 90-05-01, sec. 8, adopted 5/1/90)
Sec. 26-9 Limitations
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 266/684
This chapter shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval
order, rule, or regulation. (Ordinance 90-05-01, sec. 10, adopted 5/1/90)
CHAPTERS 27–29
RESERVED
CHAPTER 30
COURTS*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 30-1–30-24 Reserved
ARTICLE II. COURT FUNDS
Sec. 30-25 Municipal court technology fund
(a) There is hereby created and established a Municipal Court Technology Fund (the “fund”) pursuant to
Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.0172.
(b) The municipal court of the city (the “municipal court”) is hereby authorized to assess a Municipal Court
Technology Fee (the “fee”) in the amount of $4.00 against all defendants convicted in a trial of a misdemeanor
offense by the municipal court. Each misdemeanor conviction shall be subject to a separate assessment of the
fee.
(c) The municipal court clerk is hereby authorized and required to collect the fee and to pay same to the
treasury of the city. All fees so collected and paid over to the treasury of the city shall be segregated in the fund.
(d) The fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the purchase of technology enhancements for the
municipal court of the city. “Technology enhancements” shall include any and all items described in Vernon's
Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.0172(d).
(e) The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council or its designated
representative.
(Ordinance 00-08-10, sec. 2, adopted 8/15/00)
Sec. 30-26 Municipal court building security fund
(a) There is hereby created and established a Municipal Court Building Security Fund (the “fund”) pursuant to
Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.017.
(b) The municipal court of the city (the “municipal court”) is hereby authorized to assess a Municipal Court
Building Security Fee (the “fee”) in the amount of $3.00 against all defendants convicted of a misdemeanor
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 267/684
offense by the municipal court. Each misdemeanor conviction shall be subject to a separate assessment of the
fee.
(c) The municipal court clerk is hereby authorized and required to collect the fee and to pay same to the
treasury of the city. All fees so collected and paid over to the treasury of the city shall be segregated in the fund.
(d) The fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the purchase of security devices and/or services
for the building or buildings housing the municipal court of the city. “Security devices and/or services” shall
include any and all items described in Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.017(d).
(e) The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council or its designated
representative.
(Ordinance 97-10-20, sec. 2, adopted 10/21/97)
CHAPTERS 31–33
RESERVED
CHAPTER 34
ENVIRONMENT*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 34-1–34-18 Reserved
ARTICLE II. VEGETATION*
Sec. 34-19 Vegetation or grass of height greater than 12 inches constitutes offense
(a) Violation. A person, owner, tenant or agent responsible for or claiming or having supervision or control of
any real property, occupied or unoccupied, within the city limits of the city, and in the city's ETJ for a distance of
5,000 feet from the city limits, commits an offense by permitting or allowing weeds, grass, brush, or any
vegetation to grow to a height greater than 12 inches upon any such real property. Such real property shall
include, but not be limited to:
(1) The parkway between the sidewalk and the curb;
(2) The right-of-way between any fence, wall or barrier and the curb or pavement if such exists or
the centerline of such right-of-way;
(3) The area between a fence, wall or barrier and within any abutting drainage channel easement to
the top of such channel closest to the property;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 268/684
(4) The area outside the property to a distance of ten feet from the property line and not under
different ownership;
(5) The area outside the property to a distance of ten feet from the property line if such area is part
of or adjacent to a drainage easement or creek; or
(6) Any area directly across an alley or traveled way that borders the property which is between the
edge of the alley or traveled way and a screening wall or other barrier.
Vegetation not regularly cultivated that exceeds 12 inches in height shall be presumed to be a nuisance,
objectionable, unsanitary and unsightly.
(b) Exception. It shall not be an offense under this section to permit or allow weeds, grass, brush or other
vegetation to grow to a height greater than 12 inches if they are growing in an area designated as a natural
conservation area, preserve or habitat by any federal or state law or agency and the removing or cutting of the
vegetation within that area is prohibited by the federal or state law or agency.
(Ordinance 01-09-62, sec. 1, adopted 9/18/01)
Sec. 34-20 Property to be free of conditions constituting public nuisances
A person, owner, tenant or agent responsible for or claiming or having supervision or control of any real
property, occupied or unoccupied, within the city limits of the city, and in the city's ETJ for a distance of 5,000
feet from the city limits, commits an offense by permitting or allowing stagnant or unwholesome water, filth,
carrion, weeds, rubbish, rubble, junk or garbage, or impure or unwholesome matter of any kind, including, but
not limited to, dead grass, tree limbs, tree stumps, improper composting or improper storage of landscape
materials, waste paper, scrap wood or lumber, scrap metal, rags, rubber tires, plastic, metal, ceramic or glass
bottles, canisters, barrels or cans, combustible materials, appliances, furniture, discarded or unused flooring
material, dismantled or disassembled vehicle parts, discarded or abandoned construction materials and exposed
or uncovered fill materials, or any objectionable, unsanitary or unsightly matter of whatever nature to
accumulate or remain on such real property, including the improvements thereon, or within any easement area
on such real property or upon any adjacent right-of-way for streets and alleys between the property line for such
real property and where the paved surface of the street or alley begins. Such conditions are hereby defined as
public nuisances. (Ordinance 01-09-62, sec. 2, adopted 9/18/01)
Sec. 34-21 Cultivated and uncultivated agricultural properties; height limitations
(a) Uncultivated agricultural properties. A person, owner, tenant or agent responsible for or claiming or
having supervision or control over uncultivated agricultural property commits an offense if such person permits
or allows:
(1) Vegetation to grow to a height greater than 12 inches within 100 feet from any adjacent
property under different ownership, a right-of-way or easement; or
(2) If vegetation interferes with Visibility, Access, Maintenance (V.A.M.) requirements at any
intersection of public thoroughfares provided in the Engineering Standards and Construction Details,
Section 6, Thoroughfare and Circulation and Design Requirements as they exist or may be amended.
(b) Cultivated agricultural properties. Where the distance between the growing crop and adjacent property
under different ownership, a right-of-way or easement is less than 100 feet, the person, owner, tenant or agent
responsible for or claiming or having supervision or control over cultivated agricultural property commits an
offense if such person permits or allows:
(1) Vegetation to grow to a height greater than 12 inches between such growing crop and any
adjacent property under different ownership, a right-of-way or easement; or
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 269/684
(2) Such growing crop to interfere with Visibility, Access, Maintenance (V.A.M.) requirements at
any intersection of public thoroughfares provided in the Engineering Standards and Construction
Details, Section 6, Thoroughfare and Circulation and Design Requirements as they exist or may be
amended.
(c) Definition of agricultural property. For the purposes of this section, property is considered to be
agricultural property, whether cultivated or uncultivated, if it has been granted a property tax exemption by the
county central appraisal district, or equivalent authority, pursuant to the Texas Property Tax Code or state
Constitution, for agricultural land.
(Ordinance 01-09-62, sec. 3, adopted 9/18/01)
Sec. 34-22 Notice of violation
(a) In the event any owner, tenant, agent or person responsible for or claiming or having supervision or control
over real property (hereinafter “owner”) governed by this article fails to comply with the provisions of this
article, the city, by and through its code enforcement division or designee shall give notice of the violation to
such owner. Such notice shall be given in any one of the following ways:
(1) Personally to the owner in writing;
(2) By letter addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the appraisal district
records of the appraisal district in which the property is located; or
(3) If personal service cannot be obtained by:
a. Publication in the city's official newspaper at least once;
b. Posting notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the
violation relates; or
c. Posting a notice to a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to
which the violation relates, if the property contains no buildings.
(b) If the city mails a notice to the owner in accordance with subsection (a), and the United States Postal
Service returns the notice as “refused,” “unclaimed,” or if the address required by subsection (a)(2) was used and
the notice is returned as “not deliverable as addressed” (or an equivalent marking), the validity of the notice is
not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered.
(c) In a notice provided under this section the city may inform the owner by regular mail and a posting on the
property that if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature on or before the anniversary of
the date of the notice, the city, without further notice, may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess
the expense against the property or issue citations. If a violation covered by a notice under this subsection (c)
occurs within one year, and the city has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change, then
the city, without notice, may take any action permitted by section 34-23 and assess its expenses as provided in
section 34-24.
(Ordinance 01-09-62, sec. 4, adopted 9/18/01)
Sec. 34-23 Citations; work or improvements by the city; charges against owner
If the owner fails or refuses to comply with the demand for compliance in the notice within ten days of such
notice, the city may:
(1) Issue citations as provided in section 34-26; and
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 270/684
(2) Do the work or make the improvement required, pay for the work done or improvements made
and charge the expenses to the owner of the property as provided herein.
(Ordinance 01-09-62, sec. 5, adopted 9/18/01)
Sec. 34-24 Assessment of expenses; lien
(a) In the event the owner fails or refuses to pay such expenses charged to the owner under section 34-23(2),
within 15 days after the first day of the month following the month in which the work was done, a lien may be
obtained against the property. To obtain a lien, the mayor, the mayor's designee or the city's health or code
enforcement authority must file a statement of the expenses incurred in correcting the condition of the real
property with the county clerk of the county in which the property is located. The statement must also state the
name of the owner, if known, and the legal description of the property. The lien attaches upon filing of the
statement with the county clerk.
(b) The city's lien shall be a prior lien on such property, second only to tax liens and liens for street
improvements. The lien amount shall include simple interest, which shall accrue at the rate of ten percent per
annum from the date the expenses were incurred by the city. The city may bring a suit for foreclosure to recover
the expenditures and the interest due.
(Ordinance 01-09-62, sec. 6, adopted 9/18/01)
Sec. 34-25 Authority to immediately abate dangerous tall vegetation
(a) Notwithstanding any of the foregoing sections, the city may abate, without notification, weeds, grass,
brush or any unsightly vegetation that has grown higher than 48 inches (hereinafter “tall vegetation”); and is an
immediate danger to the health, life, or safety of any person. The city must give notice, in the manner provided
in section 34-22, to the property owner no later than the tenth day after the date the city abates the tall
vegetation. The notification shall contain:
(1) An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the property;
(2) A description of the violation of this article that occurred on the property;
(3) A statement that the city abated the tall vegetation; and
(4) An explanation of the property owner's rights to request an administrative hearing regarding the
city's abatement of the tall vegetation.
(b) The city, by and through its city manager or his designee, shall conduct an administrative hearing not later
than the 30th day after the date of the abatement of the tall vegetation, if the owner files a written request for a
hearing with the city. The city shall conduct the administrative hearing not later than the 20th day after the date a
request for hearing is filed. At the administrative hearing, the owner may testify or present any witnesses or
written information relating to the city's abatement of the tall vegetation.
(c) The city may assess expenses and create liens under this section in the same manner and subject to the
same conditions as set forth in section 34-24 above.
(Ordinance 01-09-62, sec. 7, adopted 9/18/01)
Sec. 34-26 Penalty provision
Any owner, person, firm, corporation or business entity violating this article shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined a sum not exceeding $2,000.00. Each continuing day's
violation under this article shall constitute a separate offense. The penal provisions imposed under this article
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 271/684
shall not preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin the violation. The city retains all legal rights and remedies
available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law. (Ordinance 01-09-62, sec. 8, adopted 9/18/01)
Secs. 34-27–34-55 Reserved
ARTICLE III. HAZARDOUS MATERIALS*
Sec. 34-56 Definitions; fees; imposition of fees
(a) Definitions. For purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the following
meanings:
Costs incurred by the fire department, police department, health department, public works, and/or any other
department and/or agency of the city shall include, but not be limited to, expenses attributable to the abatement
or cleanup of any hazardous materials incident, including the following: personnel costs; equipment operation
costs; costs of materials and supplies; costs of specialists, experts, or other contract labor not in the full time
employment of the city; disposal costs; overhead costs; overtime costs; and any other incidental cost incurred by
the city. Basic costs associated with services provided by the fire department shall be as outlined in the table
below.
(1) For hazardous materials incidents located within the jurisdiction of the city, costs and fees are
measured from the time the first fire department vehicle arrives at the incident site; all costs
described in this ordinance shall be billable.
(2) For hazardous materials incidents located outside the jurisdiction of the city, costs and fees are
measured from the time the first fire department vehicle checks en route to the incident site; all costs
described in this section shall be billable.
Hazardous materials means any substances or materials in a quantity or form which, in the determination of the
fire chief, or his authorized representative, poses a risk to persons, property, or the environment, and shall
include, but not be limited to, such substances as explosives, radioactive materials, petroleum products, poisons,
compressed or liquefied gases, etiologic (biologic) agents, oxidizers, corrosives, carcinogens, cryogens, and
organic peroxides.
Hazardous materials incident means the release, or potential release, of a hazardous material from its container
into the environment.
(b) Fees.
Code EQUIPMENT Rate Unit
Heavy
AUTO – 1001 All Terrain Transport Vehicle $230.00 day
AUTO – 1002 All Terrain Transport Trailer $180.00 day
AUTO – 1003 Backhoe Loader (Public Works) $330.00 day
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 272/684
AUTO – 1006 Hazardous Materials Response Unit $500.00 hour
AUTO – 1007 Support Vehicle $100.00 hour
AUTO – 1011 Trailer, Equipment Hauler 20' $100.00 day
AUTO – 1014 Command Communications Vehicle $500.00 hour
AUTO – 1015 Fire Engine/Brush $480.00 hour
AUTO – 1016 Aerial Ladder Truck/Quint $480.00 hour
AUTO – 1017 Mobile Intensive Care Unit $240.00 hour
AUTO – 1018 Chief Officer/ Safety Officer Vehicle $240.00 hour
AUTO – 1019 Special Operations - Heavy Rescue $500.00 hour
Pumps
PMP – 1006 Fuel Transfer Pump $75.00 day
PMP – 1008 Fuel Transfer Hose $100.00 day
Sampling/Diagnostic
DIA – 1001 pH Analysis (Roll, Box) $25.00 roll
DIA – 1002 Chemical Classifier Strips $35.00 tube
DIA – 1006 Drager, CDS Colorimetric System, w/ Tubes $250.00 day
DIA – 1008 Smiths Detection, HazMat ID, (Solids, Liquids, Pastes) $500.00 day
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 273/684
DIA – 1009 Smiths Detection, Gas ID, (Gas, Vapors, Aerosols) $500.00 day
DIA – 1010 Smiths Detection, Responder RCI (Raman Spectral) $300.00 day
DIA – 1011 Smiths Detection, HGVI $1,500.00 day
DIA – 1012 Smiths Detection APD 2000 (Chem TICs, Irritants) $200.00 day
DIA – 1017 RAE Systems, Multi-Rae $100.00 day
DIA – 1018 RAE Systems, Isotope Identifier $150.00 day
DIA – 1019 RAE Systems, Q-Rae Plus or Toxi-Rae or 4-Gas $150.00 day
DIA – 1020 RAE Systems, Gamma Rae Dosimeter/Detector $100.00 day
HazMat Equipment
HMT – 1001 Chlorine Emergency “A” Kit $500.00 day
HMT – 1002 Chlorine Emergency “B” Kit $750.00 day
HMT – 1003 Chlorine Emergency “C” Kit $1,000.00 day
HMT – 1004 Transfer Equipment $500.00 day
HMT – 1006 Portable Lights $25.00 day
HMT – 1007 Chain Saw $80.00 day
HMT – 1010 Drum Dolly $30.00 day
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 274/684
HMT – 1014 Generator, 10 kw $100.00 day
HMT – 1015 Pressure Washer, 3,000 psi or less $275.00 day
HMT – 1016 Saw, Air Powered Cut Off Wheel $80.00 day
HMT – 1017 Saw, Portable $80.00 day
Code PERSONNEL Rate Unit
PER – 1007 Operator, Heavy Equipment (Public Works) $45.00 hour
PER – 1013 IT/Communications Specialist (IT Department) $60.00 hour
PER – 1018 Engineer (Engineering Department) $75.00 hour
Other Specialist/Experts (Professional) Cost hour
Code COMMUNICATIONS Rate Unit
COM – 1001 Communication Service Fees (Data, Voice, Other) Cost unit
Code PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT Rate Unit
Suits
PPE – 1001 Bunker Gear (Pants, Coat, Gloves, Helmet, Boots) Cost each
PPE – 1003 Cool Vest $55.00 each
PPE – 1005 Coveralls, Tyvek/Saranex Stitched Seam $10.00 each
PPE – 1008 Level A, Responder, Tychem 10K, Kappler Z500 $795.00 each
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 275/684
PPE – 1009 Level A, St. Gobain “One Suit” $1,125.00 each
PPE – 1010 Level B, Fully Encapsulated (CPF 4) $240.00 each
PPE – 1012 Level B, MT-94 CBRNE / Utility Recon Suit $195.00 each
PPE – 1014 Level C, Hood, Boot (CPF 1) $25.00 each
PPE – 1017 Full Body Harnesses, Fall Protection $200.00 each
Boots
PPE – 2003 Chemical Vapor Boot $25.00 pair
Gloves
PPE – 3001 Latex, Sample/Exam $1.10 pair
PPE – 3004 Nitrile 14" $6.50 pair
PPE – 3005 Butyl Rubber 11" $53.00 pair
Respiratory Protection
PPE – 4001 Breathing Air Compressor $500.00 day
PPE – 4002 Breathing Air Hose, 50' Section $20.00 day
PPE – 4003 Self-Contained Breathing Apparatus (SCBA) $200.00 day
PPE – 4004 Self-Contained Breathing Apparatus (SCBA) Cylinder $15.00 day
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 276/684
PPE – 4012 Cylinder Refill System, On-Site $500.00 day
Code MATERIALS Rate Unit
Remediation Products
SOR – 1005 SPC Sorbent Pads 17 x 19 (200 bale) $80.00 each
SOR – 1013 Absorbent, Clay Based 50 lb. $8.00 each
SOR – 1019 AFFF-AR Alcohol Resistant Suppression Foam (5 gal) $210.00 each
SOR – 1023 Degreaser (Mixed Solution) $3.00 gallon
SOR – 1024 Soda Ash, 50 lb. Bag $35.00 each
Containers
CON – 1009 Drum, Poly, 55 gal, T/H, w/ Bungs $60.00 each
CON – 1010 Drum, Poly, Overpack, 95 gal $225.00 each
CON – 1013 Drum, Steel, 55 gal, OH, R/C, T/H $60.00 each
Code MATERIALS Rate Unit
Miscellaneous Tools
MIS – 1002 Non Sparking tools $25.00 day
MIS – 1003 Hand Tools, (Shovel, Push Broom, Rake, Scraper, etc.) $10.00 day
MIS – 1004 Small Hand Tools, (Duck Bill Metal Clamp, Wrench, etc.) $10.00 each
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 277/684
MIS – 1006 Polyethylene/Visquine Sheeting (20' x 100' roll) 6 mil $100.00 each
MIS – 1007 Putty, Repair (Plug & Dike) $7.50 each
MIS – 1010 Pump Sprayer $15.00 day
MIS – 1011 Proportioner $25.00 day
MIS – 1013 Rope, Cotton 1/4" x 100 ft $20.00 each
MIS – 1014 Rope, Polypropylene, 1/2" x 600 ft $80.00 each
MIS – 1017 Epoxy Stick, Sealant (JB Weld) $14.50 each
MIS – 1019 5/8" Water Hose, 50 ft $20.00 each
MIS – 1020 Forestry Hose, Lightweight Jacket, 100 ft $65.00 each
MIS – 1021 Decontamination Basin – RMC $125.00 each
MIS – 1023 Decontamination Shower - Single $500.00 day
MIS – 1024 Decontamination Shower - Multi Stage $1,500.00 day
MIS – 1025 Submersible Pump, 1/6 hp $20.00 day
MIS – 1026 Electric Tent Inflator, 1/3 hp $10.00 day
MIS – 1027 Rotary Drain Pump w/ Drip Pan $110.00 each
MIS – 1032 Utility Scrub Brush, Long Handle $13.00 each
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 278/684
MIS – 1035 Pre & Post Decon Kit - Civilian $50.00 each
MIS – 1038 Flashlight $10.00 day
(c) Imposition of fees. The following regulations shall apply in connection with the imposition and collection
of fees for the recovery of costs incurred by the fire department, police department, health department, public
works, and/or any other department and/or agency of the city under this section:
(1) Stand-by rates will be equal to the daily rates in the schedule set forth in subsection (b) unless
otherwise agreed to in writing.
(2) The usage period begins when an item of equipment is first made available for use on the
hazardous materials incident site and continues until such equipment is returned to the apparatus for
use in other hazardous materials incidents or is returned to the responsible party for disposal or
replacement.
(3) The rates set forth in subsection (b) apply to, among other things, equipment, personnel and
materials utilized by the city in the performance of public safety and mitigation during a hazardous
materials incident.
(4) During the course of performance of work, the city may add additional equipment items to the
schedule set forth in subsection (b) at rates to be determined by the city purchasing department.
(5) Due to the nature of hazardous chemical mitigation, it may be necessary to dispose of
equipment and/or protective clothing due to corrosion or wear. If necessary, the scheduled rates set
forth in subsection (b) will be charged plus replacement at cost.
(6) In the event any item of equipment is damaged at the hazardous materials incident site, the city
shall be entitled, at its option, to charge the replacement or repair cost of such item of equipment.
Repair or replacement cost shall be billed at cost.
(7) Decontamination charges will be charged according to the applicable rates identified in the
schedule set forth in subsection (b).
(8) Rebuild fees may be charged when a pump is damaged during operation on the hazardous
materials incident site. Repair parts and labor may be charged in lieu of rebuild fees when minor
damage occurs.
(9) The cost of all laboratory services, testing services, and/or other services that are not performed
by the city and are subcontracted by the city shall be charged in an amount equal to the city's cost for
such subcontracted service.
(10) Minimum protective equipment shall include, but not limited to, hard hats, safety goggles,
safety shields, steel toe boots and standard fire department uniforms. Additional charges for these
items may be invoiced when such items are damaged or broken or when they must be replaced due to
contamination or damage.
(11) In the event that any city personnel are engaged to provide expert testimony in any court,
administrative or other proceeding, the rate for such personnel while testifying, either at a deposition
or hearing, shall be two (2) times the hourly rate of such personnel.
(12) The information contained in the schedule set forth in subsection (b) is intended for the use of
the person, firm, entity or corporation to which an invoice or claim presented.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 279/684
(13) In the event that a responsible party fails to pay an invoice submitted under this section, the
responsible party may be subject to a “stop work order” from the city, which may apply to, among
other projects, the project in which the hazardous materials incident occurred.
(Ordinance 10-01-04, sec. 2, adopted 1/19/10; Ordinance 16-01-06, sec. 2, adopted 1/19/16)
Sec. 34-57 Scope/purpose
Any individual or business entity, who owns or possesses hazardous material(s) involved in a hazardous
material(s) incident whether within or outside of the city, or any individual or business entity, who accidentally,
negligently, or intentionally causes or is responsible for a hazardous material(s) incident within or outside of the
city, shall be liable for the payment of costs incurred by the fire department, police department, health
department, public works department, and/or any other department and/or agency of the city which assist and/or
participate, in any way, in the abatement of such an incident. The city fire department shall, in its sole discretion,
be responsible for determining whether it and/or any other department and/or agency of Frisco is needed to assist
and/or participate, in any way, in the abatement of any hazardous material(s) incident for which the costs
provided for herein may be assessed. The remedy provided by this section shall be in addition to any other
remedies provided at law or in equity. (Ordinance 10-01-04, sec. 2, adopted 1/19/10)
Sec. 34-58 Hazardous material(s) permits
Permits will be required for the storage, handling, or use of hazardous material(s) in excess of the amounts
stipulated in section 105 of the 2006 International Fire Code, as it exists or may be amended (Ordinance No. 08-
04-39). The fee for hazardous material(s) permits shall be $100.00 per year, per site. Applications for hazardous
material(s) permits shall be submitted to the city fire department. (Ordinance 10-01-04, sec. 2, adopted 1/19/10)
Sec. 34-59 Authorizing suits for injunctive relief
Notwithstanding any penal provision of this article, the city attorney is authorized to file suit on behalf of the
city, the fire chief, or his authorized representative, both for injunctive relief as may be necessary to enforce the
provisions of this article and for the collection of damages as provided herein. (Ordinance 10-01-04, sec. 2,
adopted 1/19/10)
Sec. 34-60 Penalty provision
Any person, firm, corporation or business entity violating this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of $2,000.00. Each continuing day's
violation under this article shall constitute a separate offense. The penal provisions imposed under this article
shall not preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin the violation. Frisco retains all legal rights and remedies
available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law. (Ordinance 10-01-04, sec. 2, adopted 1/19/10)
Secs. 34-61–34-78 Reserved
ARTICLE IV. JUNKED AND ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES*
Sec. 34-79 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Abandoned motor vehicle means a motor vehicle that is inoperable and more than five years old and left
unattended on public property for more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle that has remained illegally on public
property for a period of more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle that has remained on private property without the
consent of the owner or person in control of the property for more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle left
unattended on the right-of-way of a designated county, state, or federal highway within this state for more than
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 280/684
48 hours or for more than 24 hours on a turnpike project constructed and maintained by the state turnpike
authority.
Antique vehicle means a passenger car or truck that is at least 25 years old.
Collector means the owner of one or more antique or special interest vehicles who collects, purchases, acquires,
trades, or disposes of special interest or antique vehicles or parts of them for personal use in order to restore,
preserve, and maintain an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest.
Demolisher means a person whose business is to convert a motor vehicle into processed scrap or scrap metal or
to otherwise wreck or dismantle a motor vehicle.
Garagekeeper means an owner or operator of a parking place or establishment, motor vehicle storage facility, or
establishment for the servicing, repair, or maintenance of a motor vehicle.
Junked vehicle means a motor vehicle that is self-propelled and:
(1) Does not have lawfully attached to it an unexpired license plate or a valid motor vehicle
inspection plate; and
(2) Is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, or discarded, or that remains inoperable for more
than 72 hours on public property or 30 consecutive days if on private property.
Motor vehicle means a motor vehicle subject to registration under the Certificate of Title Act.
Special interest vehicle means a motor vehicle of any age that has not been altered or modified from original
manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by hobbyists.
Storage facility means a garage, parking lot, or any type of facility or establishment for the servicing, repairing,
storing, or parking of motor vehicles.
Vehicle storage facility means a vehicle storage facility, as defined by V.T.C.A., Occupations Code sec.
2303.002, that is operated by a person who holds a license under state law to operate said facility.
(Ordinance 08-10-95, sec. 2, adopted 10/21/08)
Sec. 34-80 Findings
(a) The city council hereby finds and determines that abandoned or junked motor vehicles, as those words and
terms are defined in this article, which are located in any place where they are visible from a public place or
public right-of-way, are detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, tending to reduce the value of
property, to invite vandalism, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the
health and safety of and are detrimental to the economic welfare of the city, by producing urban blight, which is
adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city, and such vehicles are, therefore, declared to
be a public nuisance.
(b) This article is adopted as an exercise of the police power of the city in order to further the health safety,
and general welfare of the citizens of the city, all of which the city council finds and determines will be furthered
by enactment hereof.
(Ordinance 08-10-95, sec. 2, adopted 10/21/08)
Sec. 34-81 Authority to enforce
The administration of the provisions of this article shall be the responsibility of the mayor or such person as he
may designate. Whoever is so authorized may enter upon private property for the purposes specified in the
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 281/684
procedures adopted in this article to examine the vehicles or parts thereof, to obtain information as to the identity
of vehicles and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to
the procedures. The municipal court shall have authority to issue any order. (Ordinance 08-10-95, sec. 2, adopted
10/21/08)
Sec. 34-82 Authority to take possession of abandoned motor vehicles
The police department is authorized to take into custody any abandoned motor vehicle found on public or private
property (V.T.C.A., Transportation Code sec. 683.011). (Ordinance 08-10-95, sec. 2, adopted 10/21/08)
Sec. 34-83 Notification of owner and lienholders regarding abandoned vehicle
Notification of abandonment of a motor vehicle shall be provided to owners and lienholders in accordance with
V.T.C.A., Transportation Code sec. 683.012. (Ordinance 08-10-95, sec. 2, adopted 10/21/08)
Sec. 34-84 Auction of abandoned vehicles
(a) If an abandoned motor vehicle has not been reclaimed within 20 days after the date of notice and payment
of all towing, preservation, and storage charges resulting from its impoundment, the police department shall sell
the abandoned motor vehicle at public auction. Proper notice of the public auction shall be given and, in the
event a vehicle is to be sold in satisfaction of a garagekeeper's lien, the garagekeeper shall be notified of the time
and place of such auction. Notice given in accordance with the requirements of this article or the giving of notice
of the sale of other types of abandoned property, shall be sufficient to comply with the requirements of this
section.
(b) The police department shall furnish a sales receipt for each vehicle to the purchaser thereof at the public
auction. The proceeds shall be applied first to reimburse the police department for the expenses of the auction,
costs of towing, preserving, and storing the vehicle, and all notice and publication costs, and any remainder from
the proceeds of the sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or entitled lienholder for 90 days, and then
shall be deposited in the special fund which shall remain available for the payment of auction, towing,
preserving, storage, and all notice and publication costs which result from placing other abandoned vehicles in
custody, whenever the proceeds from a sale of such other abandoned motor vehicles are insufficient to meet
these expenses and costs.
(Ordinance 08-10-95, sec. 2, adopted 10/21/08)
Sec. 34-85 Garagekeepers and abandoned motor vehicles
(a) The police department, upon receipt of a report from a garagekeeper of the possession of a vehicle deemed
abandoned under the provisions of this article, shall follow notification procedures set forth herein for the giving
notice to owners and lienholders of abandoned vehicles, except that custody of the vehicle shall remain with the
garagekeeper until after the notification requirements have been complied with. A motor vehicle left with a
garagekeeper in a storage facility shall be deemed abandoned under the conditions of V.T.C.A., Transportation
Code sec. 683.031(a).
(b) A fee of $10.00 which shall be deposited in the general funds of the city shall accompany the report of the
garagekeeper, and such fee shall be retained by the police department and used to defray the cost of notification
or other costs incurred in the deposition of such vehicle. Abandoned vehicles left in storage facilities, which are
not reclaimed after notice given in accordance with this article, shall be taken into custody by the police
department and sold at auction, as in the cases of other abandoned motor vehicles. The proceeds of the sale shall
first be applied to the garagekeeper's charges for servicing, storage and repair; provided, however, that the police
department shall retain an amount of two percent of the gross proceeds of the sale for each vehicle auctioned,
but in no event shall it retain less than $10.00, to be used to defray expenses of the custody and auction.
(Ordinance 08-10-95, sec. 2, adopted 10/21/08)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 282/684
Sec. 34-86 Disposal to demolishers
The police department is authorized to apply to the state department of highways and public transportation for
authority to sell, give away or dispose of any abandoned vehicle in its possession to a demolisher in accordance
with the provisions of state law. (Ordinance 08-10-95, sec. 2, adopted 10/21/08)
Sec. 34-87 Junked vehicles; procedures for abating nuisances
The police department, when desiring to remove and dispose of junked vehicles as public nuisances from private
property, public property or public rights-of-way, shall comply with the following procedures:
(1) A notice of not less than ten days, stating the nature of the public nuisance on private property
and that it must be removed and abated within ten days, and further that a request for a hearing must
be made before the expiration of said ten-day period shall be mailed by certified mail with a five-day
return requested to the owner or the occupant of the private premises whereupon such public
nuisance exists. If the notice is returned undelivered by the United States Post Office, official action
to abate said nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than 11 days from the date of such return.
(2) The requirements of subsection (1) above shall also apply to the case of a public nuisance on
public property or on a public right-of-way, and such notice shall be sent to the owner or the occupant
of the public premises, or to the owner or the occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-ofway
whereupon such public nuisance exists.
(3) Once a vehicle has been removed under the provisions of this section, it shall not be
reconstructed or made operable.
(4) Where a hearing is requested by the owner or occupant of the public or private premises, or by
the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way on which such a vehicle is
located, within 11 days after service of notice to abate the nuisance, a hearing, prior to the removal of
the vehicle or part thereof as a public nuisance, must be held before the municipal judge of the city. It
shall be the responsibility of the city prosecuting attorney to prosecute the case on behalf of the
police department, and should the municipal judge find that such vehicle is a public nuisance as
defined herein, he shall enter an order requiring the removal of the vehicle or part thereof from the
public or private property or public right-of-way where it is situated; such order shall include a
description of the vehicle and the correct identification number, and license number of the vehicle, if
available at the site.
(5) The police department shall give notice to the state department of highways and public
transportation within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle, identifying the vehicle or part
thereof.
(6) The procedure set out in this section shall not apply to a vehicle or part thereof which is
completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or
other public or private property, a vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner
on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard or to
unlicensed, operable or inoperable antique and special interest vehicles stored by a collector on his
property, provided that the vehicles and outdoor storage areas are maintained in such a manner that
they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened from ordinary public view by means of a
fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery or other appropriate means.
(7) The administration of the procedures of this section shall be carried out by regularly salaried,
fulltime employees of the city, except that the removal of vehicles or parts thereof from property may
be accomplished by any other duly authorized person, including wrecker service operators approved
by the city.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 283/684
(Ordinance 08-10-95, sec. 2, adopted 10/21/08)
Sec. 34-88 Disposal of junked vehicles
Junked vehicles or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard, demolisher or any suitable site
operated by or for the city for processing as scrap or salvage. The process of disposal must comply with
V.T.C.A., Transportation Code sec. 683.078. (Ordinance 08-10-95, sec. 2, adopted 10/21/08)
Sec. 34-89 Penalty
(a) A person, firm, or corporation commits an offense if that person, firm, or corporation maintains a public
nuisance as determined under this section.
(b) For purposes of this section only, a junk vehicle that is located in a place where it is visible from a public
place or public right-of-way is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, tends to reduce the
value of private property, invites vandalism, creates fire hazards, constitutes an attractive nuisance creating a
hazard to the health and safety of minors, and is detrimental to the economic welfare of the state by producing
urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city and is a public nuisance.
(c) A person, firm, or corporation commits an offense if that person, firm, or corporation maintains a public
nuisance as defined in this section.
(d) Any person, firm, or corporation who violates this section commits an offense and, on conviction
therefore, shall be fined any sum not exceeding $200.00 and each and every day that such violation continues
shall be considered a separate offense; provided, however, that such penal provision shall not preclude a suit to
enjoin such violation.
(e) Upon conviction, the court shall order removal and abatement of the nuisance.
(Ordinance 08-10-95, sec. 2, adopted 10/21/08)
Secs. 34-90–34-106 Reserved
ARTICLE V. EROSION SILTATION CONTROL
Sec. 34-107 Owner responsibility
It is the responsibility of each property owner within the municipal limits of the city to take appropriate
measures to control the erosion and siltation of soil materials from the owner's property. The owner shall not
allow water runoff to transport silt, earth, topsoil, etc., from the owner's property to others properties or on to
city streets, drainage easements, drainage facilities or storm drains. The property owner shall be responsible for
damages to others created by the actions of builders, contractors, developers and others performing construction
or other activities on the owner's property which create conditions that cause or aggravate erosion. (Ordinance
89-04-02, sec. 1, adopted 4/4/89)
Sec. 34-108 Contractor responsibility
Plans and specifications prepared for construction of improvements shall address suggested erosion/siltation
control measures and techniques to assist the contractor in implementing a suitable program to control erosion.
The city shall not be required to approve and may, in the city's discretion, deny approval of plans and
specifications based upon the city's opinion as to the suitability of erosion measures submitted. The contractor
shall take whatever measures are necessary to control and limit the transport of silt, earth, topsoil, etc., from the
site of construction, including, but not limited to, the erosion/siltation control measures and techniques provided
on the plans and specifications. The contractor shall, upon completion of his work, leave the owner's property in
a condition that minimizes the transportation of the owner's silt, earth, topsoil, etc. (Ordinance 89-04-02, sec. 2,
adopted 4/4/89)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 284/684
Sec. 34-109 City approval
The city, through its building officials, city engineers and inspectors, may refuse to issue approvals or permits,
including plats, drainage studies, plans and specifications, building permits, interim inspections, acceptance of
maintenance of completed construction of public streets or storm drainage facilities or certificates of occupancy
if, at the time the approval or permit is sought, the owner, developer and/or contractor does not have in place
adequate erosion/siltation control measures. (Ordinance 89-04-02, sec. 3, adopted 4/4/89)
Sec. 34-110 Penalty
Any person, firm, company, partnership, corporation or association violating any provision of this article shall be
deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in the sum of not more than
$500.00 for each such conviction, and each and every day such violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense. (Ordinance 89-04-02, sec. 4, adopted 4/4/89)
Secs. 34-111–34-133 Reserved
ARTICLE VI. TREES
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Secs. 34-134–34-164 Reserved
DIVISION 2. URBAN FORESTRY
Secs. 34-165–34-167 Reserved
Editor's note–Ordinance 11-09-46, sec. 3, adopted Sept. 20, 2011, repealed secs. 34-165-34-167, which pertained to establishment,
powers and duties, and procedures of the urban forestry board, and derived from: Ordinance 03-08-72, secs. 2-4, adopted Aug. 19,
2003; and Ordinance 11-09-39, sec. 2, adopted Sept. 6, 2011. For similar provision see ch. 2, art. III, div. 9 of this Code.
Sec. 34-168 Protection of trees
Unless authorized by a written permit issued by the city:
(1) No person shall damage, top, cut, carve, transplant, or remove any tree on public property;
allow any gas, liquid, or solid substance which is harmful to such trees to come in contact with them;
set fire or permit any fire to burn which may injure any portion of any such tree.
(2) Upon the discovery of any destructive or communicable disease, or other pestilence which
endangers the growth or health of trees, or threatens to spread disease or insect infestations. The
urban forestry board shall at once, cause written notice to be served upon the owner of the property
upon which such diseased or infested tree is situated, and the notice shall require such property owner
to eradicate, remove, or otherwise control such condition within a reasonable time to be specified in
such notice.
(3) A person damaging a tree on public property shall be liable to the city for any loss of value. In
the event that damage is so pervasive as to result in the treatment or removal of the tree, the person
damaging such tree shall be liable for all costs of treatment and/or removal.
(Ordinance 03-08-72, sec. 5, adopted 8/19/03)
Secs. 34-169–34-189 Reserved
ARTICLE VII. TREE REMOVAL REQUIREMENTS
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 285/684
Sec. 34-190 Regulation of tree removal
(a) This article applies to properties that do not have a final plat approved by the city council. A grading
permit from the city is required for removal of any trees. Removal of trees through, including but not limited to,
the use of poison, chemicals or by any other acts that affect the health and/or life of the tree is also subject to this
article.
(b) Agricultural crop harvesting of planted row crops and hay production are exempt from this article.
However, any increase in areas for agricultural use and/or production, by removal of trees, is subject to this
article.
(c) The removal of dead trees is exempted from this article. However, a property owner or its designee must
receive written approval from the city manager or his designee before removing the dead tree.
(Ordinance 00-02-25, sec. 3, adopted 2/15/00)
Sec. 34-191 Penalty provision
(a) Any person, firm, corporation or business entity violating this article, or as amended, or any provision of
this article, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined a sum not
exceeding the amount set forth below. The penal provisions imposed under this article shall not preclude the city
from filing suit to enjoin the violation. The city retains all legal rights and remedies available to its pursuant to
local, state and federal law. This article is intended to provide for the preservation of groups of trees and/or an
individual tree. Each individual tree removed in violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. Fines
shall be based on the following:
(1) Three hundred dollars per caliper inch of each tree as measured four feet, six inches above the
grade or soil stain on the damaged or fallen tree.
(2) Fines shall be issued to the property owner as shown on the tax rolls on the date of the
violation. The contractor, subcontractor, contracting company, and/or individual committing the
violation are also subject to the same fines as the property owner.
(3) Property companies, contracting companies, and/or individuals in violation of this article will
be halted on the site where trees have been removed until the city manager and/or his designee have
made an assessment.
(Ordinance 00-02-25, sec. 4, adopted 2/15/00)
Secs. 34-192–34-210 Reserved
ARTICLE VIII. AIR POLLUTION*
Sec. 34-211 Short title
This chapter may be cited as the City of Frisco Clean Air Ordinance. (Ordinance 08-05-50, sec. I, adopted
5/6/08)
Sec. 34-212 Declaration of policy
It is the policy of the City of Frisco to safeguard the air resources of the city from air pollution and to promote
the protection of the health, safety, general welfare, and physical property of the people within the city by
regulating emission of air contaminants and by controlling or abating air pollution. The provisions of this
chapter are to be construed, according to the fair import of their terms, to affect this policy. (Ordinance 08-05-50,
sec. II, adopted 5/6/08)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 286/684
Sec. 34-213 Chapter definitions
The definition of a term in this section applies to each grammatical variation of the term. In this chapter, unless
the context requires a different definition:
Air contaminant means dust, fumes, gas, mist, odor, particulate matter, toxic materials, smoke, or vapor,
individually or in combination, that is produced by a process other than natural.
Air pollution means the presence in the atmosphere of one or more air contaminants in such concentration and of
such duration:
(1) As to have or tend to have an injurious or adverse effect on human health or safety, animal or
vegetable life, or property; or
(2) As to interfere with the normal use or enjoyment of animals, vegetation, or other property.
Director means the director of the department designated by the Frisco City Manager to enforce and administer
this chapter and includes representatives, agents, or city employees designated by the director to assist in the
enforcement and administration of this chapter.
Facility means any stationary or portable source of air contaminants and includes the following classes.
(1) Class “1” facility means a stationary source of air contaminants whose actual emissions at
design capacity are greater than or equal to 100 tons per year of any pollutant.
(2) Class “2” facility means a stationary source of air contaminants whose uncontrolled emissions
at design capacity would be greater than or equal to 100 tons per year for any pollutant, but whose
actual emissions are less than 100 tons per year.
(3) Class “3” facility means a stationary source of air contaminants whose uncontrolled emissions
at design capacity are less than 100 tons per year, but greater than or equal to five tons per year.
(4) Class “4” facility means a facility whose uncontrolled emissions at design capacity are less
than five tons per year but whose emissions are significant, or have the potential to be significant, or
have a potential to be a nuisance.
(5) Class “5” facility means a dry cleaner that uses trichloroethylene, perchloroethylene, or
naphtha when conducting cleaning operations on clothing or other fabrics.
Nuisance means one or more air contaminants, or combination thereof, in such concentration and of such
duration as are, or may tend to be, injurious to, or to adversely affect, human health or welfare, animal life,
vegetation, or property, or as to interfere with the normal use and enjoyment of animal life, vegetation, or
property.
Person means an individual corporation; government or governmental subdivision; or agency, trust, partnership,
or two or more persons having a joint or common economic interest. Used oil, regardless of source (e.g.,
industrial, commercial, or household), means any oil that has been refined from crude oil, or any synthetic oil,
that has been used and as a result of such use is contaminated by physical or chemical impurities (see 40 CFR
279.1).
(Ordinance 08-05-50, sec. III, adopted 5/6/08)
Sec. 34-214 General authority and duty of director
The director is the principal air pollution control officer of the city. The director shall implement and enforce this
chapter and may establish such rules, not inconsistent with this chapter, as he determines are necessary to
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 287/684
discharge his duty under, or to affect the policy of, this chapter. The director shall evaluate the effect of proposed
zoning changes on air pollution and shall endeavor to coordinate his activities with those of the city planning
and zoning agencies in order to achieve optimum management of the air resources of the city. The director will
cooperate, in a manner consistent with the policy of this chapter, with other governmental agencies concerned
with air pollution. The director will publicize information on air pollution data, administrative hearings, progress
in abatement programs and decisions affecting pollution control, and to inform and cooperate with citizen groups
and industry associations concerned with air pollution. The director shall recommend to the city manager
enforcement measures and policies to achieve and maintain air quality in the city. (Ordinance 08-05-50, sec. IV,
adopted 5/6/08)
Sec. 34-215 Air pollution information required
(a) Any person operating or maintaining an existing facility which emits or has the potential to emit air
contaminants in the city shall register with the director and copy the director on all communications with state or
federal agencies regarding air permits, air permit renewals, air permit modifications and amendments,
environmental compliance, air emissions monitoring, and air emission controls.
(b) New or modified facilities.
(1) Any person proposing to construct a new facility or modify an existing facility, as defined in
the Texas Clean Air Act, in the city so as to require a Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
(TCEQ) permit shall register with the director within five business days of submittal of the TCEQ
permit application.
(2) Any person proposing to construct a new facility in the city that is exempt from TCEQ permit
requirements shall register with the director at least 60 days prior to beginning operation.
(c) The director may require, from time to time, a person whose activity causes emission of an air contaminant
to submit to the director such additional information as the director considers necessary to evaluate the air
pollution nature or potential of the activity.
(d) Except for official purposes, the director may not disclose information submitted under this chapter
relating to secret processes or methods of manufacture or production, which information is identified as
confidential when submitted, without the written consent of the person who submits the information.
(Ordinance 08-05-50, sec. V, adopted 5/6/08)
Sec. 34-216 Texas Commission on Environmental Quality Rules
The city hereby adopts by reference the following rules of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
(“TCEQ”), in their current form and as they may hereafter be amended, including the tables, graphs, figures,
appendices, and other matter promulgated as part of the TCEQ's rules, all of which are incorporated by reference
as though written fully word for word in this chapter. TCEQ rules are promulgated in the Texas Administrative
Code, Chapter 30.
(1) 30 TAC, Chapter 101, General Rules.
(2) 30 TAC, Chapter 104, Bond Certification Criteria for Air Pollution Control Facilities.
(3) 30 TAC, Chapter 106, Exemptions from Permitting.
(4) 30 TAC, Chapter 111, (Regulation I) Control of Air Pollution from Visible Emissions and
Particulate Matter.
(5) 30 TAC, Chapter 112, (Regulation II) Control of Air Pollution from Sulphur Compounds.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 288/684
(6) 30 TAC, Chapter 113, (Regulation III) Control of Air Pollution from Toxic Materials.
(7) 30 TAC, Chapter 114 (Regulation IV) Control of Air Pollution from Motor Vehicles.
(8) 30 TAC, Chapter 115, (Regulation V) Control of Air Pollution from Volatile Organic
Compounds.
(9) 30 TAC, Chapter 116, (Regulation VI) Control of Air Pollution by Permits for New
Construction or Modification.
(10) 30 TAC, Chapter 117, (Regulation VII) Control of Air Pollution from Nitrogen Compounds.
(11) 30 TAC, Chapter 118, (Regulation VIII) Control of Air Pollution Episodes.
(12) 30 TAC, Chapter 119, (Regulation IX) Control of Air Pollution from Carbon Monoxide.
(13) 30 TAC, Chapter 122, (Regulation XII) Federal Operating Permits.
(Ordinance 08-05-50, sec. VI, adopted 5/6/08)
Sec. 34-217 City air pollution standards
(a) Odors (emission standard). A stationary source may not emit beyond its property line an odor, as measured
by the director, the strength of which equals or exceeds:
(1) Two odor units on a Barnaby-Cheney Scentometer;
(2) Two dilution-to-threshold (Dm units on a St. Croix Sensory Nasalranger, or equivalent units on
an equivalent odor-testing device.
(b) Particulates (emission standard). Neither a stationary source nor a portable source may emit nuisance level
emissions beyond its property line as determined by USEPA Method 22. In addition, both a stationary source
and a portable source must:
(1) Maintain all dust collection and fugitive controls in good working order at all times;
(2) Install and operate such controls at such times to control fugitives from aggregate stockpiles,
transfer points, conveyor systems, and collection facilities (e.g., baghouses); and
(3) Meet the most stringent USEPA and TCEQ standards for Best Available Control Technology
(BACT) applicable to the specific source.
(c) Used oil (fuel standard). Neither a stationary source, nor a portable source within the corporate limits of
the City of Frisco, Texas shall burn used or waste oil, regardless of the source of such used oil, for any purpose
whatsoever.
(d) Additional regulations. The director shall prescribe by rule such additional regulations as he determines
are necessary to implement this section and may provide by rule for temporary suspension of the application of
the air pollution standards prescribed by this section to a source that is operating under unusual conditions or
circumstances that prevent compliance.
(Ordinance 08-05-50, sec. VII, adopted 5/6/08)
Sec. 34-218 Registration fees
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 289/684
(a) Any person operating or maintaining a facility registered with the director under section 34-215 shall pay a
nonrefundable registration fee for each calendar year. The fee shall be based upon the applicable facility class, or
upon the facility source status. The fee for each calendar year must be paid by December 31 of the previous
calendar year.
(b) The fee for each class of facility is as follows:
Class “1” facility $2,750.00
Class “2” facility $2,140.00
Class “3” facility $1,000.00
Class “4” facility $350.00
Class “5” facility $135.00
(c) The annual registration fee for a new facility will be prorated from the date on which operations begin to
the end of the calendar year.
(d) If the annual registration fee is not received by the date due, the registration for the facility lapses, and a
reinstatement fee of $50.00 must be paid in addition to the registration fee before the registration will be
renewed.
(e) A person commits a separate offense each day that he fails to either register a facility or pay the
appropriate registration fee for a facility by the date due.
(Ordinance 08-05-50, sec. VIII, adopted 5/6/08)
Sec. 34-219 Compliance order and emergency action
(a) If the director determines that a source is in violation of the emission standard prescribed by section 34-
217, the director by written order may require a person who owns, controls, or manages the source to take such
action as the director determines is necessary to promote or effect compliance with the emission standard.
(b) If the director determines that an imminent and serious threat to the public health or safety exists because
of violation of section 34-217, the director may take or cause to be taken such immediate action as is necessary
under the circumstances to abate the threat.
(c) Exercise of authority granted by this section is not a prerequisite to prosecution of an offense under section
34-224.
(Ordinance 08-05-50, sec. IX, adopted 5/6/08)
Sec. 34-220 Monitoring requirements
(a) The director by rule may prescribe reasonable requirements for monitoring or measuring emission of air
contaminants by a person who owns, controls, or operates a source that emits an air contaminant.
(b) The director by rule may prescribe reasonable requirements for maintaining records on monitoring or
measuring emissions by a person who is required to monitor or measure emission of air contaminants under
subsection (a) of this section.
(Ordinance 08-05-50, sec. X, adopted 5/6/08)
Sec. 34-221 Inspection of records
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 290/684
The director may examine during regular business hours such records as are required by state or city law or rule
to be maintained in connection with the operation of air pollution or emission control equipment or facilities or
in connection with the emission of air contaminants. (Ordinance 08-05-50, sec. XI, adopted 5/6/08)
Sec. 34-222 Notice
Notice required or authorized under this chapter must be served on the person to be notified either personally, by
facsimile, or by mailing to the person at the address last known to the director. The effective date of notice
required or authorized under this chapter is the date that the notice is personally served, facsimiled, or
postmarked. (Ordinance 08-05-50, sec. XII, adopted 5/6/08)
Sec. 34-223 Nuisance
A violation of a standard prescribed by chapter constitutes a nuisance as that term is defined herein. The city
attorney may file suit to obtain such orders or process as are necessary to abate the nuisance. (Ordinance 08-05-
50, sec. XIII, adopted 5/6/08)
Sec. 34-224 Offenses
(a) A person commits an offense if he:
(1) Refuses to submit information requested by the director under section 34-215(a);
(2) Violates a rule of the TCEQ identified in section 34-216;
(3) Owns, controls, or manages a source that violates the emission standard prescribed by this
chapter;
(4) Interferes with the director in the exercise of his authority under this chapter;
(5) Violates a rule established under this chapter;
(6) Refuses to allow or interferes with an inspection authorized under this chapter; or
(7) Violates a variance or order granted or issued by the TCEQ under the Texas Clean Air Act.
(b) A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this chapter unless the
provision defining the offense expressly requires a culpable mental state.
(c) An offense committed under this chapter is punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00.
(d) A separate offense is committed each day in which an offense under this chapter occurs.
(e) If an enforcing officer designated by the director has probable cause to believe that a person has committed
an offense under this chapter, the enforcing officer may issue the person a written citation requiring that person
to appear in municipal court to answer the charge. If, upon request by the enforcing officer, the person believed
by the enforcing officer to have committed the offense refuses to promise to appear in court by signing the
citation, the enforcing officer may cause the person to be arrested. The citation must include the name of the
person cited for the offense, identification and date of offense alleged, and date of citation. The enforcing officer
issuing a citation shall sign it.
(f) Prosecution for an offense under this chapter does not prevent the use of other enforcement remedies or
procedures applicable to the person charged with or the conduct involved in the offense.
(Ordinance 08-05-50, sec. XIV, adopted 5/6/08)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 291/684
Secs. 34-225–34-329 Reserved
ARTICLE IX. STORMWATER DISCHARGE
Sec. 34-330 General provisions
(a) Purposes. The purposes and objectives of this article are as follows:
(1) To maintain and improve the quality of surface water and groundwater within the City of
Frisco, the North Central Texas Region, and the State of Texas.
(2) To prevent the discharge of contaminated stormwater runoff from industrial, commercial,
residential, and construction sites into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) and natural
waters within the City of Frisco.
(3) To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper discharge of hazardous
substances, petroleum products, household hazardous waste, industrial waste, sediment from
construction sites, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, and other contaminants into the storm sewers and
natural waters of the city.
(4) To encourage recycling of used motor oil and safe disposal of other hazardous consumer
products.
(5) To facilitate compliance with state and federal standards and permits by owners and operators
of industrial and construction sites within the city.
(6) To enable the city to comply with all federal and state laws and regulations applicable to
stormwater discharges.
(b) Administration. Except as otherwise provided herein, the director of engineering services (DES), the
director of public works (DPW), and code enforcement administrator (CEA) shall administer, implement, and
enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon these people may be
delegated to other city personnel.
(c) Abbreviations. The following abbreviations when used in this article shall have the designated meanings:
BMP Best Management Practices
BTEX Benzene, Toluene, Ethyl benzene, and Xylene
CEA Code Enforcement Administrator
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 292/684
DES Director of Engineering Services
DPW Director of Public Works
EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
HHW Hazardous Household Waste
mg/l Milligrams per liter
MS4 Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System
NOI Notice of Intent
NOT Notice of Termination
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
Ppb Parts per billion
PST Petroleum Storage Tank
RLA Registered Landscape Architect
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 293/684
RPE Registered Professional Engineer
RQ Reportable Quantity
SWPPP Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan
TPH Total Petroleum Hydrocarbons
USC United States Code
(d) Definitions. Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this
article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated:
(1) Agricultural stormwater runoff. Any stormwater runoff from orchards, cultivated crops,
pastures, range lands, and other nonpoint source agricultural activities, but not discharges from
concentrated animal feeding operations as defined in 40 CFR Section 122.23 or discharges from
concentrated aquatic animal production facilities as defined in 40 CFR Section 122.24.
(2) Best management practices (BMP). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices,
maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters
of the United States. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices
to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material
storage.
(3) City. The City of Frisco, Texas, or the City Council of Frisco.
(4) City inspector(s) shall refer the DES, DPW or CEA who go on-site to determine if the
provisions of this article are being met.
(5) Director of engineering services DES. The person appointed to the position of DES by the city
manager to provide engineering and technical services, or his/her duly authorized representative.
(6) Coal pile runoff. The rainfall runoff from or through any coal storage pile.
(7) Code enforcement administrator (CEA). The person appointed by the city manager to enforce
city codes or his/her duly authorized representative.
(8) Commencement of construction. The disturbance of soils associated with clearing, grading, or
excavating activities or other construction activities.
(9) Commercial. Pertaining to any business, trade, industry, or other activity engaged in for profit.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 294/684
(10) Director of public works (DPW). The person appointed by the city manager to manage field
operations and provide environmental education, or his/her duly authorized representative.
(11) Discharge. Any addition or introduction of any pollutant, stormwater, or any other substance
whatsoever into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or into waters of the United
States.
(12) Discharger. Any person, who causes, allows, permits, or is otherwise responsible for, a
discharge, including, without limitation, any operator of a construction site or industrial facility.
(13) Domestic sewage. Human excrement, gray water (from home clothes washing, bathing,
showers, dishwashing, and food preparation), other wastewater from household drains, and
waterborne waste normally discharged from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including
apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories, and institutions, that is free from industrial
waste.
(14) Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The United States Environmental Protection
Agency, the regional office thereof, any federal department, agency, or commission that may succeed
to the authority of the EPA, and any duly authorized official of EPA or such successor agency.
(15) Extremely hazardous substance. Any substance listed in the Appendices to 40 CFR Part 355,
Emergency Planning and Notification.
(16) Facility. Any building, structure, installation, process, or activity from which there is or may
be a discharge of a pollutant.
(17) Fertilizer. A solid or nonsolid substance or compound that contains an essential plant nutrient
element in a form available to plants and is used primarily for its essential plant nutrient element
content in promoting or stimulating growth of a plant or improving the quality of a crop, or a mixture
of two or more fertilizers. The term does not include the excreta of an animal, plant remains, or a
mixture of those substances, for which no claim of essential plant nutrients is made.
(18) Final stabilization. The status when all soil disturbing activities at a site have been completed,
and a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of 70 percent of the cover for unpaved areas
and areas not covered by permanent structures has been established, or equivalent permanent
stabilization measures (such as the use of riprap, gabions, or geotextiles) have been employed.
(19) Fire department. The Fire Department of the City of Frisco, or any duly authorized
representative thereof.
(20) Fire protection water. Any water, and any substances or materials contained therein, used by
any person other than the fire department to control or extinguish a fire.
(21) Garbage. Putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials from the handling, preparation,
cooking, or consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities, and the
handling and sale of produce and other food products.
(22) Harmful quantity. The amount of any substance that will cause pollution of water in the state.
(23) Hazardous household waste (HHW). Any material generated in a household (including single
and multiple residences, hotels and motels, bunk houses, ranger stations, crew quarters, camp
grounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreational areas) by a consumer which, except for the
exclusion provided in 40 CFR sec. 261.4(b)(1), would be classified as a hazardous waste under 40
CFR Part 261.
(24) Hazardous substance. Any substance listed in Table 302.4 of 40 CFR Part 302.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 295/684
(25) Hazardous waste. Any substance identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the EPA
pursuant to 40 CFR Part 261.
(26) Hazardous waste treatment, disposal and recovery facility. All contiguous land, and
structures, other appurtenances and improvements on the land, used for the treatment, disposal, or
recovery of hazardous waste.
(27) Herbicide. A substance or mixture of substances used to destroy a plant or to inhibit plant
growth.
(28) Industrial waste. Any waterborne liquid or solid substance that results from any process of
industry, manufacturing, mining, production, trade, or business.
(29) Motor vehicle fuel. Any vehicle crankcase oil, antifreeze, transmission fluid, brake fluid,
differential lubricant, gasoline, diesel fuel, gasoline/alcohol blend, and any other fluid used in a motor
vehicle.
(30) Municipal landfill (or landfill). An area of land or an excavation in which municipal solid
waste is placed for permanent disposal, and which is not a land treatment facility, a surface
impoundment, an injection well, or a pile (as these terms are defined in regulations promulgated by
the Texas Water Commission).
(31) Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). The system of conveyances (including roads
with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or
storm drains) owned and operated by the city and designed or used for collecting or conveying
stormwater, and which is not used for collecting or conveying sewage.
(32) Municipal solid waste. Solid waste resulting from or incidental to municipal, community,
commercial, institutional, or recreational activities, and includes garbage, rubbish, ashes, street
cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and other solid waste other than industrial waste.
(33) NPDES general permit for stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity (or
industrial general permit). The industrial general permit issued by EPA on August 27, 1992, and
published in Volume 57 of the Federal Register at page 41304 on September 9, 1992, and any
subsequent modifications or amendments thereto.
(34) NPDES general permit for stormwater discharges from construction sites (or construction
general permit). The construction general permit issued by EPA on August 27, 1992, and published
in Volume 57 of the Federal Register at page 41217 on September 9, 1992, and any subsequent
modifications or amendments thereto.
(35) NPDES permit. A permit issued by EPA (or by the state under authority delegated pursuant to
33 USC sec. 1342(b)), as amended, that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United
States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis.
(36) Nonpoint source. Any source of any discharge of a pollutant that is not a “point source.”
(37) Notice of intent (NOI). The notice of intent that is required by either the industrial general
permit or the construction general permit.
(38) Notice of termination (NOT). The notice of termination that is required by either the industrial
general permit or the construction general permit.
(39) Oil. Any kind of oil in any form, including, but not limited to, petroleum, fuel oil, crude oil or
any fraction thereof which is liquid at standard conditions of temperature and pressure, sludge, oil
refuse, and oil mixed with waste.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 296/684
(40) Operator. The person or persons who, either individually or taken together, meet the
following two criteria: (1) they have operational control over the facility specifications (including the
ability to make modifications in specifications); and (2) they have the day-to-day operational control
over those activities at the facility necessary to ensure compliance with pollution prevention
requirements and any permit conditions.
(41) Owner. The person who owns a facility, part of property.
(42) Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association,
joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal
representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental
entities.
(43) Pesticide. A substance or mixture of substances intended to prevent, destroy, repel, or mitigate
any pest, or any substance or mixture of substances intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant, or
desiccant (as these terms are defined in V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code sec. 76.001, as amended).
(44) Petroleum product. A petroleum product that is obtained from distilling and processing crude
oil and that is capable of being used as a fuel for the propulsion of a motor vehicle or aircraft,
including motor gasoline, gasohol, other alcohol blended fuels, aviation gasoline, kerosene, distillate
fuel oil, and #1 and #2 diesel. The term does not include naphtha-type jet fuel, kerosene-type jet fuel,
or a petroleum product destined for use in chemical manufacturing or feedstock of that
manufacturing.
(45) Petroleum storage tank (PST). Any one or combination of above ground or underground
storage tanks that contain petroleum products and any connecting underground pipes.
(46) Point source. Any discernable, confined, and discrete conveyance, including but not limited
to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock,
concentrated animal feeding operation, landfill leachate collection system, vessel or other floating
craft from which pollutants are or may be discharged. This term does not include return flows from
irrigated agriculture or agricultural stormwater runoff.
(47) Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge,
munitions, chemical waste, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into
water. The term “pollutant” does not include tail water or runoff water from irrigation or rainwater
runoff from cultivated or uncultivated range land, pasture land, and farm land.
(48) Pollution. The alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or biological quality of, or the
contamination of, any water in the state that renders the water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to
humans, animal life, vegetation, or property, or to the public health, safety or welfare, or impairs the
usefulness or the public enjoyment of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose.
(49) Qualified personnel. Persons who possess the appropriate competence, skills and ability (as
demonstrated by sufficient education, training, experience, and/or, when applicable, any required
certification or licensing) to perform a specific activity in a timely and complete manner consistent
with the applicable regulatory requirements and generally-accepted industry standards for such
activity.
(50) Registered landscape architect (RLA). A person who has been duly licensed and registered to
practice landscape architecture by the Texas Board of Architectural Examiners.
(51) Registered professional engineer (RPE). A person who has been duly licensed and registered
by the Texas Board of Registration for Professional Engineers to engage in the practice of
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 297/684
engineering in the State of Texas.
(52) Release. Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting,
escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or
the waters of the United States.
(53) Reportable quantity (RQ). For any “hazardous substance,” the quantity established and listed
in Table 302.4 of 40 CFR Part 302, as amended; for any “extremely hazardous substance,” the
quantity established in 40 CFR Part 355, as amended, and listed in Appendix A thereto.
(54) Rubbish. Nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, that consist of: (A) combustible waste
materials, including paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings,
leaves, and similar materials; and (B) noncombustible waste materials, including glass, crockery, tin
cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture, and similar materials that do not burn at ordinary incinerator
temperatures (1,600 to 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit).
(55) Sanitary sewer (or sewer). The system of pipes, conduits, and other conveyances which carry
industrial waste and domestic sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial
and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, to the city sewage
treatment plant (and to which stormwater, surface water, and groundwater are not intentionally
admitted).
(56) Septic tank waste. Any domestic sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets,
campers, trailers and septic tanks.
(57) Service station. Any retail establishment engaged in the business of selling fuel for motor
vehicles that is dispensed from stationary storage tanks.
(58) Sewage (or sanitary sewage). The domestic sewage and/or industrial waste that is discharged
into the city sanitary sewer system and passes through the sanitary sewer system to the city sewage
treatment plant for treatment.
(59) Site. The land or water area where any facility or activity is physically located or conducted,
including adjacent land used in connection with the facility or activity.
(60) Solid waste. Any garbage, rubbish, refuse, sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply
treatment plant, or air pollution control facility, and other discarded material, including, solid, liquid,
semi-solid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, municipal, commercial, mining,
and agricultural operations, and from community and institutional activities.
(61) State. The State of Texas.
(62) Stormwater. Stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage.
(63) Stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity. The discharge from any conveyance
which is used for collecting and conveying stormwater and which is directly related to
manufacturing, processing, or raw materials storage areas at an industrial plant which is within one of
the categories of facilities listed in 40 CFR sec. 122.26(b)(14), as amended, and which is not
excluded from EPA's definition of the same term.
(64) Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP). A plan required by either the construction
general permit or the industrial general permit and which describes and ensures the implementation
of practices that are to be used to reduce the pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with
construction or other industrial activity at the facility.
(65) Uncontaminated. Not containing a harmful quantity of any substance.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 298/684
(66) Used oil (or used motor oil). Any oil that has been refined from crude oil or synthetic oil that,
as a result of use, storage, or handling, has become unsuitable for its original purpose because of
impurities or the loss of original properties, but that may be suitable for further use and is recyclable
in compliance with state and federal law.
(67) Water in the state (or water). Any groundwater, percolating or otherwise, lakes, bays, ponds,
impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Gulf of
Mexico, inside the territorial limits of the state, and all other bodies of surface water, natural or
artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, navigable or non-navigable, and including the beds and
banks of all watercourses and bodies of surface water, that are wholly or partially inside or bordering
the state or inside the jurisdiction of the state.
(68) Water quality standard. The designation of a body or segment of surface water in the state for
desirable uses and the narrative and numerical criteria deemed by the state to be necessary to protect
those uses, as specified in Texas Administrative Code, tit. 31 ch. 307, as amended.
(69) Waters of the United States. All waters which are currently used, were used in the past, or may
be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the
ebb and flow of the tide; all interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; all other waters the use,
degradation, or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or foreign commerce; all
impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the United States under this definition; all
tributaries of waters identified in this definition; all wetlands adjacent to waters identified in this
definition; and any waters within the federal definition of “waters of the United States” at 40 CFR
sec. 122.2, as amended; but not including any waste treatment systems, treatment ponds, or lagoons
designed to meet the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act.
(70) Wetland. An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps,
marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
(71) Yard waste. Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris, and brush that results from
landscaping maintenance and land-clearing operations.
(Ordinance 11-11-52, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 11/15/11)
Sec. 34-331 General prohibition
(a) No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)
any discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater.
(b) It is an affirmative defense to any enforcement action for violation of subsection (a) of this section that the
discharge was composed entirely of one or more of the following categories of discharges: (As found in the
permit)
(1) Water line flushing (excluding discharges of hyperchlorinated water, unless the water is first
dechlorinated and discharges are not expected to adversely affect aquatic life);
(2) Runoff or return flow from landscape irrigation, lawn irrigation, and other irrigation utilizing
potable water, groundwater, or surface water sources. Runoff from irrigation systems using potable
water is prohibited by Ordinance No. 09-04-21, Water Management Plan.;
(3) Discharges from potable water sources;
(4) Diverted stream flows;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 299/684
(5) Rising groundwaters and springs;
(6) Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration;
(7) Uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
(8) Foundation and footing drains;
(9) Air conditioning condensation;
(10) Water from crawl space pumps;
(11) Individual residential vehicle washing;
(12) Flows from wetlands and riparian habitats;
(13) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;
(14) Street wash water;
(15) Discharges or flows from fire-fighting activities (fire-fighting activities do not include
washing of trucks, runoff water from training activities, test water from fire suppression systems, and
similar activities);
(16) Other allowable nonstormwater discharges listed in 40 CFR 122.26(d)(2)(iv)(B)(1), as
amended;
(17) Nonstormwater discharges that are specifically listed in the TPDES multi sector general
permit (MSGP) or the TPDES construction general permit (CGP);
(18) A discharge from a temporary car wash sponsored by a civic group school religious or
nonprofit organization where only soap and water are used and where efforts are made to minimize
pollutants in the discharge; and
(19) Other similar occasional incidental nonstormwater discharges, unless the TCEQ develops
permits or regulations addressing these discharges.
(c) No affirmative defense shall be available under subsection (b) of this section if the discharge or flow in
question has been determined by the DES to be a source of a pollutant or pollutants to the waters of the United
States or to the MS4, written notice of such determination has been provided to the discharger, and the discharge
has occurred more than 14 calendar days beyond such notice. The correctness of the DES's determination that a
discharge is a source of a pollutant or pollutants may be reviewed in any administrative or judicial enforcement
proceeding.
(Ordinance 11-11-52, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 11/15/11)
Sec. 34-332 Specific prohibitions and requirements
(a) The specific prohibitions and requirements in this section are not necessarily inclusive of all the discharges
prohibited by the general prohibition in section 34-331.
(b) No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the MS4 any discharge that causes or contributes
to causing the city to violate a water quality standard, the city's NPDES permit, or any state-issued discharge
permit for discharges from its MS4.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 300/684
(c) No person shall dump, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, discharge, leach, dispose, or otherwise
introduce or cause, allow, or permit to be introduced any of the following substances into the MS4:
(1) Any industrial waste;
(2) Any used motor oil;
(3) Any hazardous waste, including hazardous household waste;
(4) Any domestic sewage or septic tank waste, grease trap waste, or grit trap waste;
(5) Any release from a petroleum storage tank (PST), or any leachate or runoff from soil
contaminated by a leaking PST, or any discharge of pumped, confined, or treated wastewater from
the remediation of any such PST release, unless the discharge satisfies all of the following criteria:
a. Compliance with all state and federal standards and requirements; and
b. No discharge containing a harmful quantity of any pollutant.
(d) No person shall intentionally dump, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, discharge, leach, dispose, or
introduce any of the following substances into the MS4 and all persons shall to the maximum extent practicable
under prevailing circumstances employ control measures to prevent the following substances from entering into
the MS4:
(1) Any motor oil, antifreeze, or any other motor vehicle fluid;
(2) Any garbage, rubbish or yard waste;
(3) Any wastewater from a commercial carwash facility; from any vehicle washing, cleaning, or
maintenance at any new or used automobile or other vehicle dealership, rental agency, body shop,
repair shop, or maintenance facility; or from any washing, cleaning, or maintenance of any business
or commercial or public service vehicle, including a truck, bus, or heavy equipment, by a business or
public entity;
(4) Any wastewater from the washing, cleaning, de-icing, or other maintenance of aircraft;
(5) Any wastewater from a commercial mobile power washer or from the washing or other
cleaning of a building exterior that contains any soap, detergent, degreaser, solvent, or any other
harmful cleaning substance;
(6) Any wastewater from floor, rug or carpet cleaning;
(7) Any wastewater from the wash-down or other cleaning of pavement that contains any harmful
quantity of soap, detergent, solvent, degreaser, emulsifier, dispersant, or any other harmful cleaning
substance; or any wastewater from the wash-down or other cleaning of any pavement where any
spill, leak, or other release of oil, motor fuel, or other petroleum or hazardous substance has occurred,
unless all harmful quantities of such released material have been previously removed;
(8) Any effluent from a cooling tower, condenser, compressor, emissions scrubber, emissions filter,
or the blow down from a boiler;
(9) Any ready-mixed concrete, mortar, ceramic, or asphalt base material or hydro mulch material,
or from the cleaning of commercial vehicles or equipment containing, or used in transporting or
applying, such material;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 301/684
(10) Any runoff or wash-down water from any animal pen, kennel, or foul or livestock
containment area;
(11) Any filter backwash from a swimming pool, fountain or spa;
(12) Any swimming pool water containing any harmful quantity of chlorine, muriatic acid or other
chemical used in the treatment or disinfection of the swimming pool water or in pool cleaning;
(13) Any discharge from water line disinfection by super chlorination or other means if it contains
any harmful quantity of chlorine or any other chemical used in line disinfection;
(14) Any fire protection water containing oil or hazardous substances or materials that the fire code
in this Code of Ordinances requires to be contained and treated prior to discharge, unless treatment
adequate to remove pollutants occurs prior to discharge. (This prohibition does not apply to
discharges or flow from fire-fighting by the fire department.);
(15) Any water from a water curtain in a spray room used for painting vehicles or equipment;
(16) Any contaminated runoff from a vehicle wrecking yard;
(17) Any substance or material that will damage, block or clog the MS4.
(e) No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the MS4 any harmful quantity of sediment, silt,
earth, soil, or other material associated with clearing, grading, excavation or other construction activities, or
associated with landfilling or other placement or disposal of soil, rock, or other earth materials, in excess of what
could be retained on-site or captured by employing sediment and erosion control measures to the maximum
extent practicable under prevailing circumstances.
(f) No person shall connect a line conveying sanitary sewage, domestic or industrial, to the MS4, or allow
such a connection to continue.
(g) No person shall cause or allow any pavement wash water from a service station to be discharged into the
MS4 unless such wash water has passed through a properly functioning and maintained, grease, oil, and sand
interceptor before discharge into the MS4.
(h) Pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers. No person shall dump, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty,
discharge, leach, dispose, or otherwise introduce or cause, allow, or permit to be introduced harmful levels of
pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers into the MS4. All persons shall to the maximum extent practicable under
prevailing circumstances employ control measures to minimize pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers from
entering the MS4. This includes the following:
(1) Applying products according to manufacture recommendations.
(2) Applying products according to all state and federal laws.
(3) Proper storage and disposal.
(Ordinance 11-11-52, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 11/15/11)
Sec. 34-333 Release and reporting and cleanup
(a) The person in charge of any facility, vehicle, or other source of any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring,
emitting, emptying, discharging, escaping, leaching, dumping, disposing, or any other release of any of the
following quantities of any of the following substances that may flow, leach, enter, or otherwise be introduced
into the MS4 or waters of the United States, shall immediately telephone and notify the DES concerning the
incident:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 302/684
(1) An amount equal to or in excess of a reportable quantity of any hazardous substance, as
established under 40 CFR Part 302, as amended;
(2) An amount equal to or in excess of a reportable quantity of any extremely hazardous substance,
as established under 40 CFR Part 355, as amended;
(3) An amount of oil that either: (a) violates applicable water quality standards; or (b) causes a film
or sheen upon or discoloration of the surface of the water or an adjoining shoreline or causes a sludge
or emulsion to be deposited beneath the surface of the water or upon an adjoining shoreline; or
(4) Any harmful quantity of any pollutant.
(b) The immediate notification required by subsection (a) shall include the following information:
(1) The identity or chemical name of the substance released, and whether the substance is an
extremely hazardous substance;
(2) The exact location of the release, including any known name of the waters involved or
threatened and any other environmental media affected;
(3) The time and duration (thus far) of the release;
(4) An estimate of the quantity and concentration (if known) of the substance released;
(5) The source of the release;
(6) Any known or anticipated health risks associated with the release and, where appropriate,
advice regarding medical attention that may be necessary for exposed individuals;
(7) Any precautions that should be taken as a result of the release;
(8) Any steps that have been taken to contain and/or clean up the released material and minimize
its impacts; and
(9) The names and telephone numbers of the person or persons to be contacted for further
information.
(c) Within 14 calendar days following such release, the responsible person in charge of the facility, vehicle, or
other source of the release shall, unless waived by the DES, submit a written report containing each of the items
of information specified above in subsection (b), as well as the following additional information:
(1) The ultimate duration, concentration, and quantity of the release;
(2) All actions taken to respond to, contain, and clean up the released substances, and all
precautions taken to minimize the impacts;
(3) Any known or anticipated acute or chronic health risks associated with the release;
(4) Where appropriate, advice regarding medical attention necessary for exposed individuals;
(5) The identity of any governmental/private sector representatives responding to the release; and
(6) The measures taken or to be taken by the responsible person(s) to prevent similar future
occurrences.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 303/684
(d) The notifications required by subsections (b) and (c) above shall not relieve the responsible person of any
expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of the release, including any liability
for damage to the city, to natural resources, or to any other person or property; nor shall such notification relieve
the responsible person of any fine, penalty, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article or to
state or federal law.
(e) Any person responsible for any release as described in subsection (a) above shall comply with all state,
federal, and any other local law requiring reporting, cleanup, containment, and any other appropriate remedial
action in response to the release.
(f) Any person responsible for a release described in subsection (a) above shall reimburse the city for any cost
incurred by the city in responding to the release.
(Ordinance 11-11-52, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 11/15/11)
Sec. 34-334 Stormwater discharges from construction activities
(a) General requirements.
(1) All operators of construction sites shall use best management practices to control and reduce
the discharge, to the MS4 and to waters of the United States, of sediment, silt, earth, soil, and other
material associated with the clearing, grading, excavation, and other construction activities to the
maximum extent practicable under the circumstances. Such best management practices may include,
but not be limited to the following measures:
a. Ensuring that existing vegetation is preserved where possible and that disturbed portions of
the site are stabilized as soon as practicable in portions of the site where construction activities
have temporarily or permanently ceased. Stabilization measures may include: Temporary
seeding, permanent seeding, mulching, geotextiles, sod stabilization, vegetative buffer strips,
protection of trees, preservation of mature vegetation, and other appropriate measures;
b. Use of structural practices to divert flows from exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise
limit runoff and the discharge of pollutants from the site to the extent feasible;
c. Minimization of the tracking of sediments off-site by vehicles, the generation of dust, and
the escape of other windblown waste from the site;
d. Prevention of the discharge of building materials, including cement, lime, concrete, and
mortar, to the MS4 or waters of the United States;
e. Providing general good housekeeping measures to prevent and contain spills of paints,
solvents, fuels, septic waste, and other hazardous chemicals and pollutants associated with
construction, and to assure proper cleanup and disposal of any such spills in compliance with
state, federal and local requirements;
f. Implementation of proper waste disposal and waste management techniques, including
covering waste materials and minimizing ground contact with hazardous chemicals and trash;
g. Timely maintenance of vegetation, erosion and sediment control measures, and other best
management practices in good and effective operating condition; and
h. Installation of structural measures during the construction process to control pollutants in
stormwater discharges that will occur after construction operations have been completed.
Structural measures should be placed on upland soils to the degree attainable. Such installed
structural measures may include, but not be limited to the following: Stormwater detention
structures (including wet ponds); stormwater retention structures; flow attenuation by use of
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 304/684
open vegetative swales and natural depressions; other velocity dissipation devices; infiltration
of runoff on-site; and sequential systems which combine several practices. Operators of
construction sites are only responsible for the installation and maintenance of stormwater
management measures prior to final stabilization of the site, and are not responsible for
maintenance after stormwater discharges associated with construction activity have terminated.
(2) Qualified personnel (provided by the operator of the construction site) shall inspect disturbed
areas of any construction site that have not been finally stabilized, areas used for storage of materials
that are exposed to precipitation, structural control measures, and locations where vehicles enter or
exit the site, at least once every seven calendar days. All erosion and sediment control measures and
other identified best management practices shall be observed in order to ensure that they are
operating correctly and are effective in preventing significant impacts to receiving waters and the
MS4. Based on the results of the inspection, best management practices shall be revised as
appropriate, and as soon as is practicable.
(3) The DES may require any plans and specifications that are prepared for the construction of site
improvements to illustrate and describe the best management practices required by subsection (a)(1)
above, that will be implemented at the construction site. The city may deny approval of any building
permit, grading permit, or any other city approval necessary to commence or continue construction,
or to assume occupancy, on the grounds that the management practices described in the plans or
observed upon a site inspection by the DES are determined not to control and reduce the discharge of
sediment, silt, earth, soil, and other materials associated with clearing, grading, excavation, and other
construction activities to the maximum extent practicable under the circumstances.
(4) Any owner of a site of construction activity, whether or not he/she is an operator, is jointly and
severally responsible for compliance with the requirements in subsection (a).
(5) Any contractor or subcontractor on a site of construction activity, who is not an owner or
operator, but who is responsible under his/her contract or subcontract for implementing a best
management practices control measure, is jointly and severally responsible for any willful or
negligent failure on his/her part to adequately implement that control measure if such failure causes
or contributes to causing the city to violate a water quality standard, the city's NPDES permit, or any
state-issued discharge permit for discharges from its MS4.
(b) Five-acre disturbances.
(1) All operators of sites of construction activity, including clearing, grading, and excavation
activities, that result in the disturbance of five or more acres of total land area, or that are part of a
common plan of development or sale within which five or more acres of total land area are disturbed,
or who are required to obtain an NPDES permit for stormwater discharges associated with
construction activity, shall comply with the following requirements (in addition to those in subsection
(a)):
a. Any operator who intends to obtain coverage for stormwater discharges from a
construction site under the NPDES general permit for stormwater discharges from construction
sites (“the construction general permit”) shall submit a signed copy of its notice of intent (NOI)
to the DES at least two days prior to the commencement of construction activities. If the
construction activity is already underway upon the effective date of this article, the NOI shall be
submitted within 30 days. For stormwater discharges from construction sites where the operator
changes, an NOI shall be submitted at least two days prior to when the operator commences
work at the site.
b. A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) shall be prepared and implemented in
accordance with the requirements of the construction general permit or any individual or group
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 305/684
NPDES permit issued for stormwater discharges from the construction site, and with any
additional requirement imposed by or under this article and any other city ordinance.
c. The SWPPP shall be completed prior to the submittal of the NOI to the DES and, for new
construction, prior to the commencement of construction activities. The SWPPP shall be
updated and modified as appropriate and as required by the construction general permit and this
article.
d. A copy of any NOI that is required by subsection (b)(1)a., shall be submitted to the city in
conjunction with any application for a building permit, grading permit, site development plan
approval, and any other city approval necessary to commence or continue construction at the
site.
e. The DES may require any operator who is required by subsection (b)(1)b. to prepare a
SWPPP to submit the SWPPP, and any modifications thereto, to the DES for review. Such
submittal and review of the SWPPP may be required by the DES prior to commencement of or
during construction activities at the site.
f. Upon the DES's review of the SWPPP and any site inspection that he/she may conduct, the
city may deny approval of any building permit, grading permit, or any other city approval
necessary to commence or continue construction, or to assume occupancy, on the grounds that
the SWPPP does not comply with the requirements of the construction general permit, any
individual or group NPDES permit issued for stormwater discharge from the construction site,
or any additional requirement imposed by or under this article. Also, if at any time the DES
determines that the SWPPP is not being fully implemented, the city may similarly deny
approval of any building permit, grading permit, subdivision plat, site development plan or any
other city approval necessary to commence or continue construction, or to assume occupancy,
at the site.
g. All contractors and subcontractors identified in an SWPPP shall sign a copy of the
following certification statement before conducting any professional service identified in the
SWPPP:
I certify under penalty of law that I understand the terms and conditions of the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit that authorizes the stormwater
discharges associated with industrial activity from the construction site identified as part of this
certification, with the Stormwater Ordinance of the City of Frisco, and with those provisions of
the stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) for the construction site for which I am
responsible.
h. The certification must include the name and title of the person providing the signature; the
name, address and telephone number of the contracting firm; the address (or other identifying
description) of the site; and the date the certification is made.
i. The SWPPP, and the certifications of contractors and subcontractors required by subsection
(b)(1)g., and with any modifications attached, shall be retained at the construction site from the
date of commencement of construction through the date of final stabilization.
j. The operator shall make the SWPPP and any modification thereto available to the DES
upon request (as well as to EPA and state inspectors).
k. The DES may notify the operator at any time that the SWPPP does not meet the
requirements of the construction general permit, any applicable individual or group NPDES
permit issued for stormwater discharges from the construction site, or any additional
requirement imposed by or under this article. Such notification shall identify those provisions of
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 306/684
the permit or ordinance which are not being met by the SWPPP, and identify which provisions
of the SWPPP require modifications in order to meet such requirements. Within seven days of
such notification from the DES (or as otherwise provided by the DES), the operator shall make
the required changes to the SWPPP and shall submit to the DES a written certification that the
requested changes have been made.
l. The operator shall amend the SWPPP whenever there is a change in design, construction,
operation, or maintenance, which has a significant effect on the potential for the discharge of
pollutants to the MS4 or to the waters of the United States, and which has not otherwise been
addressed in the SWPPP, or if the SWPPP proves to be ineffective in eliminating or
significantly minimizing pollutants, or in otherwise achieving the general objective of
controlling pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with construction activity. In
addition, the SWPPP shall be amended to identify any new contractor and/or subcontractor that
will implement a measure in the SWPPP.
m. Qualified personnel (provided by the operator of the construction site) shall inspect
disturbed areas of the construction site that have not been finally stabilized, areas used for
storage of materials that are exposed to precipitation, structural control measures, and locations
where vehicles enter or exit the site, at least once every seven (7) calendar days. Disturbed areas
and areas used for storage of materials that are exposed to precipitation shall be inspected for
evidence of, or the potential for, pollutants entering the drainage system. Erosion and sediment
control measures identified in the SWPPP shall be observed to ensure that they are operating
correctly. Where discharge locations or points are accessible, they shall be inspected to
ascertain whether erosion control measures are effective in preventing significant impacts to
receiving waters or the MS4. Locations where vehicles enter or exit the site shall be inspected
for evidence of off-site sediment tracking.
An alternative to the above-described inspection schedule may be used if the alternative
schedule complies with the current TPDES General Permit for construction sites.
n. Based on the results of the inspections required by subsection (b)(l)m., the site description
and/or the pollution prevention measures identified in the SWPPP shall be revised as
appropriate, but in no case later than seven calendar days following the inspection. Such
modifications shall provide for timely implementation of any changes to the SWPPP within
seven calendar days following the inspection.
o. A report summarizing the scope of any inspection required by subsection (b)(l)m., and the
name(s) and qualifications of personnel making the inspection, the date(s) of the inspection,
major observations relating to the implementation of the SWPPP, and actions taken in
accordance with subsection (b)(l)n. above, shall be made and retained as part of the SWPPP for
at least three years from the date that the site is finally stabilized. Such report shall identify any
incidence of noncompliance. Where a report does not identify any incidence of noncompliance,
the report shall contain a certification that the facility is in compliance with the SWPPP, the
facility's NPDES permit, and this article. The report shall be certified and signed by the person
responsible for making it.
p. The operator shall retain copies of any SWPPP and all reports required by this article or by
the NPDES permit for the site, and records of all data used to complete the NOI, for a period of
at least three years from the date that the site is finally stabilized.
q. Where a site has been finally stabilized and all stormwater discharges from construction
activities that are authorized by this article and by the NPDES permit for those construction
activities are eliminated, or where the operator of all stormwater discharges at a facility
changes, the operator of the construction site shall submit to the DES a notice of termination
(NOT) in accordance with the construction general permit.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 307/684
r. Upon final stabilization of the construction site, the owner (or the duly authorized
representative thereof) shall submit written certification to the DES that the site has been finally
stabilized. (See definition of final stabilization in this article.) The city may withhold an
occupancy or use permit for any premises constructed on the site until such certification of final
stabilization has been filed and the DES has determined, following any appropriate inspection,
that final stabilization has, in fact, occurred and that any required permanent structural controls
have been completed.
(Ordinance 11-11-52, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 11/15/11; Ordinance 16-04-36, sec. 2, adopted 4/19/16)
Sec. 34-335 Compliance monitoring
(a) Right of entry; inspection and sampling. City inspectors shall have the right to enter the premises of any
person reasonably suspected by the city of discharging pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system
(MS4) or to waters of the United States to determine if the discharger is complying with all requirements of this
article, and with any state or federal discharge permit, limitation or requirement. Dischargers shall allow the city
inspectors ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination
and copying, and for the performance of any additional duties. Dischargers shall make available to the city
inspector, upon request, any SWPPPs, modifications thereto, self-inspection reports, monitoring records,
compliance evaluations, notices of intent, and any other records, reports, and other documents related to
compliance with this article and with any state or federal discharge permit.
(1) Where a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and
clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make necessary arrangements with its
security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the city inspector will be
permitted to enter without unreasonable delay for the purposes of performing his/her responsibilities.
(2) The city inspector shall have the right to set up on the discharger's property, or require
installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the discharger's
operations.
(3) When pollutants have been discharged the DES may require any discharger to the MS4 or
waters of the United States to conduct specified sampling, testing, analysis, and other monitoring of
its stormwater discharges, and may specify the frequency and parameters of any such required
monitoring.
(4) The DES may require that discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary at the
discharger's expense. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used
to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected
and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the discharger at the written or verbal request of the
city inspector and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the
discharger.
(6) Unreasonable delays in allowing the city inspector access to the discharger's premises shall be a
violation of this article.
(b) Search warrants. If the city inspector has been refused access to any part of the premises from which
stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this article or any state or federal discharge permit, limitation or requirement, or that there is a need
to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify
compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 308/684
welfare of the community, then the city inspector may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of
competent jurisdiction.
(Ordinance 11-11-52, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 11/15/11)
Sec. 34-336 Publication
Publication of dischargers in significant noncompliance. The DES may periodically publish, in a daily
newspaper generally distributed within the city, a list of owners and operators of discharges to the MS4 or waters
of the United States from sites of construction and industrial activity which, during the previous three months,
were in significant noncompliance with the requirements of this article. The term “significant noncompliance”
shall mean:
(1) Introducing or causing to be introduced into the waters of the United States any discharge that
violates a water quality standard;
(2) Introducing or causing to be introduced into the MS4 any discharge that causes or contributes
to causing the city to violate a water quality standard, the city's NPDES permit, or any state-issued
discharge permit for discharges from the city's MS4;
(3) Any connection of a line conveying sanitary sewage, domestic or industrial, to the MS4, or
allowing any such connection to continue;
(4) Any discharge of pollutants to the MS4 or waters of the United States that has caused an
imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, or
has resulted in the DES's exercise of his/her emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
(5) Any violation that has resulted in injunctive relief, civil penalties, or criminal fine being
imposed as a judicial remedy under section 34-339 of this article;
(6) Any other violation(s) which the DES determines to be chronic or especially dangerous to the
public or to the environment; or
(7) Any failure to comply with a compliance schedule, whether imposed by the city or by a court.
(Ordinance 11-11-52, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 11/15/11)
Sec. 34-337 Administrative enforcement remedies
(a) Warning notice. When the DES finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of
this article, or any order issued hereunder, the DES may serve upon that person a written warning notice,
specifying the particular violation believed to have occurred and requesting the discharger to immediately
investigate the matter and to seek a resolution whereby any offending discharge will cease. Investigation and/or
resolution of the matter in response to the warning notice in no way relieves the alleged violator of liability for
any violations occurring before or after receipt of the warning notice. Nothing in this subsection shall limit the
authority of the DES to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action, without
first issuing a warning notice.
(b) Notification of violation. When the DES finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, the CEA may serve upon that person a written notice of
violation. Within ten days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the
satisfactory correction and prevention of reoccurrence thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be
submitted by the alleged violator to the CEA. If the alleged violator denies that any violation occurred and/or
contends that no corrective action is necessary, an explanation of the basis of any such denial or contention shall
be submitted to the CEA within ten days of receipt of the notice. Submission of an explanation and/or plan in no
way relieves the alleged violator of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 309/684
violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the CEA to take any action, including emergency
action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
(c) Consent orders. The CEA may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other
similar documents establishing an agreement with any person responsible for noncompliance with any provision
in this article or any order issued hereunder. Such documents may include specific action to be taken by the
person to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have
the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to subsections (e), (f) and (g) this section
and shall be judicially enforceable.
(d) Show cause hearing. The CEA may order any person who has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, to appear before the CEA and show cause why a
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the alleged violator specifying the
time and place for the hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that
the alleged violator show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the
hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days
prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the alleged violator. The
hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the rights and procedures specified in section 34-338(a)(7) of this article.
A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the alleged
violator.
(e) Compliance orders. When the CEA finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, the CEA may issue an order to the violator directing that
the violator come into compliance within a specified time limit. Compliance orders also may contain other
requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring, and management practices
designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the MS4 and waters of the United States. A
compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established by a state or federal standard or
requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the person of liability for any violation, including any
continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the violator.
(f) Remediation, abatement and restoration orders. When the CEA finds that a person has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, and that such violation has
adversely affected the MS4, the waters of the United States or any other aspect of the environment, the CEA
may issue an order to the violator directing him/her to undertake and implement any appropriate action to
remediate and/or abate any adverse effects of the violation upon the MS4, the waters of the United States, or any
other aspect of the environment, and/or to restore any part of the MS4, the waters of the United States, or any
other aspect of the environment that has been harmed. Such remedial, abatement, and restoration action may
include, but not be limited to: Monitoring, assessment, and evaluation of the adverse effects and determination
of the appropriate remedial, abatement, and/or restoration action; confinement, removal, cleanup, treatment and
disposal of any discharged or released pollution or contamination; prevention, minimization, and/or mitigation
of any damage to the public health, welfare, or the environment that may result from the violation; restoration or
replacement of city property or natural resources damaged by the violation. The order may direct that the
remediation, abatement, and/or restoration be accomplished on a specified compliance schedule and/or be
completed within a specified period of time. An order issued under this subsection does not relieve the violator
of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of an order under this subsection shall
not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against any responsible party.
(g) Emergency cease and desist orders. When the CEA finds that any person has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, or that the person's past violations are likely
to recur, and that the person's violation(s) have caused or contributed to an actual or threatened discharge to the
MS4 or waters of the United States which reasonably appears to present an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, the CEA may issue an order to the
violator directing it immediately to cease and desist all such violations and directing the violator to:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 310/684
(1) Immediately comply with all ordinance requirements; and
(2) Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or
threatened violation, including immediately halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
Any person notified of an emergency order directed to it under this subsection shall immediately comply and
stop or eliminate its endangering discharge. In the event of a discharger's failure to immediately comply
voluntarily with the emergency order, the CEA may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize
harm to the MS4 or waters of the United States, and/or endangerment to persons or to the environment,
including immediate termination of a facility's water supply, sewer connection, or other municipal utility
services. The CEA may allow the person to recommence its discharge when it has demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the CEA that the period of endangerment has passed, unless further termination proceedings are
initiated against the discharger under this article. A person that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any
discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of
the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the CEA within two days of
receipt of the emergency order. Issuance of an emergency cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator.
(h) “Red tags”. Whenever the CEA finds that any operator of a construction site has violated, or continues to
violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued thereunder, the CEA may order that a “red tag” be
issued to the operator, posted at the construction site, and distributed to all city departments and divisions whose
decisions affect any activity at the site. Unless express written exception is made by the CEA, the “red tag” shall
prohibit any further construction activity at the site and shall bar any further inspection or approval by the city
associated with a building permit, grading permit, subdivision plat approval, site development plan approval, or
any other city approval necessary to commence or continue construction or to assume occupancy at the site.
Issuance of a “red tag” order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the
violator.
(Ordinance 11-11-52, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 11/15/11)
Sec. 34-338 Right to reconsideration, hearing and appeal
(a) Reconsideration and hearing.
(1) Any person subject to a compliance order under section 34-337(e), a remediation, abatement, or
restoration order under section 34-337(f), an emergency cease and desist order under section 34-
337(g), or a red tag order under section 34-337(h) of this article may petition the CEA to reconsider
the basis for his/her order within 30 days of the affected person's notice of issuance of such an order.
(2) Failure to submit a timely written petition for reconsideration shall be deemed to be a waiver of
any further right to administrative reconsideration or review of the order.
(3) In its petition, the petitioning party must indicate the provisions of the order objected to, the
reasons for the objection(s), any facts that are contested, the evidence that supports the petitioner's
view of the facts, any alternative terms of an order that the petitioner would accept, and whether the
petitioning party requests a hearing on its petition.
(4) The effect of any compliance order under section 34-337(e), remediation, abatement, or
restoration order under section 34-337(f), and any red tag order under section 34-337(h) shall be
stayed pending the CEA's reconsideration of the petition, and any hearing thereon, unless the CEA
expressly makes a written determination to the contrary. The effectiveness of any emergency cease
and desist order under section 34-337(g) shall not be stayed pending the CEA's reconsideration, or
any hearing thereon, unless the CEA expressly and in writing stays his/her emergency order.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 311/684
(5) Within ten days of the submittal of a petition for reconsideration, the CEA shall either: (1)
grant the petition and withdraw or modify the order accordingly; (2) deny the petition, without
hearing if no material issue of fact is raised; or (3) if a hearing has been requested and a material
issue of fact has been raised, set a hearing on the petition.
(6) Written notice of any hearing set by the CEA pursuant to subsection (a)(5) above, shall be
served on the petitioning party personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested)
at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of
the petitioning party.
(7) The CEA may himself/herself conduct the hearing and take evidence, or he/she may designate
any employee of the city or any specially-designated attorney or engineer to:
a. Issue in the name of the city notices of hearing requesting the attendance and testimony of
witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in the hearing;
b. Take evidence;
c. Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence,
together with recommendations to the CEA for action thereon.
At any hearing held pursuant to this subsection, testimony taken shall be under oath and recorded.
Any party is entitled to present his/her case or defense by oral or documentary evidence and to
conduct such cross-examination as may be required for a full and true disclosure of the facts. A
transcript will be made available to any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges
thereof.
(8) After the CEA has reviewed the evidence, he/she shall either: (1) grant the petition; (2) deny
the petition; or (3) grant the petition in part and deny it in part. The CEA may modify his/her order as
is appropriate based upon the evidence and arguments presented at the hearing and his/her action on
the petition. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued.
(b) Appeal.
(1) Any person whose petition for reconsideration by the CEA has not been granted in its entirety
and who remains adversely affected by the CEA's order, or who is subject to an order of the CEA
issued following a show cause hearing under section 34-337(d), may appeal the action of the CEA to
the city council by filing a written appeal with the city council within ten days of the person's notice
of the CEA's adverse action on the petition for reconsideration, or within ten days of the person's
notice of the issuance of the order following the show cause hearing, as the case may be.
(2) Failure to submit a timely written appeal to the city council shall be deemed to be a waiver of
further administrative review.
(3) In its written appeal to the city council, the appealing party shall indicate the particular
provisions of the order objected to, the particular determinations of the CEA that are contested, the
reasons that the CEA's order and/or determinations are contested, and any alternative order that the
appealing party would accept.
(4) The effect of the CEA's order, as issued or modified, shall not be stayed pending the appeal to
the city council, unless the city council expressly so states.
(5) Within 30 days of the submittal of a written appeal to the city council, the city council shall
hear and consider the appeal in open meeting. The appellant shall be notified at least three days in
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 312/684
advance of the date and time of the city council meeting at which the appeal will be heard and
considered.
(6) The appellant shall have the right to public appearance before the city council to present oral
and written statements in support of his/her appeal. If the city council wishes to consider testimony of
witnesses or other evidence beyond that in the record of any hearing before the CEA the city council
may remand the matter to the CEA for the taking of additional testimony or other evidence.
(7) Upon consideration of any written and oral statements made to the city council, as well as the
record made before the CEA, the city council shall act on the appeal by affirming, vacating, or
modifying the order of the CEA, and/or by remanding the matter to the CEA for further action.
(8) Following final action by the city council on the appeal, any adversely affected party may
challenge such action by the city council in an appropriate court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ordinance 11-11-52, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 11/15/11)
Sec. 34-339 Judicial enforcement remedies
(a) Civil remedies.
(1) Whenever it appears that a person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
article that relates to:
a. The preservation of public safety, relating to the materials or methods used in construction
of any structure or improvement of real property;
b. The preservation of public health or to the fire safety of a building or other structure or
improvement;
c. The establishment of criteria for land subdivision or construction of buildings, including
street design;
d. Dangerous damaged or deteriorated structures or improvements;
e. Conditions caused by accumulations of refuse, vegetation, or other matter that creates
breeding and living places for insects and rodents; or
f. Point source effluent limitations or the discharge of a pollutant, other than from a nonpoint
source, into the MS4.
The city may invoke V.T.C.A., Local Government Code secs. 54.011-54.017, as amended, and
petition the state district court or the county court at law of Collin or Denton County, through the city
attorney, for either the injunctive relief specified in subsection (a)(2), or the civil penalties specified
in subsection (a)(3) below, or both the specified injunctive relief and civil penalties.
(2) Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code sec. 54.016, as amended, the city may obtain
against the owner or the operator of a facility a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate,
that:
a. Prohibits any conduct that violates any provision of this article that relates to any matter
specified in subsections (a)(1)a-f. above; or
b. Compels the specific performance of any action that is necessary for compliance with any
provision of this article that relates to any matter specified in subsections (a)(1)a-f. above.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 313/684
(3) Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code sec. 54.017, as amended, the city may recover a
civil penalty of not more than $1,000.00 per day for each violation of any provision of this article that
relates to any matter specified in subsections (a)(1)a-e. above, and a civil penalty of not more than
$5,000.00 per day for each violation of any provision of this article that relates to any matter
specified in subsection (a)(1)f. above, if the city proves that:
a. The defendant was actually notified of the provisions of the ordinance; and
b. After the defendant received notice of the ordinance provisions, the defendant committed
acts in violation of the ordinance or failed to take action necessary for compliance with the
ordinance.
(b) Criminal penalties.
(1) Any person, who has violated any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, shall
be strictly liable for such violation regardless of the presence or absence of a culpable mental state,
except as expressly provided herein, and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than
$2,000.00 per violation, per day, or any greater fine authorized by state statute.
(2) Any person who has knowingly made any false statement, representation, or certification in any
application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant
to this article, or any order issued hereunder, or who has falsified, tampered with, or knowingly
rendered inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than $2,000.00 per violation, per day, or any greater fine
authorized by state statute.
(3) In determining the amount of any fine imposed hereunder, the court shall take into account all
relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the
magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the violation,
corrective actions by the violator, the compliance history of the violator, the knowledge, intent,
negligence, or other state of mind of the violator, and any other factor as justice requires.
(c) Civil suit under the Texas Water Code. Whenever it appears that a violation or threat of violation of any
provision of V.T.C.A., Water Code sec. 26.121, as amended, or any rule, permit, or order of the Texas Water
Commission, has occurred or is occurring within the jurisdiction of the City of Frisco, exclusive of its
extraterritorial jurisdiction, the city, in the same manner as the Texas Water Commission, may have a suit
instituted in a state district court through its city attorney for the injunctive relief or civil penalties or both
authorized in V.T.C.A., Water Code sec. 26.123(a), as amended, against the person who committed or is
committing or threatening to commit the violation. This power is exercised pursuant to V.T.C.A., Water Code
sec. 26.124, as amended. In any suit brought by the city under this subsection (c), the Texas Water Commission
is a necessary and indispensable party.
(d) Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
that the city may have under state or federal law or other city ordinances. The city may take any, all, or any
combination of these actions against a violator. The city is empowered to take more than one enforcement action
against any violator. These actions may be taken concurrently.
(Ordinance 11-11-52, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 11/15/11)
Sec. 34-340 Supplemental enforcement action
(a) Performance bonds. The CEA may, by written notice, order any owner or operator of a source of
stormwater discharge associated with construction or industrial activity to file a satisfactory bond, payable to the
city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the CEA to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance
with this article, any order issued hereunder, any required best management practice, and/or any SWPPP
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 314/684
provision, and/or to achieve final stabilization of the site. The city may deny approval of any building permit,
grading permit, subdivision plat, site development plan, or any other city permit or approval necessary to
commence or continue construction or any industrial activity at the site, or to assume occupancy, until such a
performance bond has been filed.
(b) Liability insurance. The CEA may, by written notice, order any owner or operator of a source of
stormwater discharge associated with construction or industrial activity to submit proof that it has obtained
liability insurance, or other financial assurance, in an amount not to exceed a value determined by the CEA, that
is sufficient to remediate, restore, and abate any damage to the MS4, the waters of the United States, or any other
aspect of the environment that is caused by the discharge.
(c) Public nuisances. A violation of any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, is hereby
declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the CEA. Any person(s) creating a
public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the City Code governing such nuisances, including
reimbursing the city for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance.
(Ordinance 11-11-52, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 11/15/11)
Sec. 34-341 Construction activities in right-of-way
The following is required for all construction activity within public right-of-way dedicated to an agency such as
the city, county or state or all construction activity within right-of-way dedicated to a homeowners association,
except for construction activity performed by or for the agency responsible for the right-of-way:
(1) At the end of each workday, the street shall be free of pollutants originating from the
construction site.
(2) No loose material may be placed or stored in right-of-way without sufficient BMPs installed
and maintained to prevent any discharge to pavement or other drainage conveyance.
(3) Sediment controls may not be placed on or near inlets or on pavement unless the control:
a. Does not impede the flow of water or traffic; and
b. Does not create siltation on pavement.
(4) An 8.5" x 11" approved city stormwater placard shall be posted and made visible on the
construction site. The city will make the approved placard available.
(Ordinance 16-04-36, sec. 3, adopted 4/19/16)
Secs. 34-342–34-365 Reserved
ARTICLE X. STORMWATER FEATURE MAINTENANCE
Sec. 34-366 General provisions
(a) Purposes. The purposes and objectives of this article are as follows:
(1) To address stormwater runoff from the construction of new development and redevelopment
projects that will disturb land and discharge into the small MS4 by regulating stormwater features.
(2) To enable the city to comply with all federal and state laws and regulations applicable to post
construction runoff.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 315/684
(b) Administration. Except as otherwise provided herein, the director of engineering services (DES), the
director of public works (DPW), and code enforcement administrator (CEA) shall administer, implement, and
enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon these people may be
delegated to other city personnel.
(c) Abbreviations. The following abbreviations when used in this article shall have the designated meanings:
BMP - Best management practices
CEA - Code enforcement administrator
CFR - Code of Federal Regulations
DES - Director of engineering services
DPW - Director of public works
MS4 - Municipal separate storm sewer system
(d) Definitions. Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this
article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated.
Best management practices (BMP). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures,
and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the United States. BMPs also
include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks,
sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.
Bioretention. A method of treating surface runoff and settling of suspended solids through a terrestrial aerobic
(upland) plant/soil/microbe complex to remove pollutants through a variety of physical, chemical and biological
processes.
Channel. A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or
periodically flowing water. This shall include, the bed, the banks, and the entire erosion hazard setback,
floodplain zone, and easement.
City. The City of Frisco, Texas, or the city council of Frisco.
City inspector(s). Shall refer the DES, DPW or CEA who go on site to determine if the provisions of this article
are being met.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 316/684
Code enforcement administrator (CEA). The person appointed by the city manager to enforce city codes or
his/her duly authorized representative.
Debris. Any solid waste, or yard waste.
Detention. The temporary storage of storm runoff with the goals of controlling peak discharge rates and
providing gravity settling of pollutants.
Detention facility. A detention basin or alternative structure designed for the purpose of temporary storage of
surface runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates.
Director of engineering services (DES). The person appointed to the position of DES by the city manager to
provide engineering and technical services, or his/her duly authorized representative.
Director of public works (DPW). The person appointed by the city manager to manage field operations and
provide environmental education, or his/her duly authorized representative.
Discharge. Any addition or introduction of any pollutant, stormwater, or any other substance whatsoever into the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or into waters of the United States.
Garbage. Putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials from the handling, preparation, cooking, or
consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities, and the handling and sale of
produce and other food products.
Generally accepted maintenance activities. Procedures, work tasks, techniques and schedules established for the
sustainability and function of a stormwater feature published by a governmental agency, educational
organization, professional organization or other subject matter experts.
Good working order. The stormwater feature functions as designed to achieve its purpose pursuant to the design
intent and record drawings and is not a public nuisance. This includes preserving and continuing its function in
controlling stormwater quality and quantity as the degree or amount for which the stormwater feature was
designed.
Maintenance activities. Practices required for the long-term sustainability and function of a component or
system. This includes periodic inspections, debris removal and disposal, replanting of trees, maintaining
vegetation, removal of silt, and repair of manmade components. The maintenance activities in natural channels
and riparian areas shall be as minimal as possible.
Natural channels. Channels left in or near their natural state, maintaining the natural alignment and grade and
riparian corridor.
Owner. The person who owns a facility, part of property.
Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock
company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities.
Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical
waste, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt,
and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water. The term “pollutant” does not include tail
water or runoff water from irrigation or rainwater runoff from cultivated or uncultivated range land, pasture land,
and farm land.
Pollution. The alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or biological quality of, or the contamination of, any
water in the state that renders the water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to humans, animal life, vegetation, or
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 317/684
property, or to the public health, safety, or welfare, or impairs the usefulness or the public enjoyment of the
water for any lawful or reasonable purpose.
Public nuisance. A condition which meets all of the requirements:
(1) Is injurious to health, or is indecent or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use
of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property.
(2) Affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of
persons, although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon individuals may be unequal.
Rubbish. Nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, that consists of:
(1) Combustible waste materials, including paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber,
plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, and similar materials; and
(2) Noncombustible waste materials, including glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, metal
furniture, and similar materials that do not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures (1600 to 1800
degrees Fahrenheit).
Solid waste. Any garbage, rubbish, refuse, sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or
air pollution control facility, and other discarded material, including, solid, liquid, semi-solid, or contained
gaseous material resulting from industrial, municipal, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations, and from
community and institutional activities.
Stormwater. Stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage.
Stormwater feature. A natural or manmade component or system which remains as a permanent part of a
development also known as structural BMPs. The purpose of which includes stormwater conveyance,
stormwater quality improvement, flood mitigation, or erosion reduction. The features include but are not limited
to, channels, detention facilities, retention ponds, bioretention, rain harvest systems, landscape buffers, riparian
areas, enhanced swales, filter strips, permeable pavers and manufactured devices.
Water resource zone. A landscape area that receives surface runoff from an adjacent impervious paved surface
and uses one or more BMPs such as bioretention to capture and treat the runoff near the source.
Yard waste. Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris, and brush that result from landscaping maintenance
and land-clearing operations.
(Ordinance 12-06-43, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 6/19/12)
Sec. 34-367 General requirements
(a) The owner of any stormwater feature shall have full responsibility for maintenance activities so that the
stormwater feature remains in good working order.
(b) The maintenance activities shall be performed according to the below guidelines with the first applicable
item to serve as the prevailing guideline:
(1) Documents submitted to and reviewed by the city, and filed at the county with the property that
establish the maintenance activities for the stormwater feature, if available.
(2) The manufacturer's recommended maintenance activities if the stormwater feature was
manufactured.
(3) Generally accepted maintenance activities suitable in the North Texas Region, if available.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 318/684
(4) Generally accepted maintenance activities.
(c) Maintenance activities resulting in the following are prohibited:
(1) Increased erosion potential;
(2) Decreased bank stability;
(3) Increased flooding potential;
(4) Increased pollutants;
(5) Unnecessary disturbance of vegetation and riparian areas; or
(6) Increased proliferation of invasive species.
(Ordinance 12-06-43, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 6/19/12)
Sec. 34-368 Notice of violation
(a) In the event any owner, tenant, agent or person responsible for or claiming or having supervision or control
over real property governed by this article fails to comply with the provisions of this article, the city, by and
through its code enforcement division or designee shall give notice of the violation to such owner. Such notice
shall be given in any one of the following ways:
(1) Personally to the owner in writing;
(2) By letter addressed to the owner at the owner's address as recorded in the appraisal district
records of the appraisal district in which the property is located; or
(3) If personal service cannot be obtained:
a. By publication in the city's official newspaper at least once;
b. By posting notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the
violation relates; or
c. By posting a notice to a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property
to which the violation relates, if the property contains no buildings.
(b) If the city mails a notice to the owner in accordance with subsection (a), and the United States Postal
Service returns the notice as “refused,” “unclaimed,” or if the address required by subsection (a)(2) was used and
the notice is returned as “not deliverable as addressed” (or an equivalent marking), the validity of the notice is
not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered.
(c) In a notice provided under this section, the city may inform the owner by regular mail and a posting on the
property that if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature on or before the anniversary of
the date of the notice, the city, without further notice, may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess
the expense against the property or issue citations. If a violation covered by a notice under this subsection occurs
within one (1) year, and the city has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change, then the
city, without notice, may take any action permitted by section 34-369 and assess its expenses as provide in
section 34-370.
(Ordinance 12-06-43, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 6/19/12)
Sec. 34-369 Citations; Work or improvements by the city; charges against owner
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 319/684
If the owner fails or refuses to comply with the demand for compliance in the notice within ten (10) days of such
notice, the city may:
(1) Issue citations as provided in section 8 [sic]; and
(2) Do the work or make the improvement required, pay for the work done or improvements made
and charge the expenses to the owner of the property as provided herein. The property owner will
have twenty (20) days to reimburse the city from the completion date of such work to abate the
violation(s) at the property.
(Ordinance 12-06-43, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 6/19/12)
Sec. 34-370 Assessment of expenses; lien
(a) In the event the owner fails or refuses to pay such expenses charged to the owner, within twenty (20) days
after the abatement work is completed, a lien may be obtained. The lien and other expenses incurred by the city
may be filed against the property. Expenses will include, but are not limited to the following:
(1) Fees for service work to abate violation(s);
(2) Fees to file lien;
(3) Fees to release lien;
(4) Postage fees;
(5) Courier fees;
(6) Legal fees; and
(7) Any other fees charged to the city.
(b) To obtain a lien, the [city] must file a statement of the expenses incurred to correct the condition of the real
property with the county clerk of the county in which the property is located. The statement must also state the
name of the owner, if known, and the legal description of the property. The lien attaches upon filing of the
statement with the county clerk.
(c) The city's lien shall be a prior lien on such property, second only to tax liens and liens for street
improvements. The lien amount shall include simple interest, which shall accrue at the rate of ten percent (10%)
per annum on the date of the expenses were incurred by the city. The city may bring suit for foreclosure to
recover the expenditures and the interest due.
(Ordinance 12-06-43, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 6/19/12)
Sec. 34-371 Right of entry; Inspection
The owner shall grant the city a right of entry in the event that the DES or DPW has reason to believe it has
become necessary to inspect, monitor, maintain, repair, reconstruct, or discontinue the use of stormwater features
and/or structural BMPs; however, in no case shall the right of entry, of itself, confer an obligation on the city to
assume responsibility for the stormwater feature and/or structural BMPs.
(1) Where an owner has security measures in force which require proper identification and
clearance before entry into its premises, the owner shall make necessary arrangements with its
security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the city will be permitted to enter
without unreasonable delay for the purposes of performing his/her responsibilities.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 320/684
(2) The city shall have the right to set up on the owner's property, or require installation of, such
devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the owner's operations.
(3) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected
and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner at the written or verbal request of the city
and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner.
(4) Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to the owner's premises shall be a violation of
this article.
(Ordinance 12-06-43, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 6/19/12)
CHAPTERS 35–37
RESERVED
CHAPTER 38
FIRE PREVENTION AND EMERGENCY SERVICES*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 38-1 Reward for information concerning arson
From and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the city offers and promises
to pay a reward of $250.00 to any person who voluntarily gives information to any law enforcement officer,
which information leads to the arrest and subsequent conviction of any person who commits the offense of arson
within the corporate limits of the city. (Ordinance 171, sec. 1, adopted 10/6/64)
Secs. 38-2–38-20 Reserved
ARTICLE II. FIRE DEPARTMENT
Sec. 38-21 Fire department established
The fire department is established by combining the volunteer fire department and the emergency ambulance
corporation. (Ordinance 86-08-01, sec. 1, adopted 8/5/86)
Sec. 38-22 Duties of fire department
The duties of the fire department include but are not limited to the fighting of fires, providing emergency rescue
services, providing emergency medical services, and providing fire prevention services and enforcement. Other
duties may be prescribed by the city council. (Ordinance 86-08-01, sec. 2, adopted 8/5/86)
Sec. 38-23 Chief of department
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 321/684
The chief of the department shall promulgate rules, regulations, and operating procedures under which the
department operates. Said rules, regulations and operating procedures shall be approved by the city council, and
the council may amend said procedures as it deems necessary. The rules, regulations, and operating manual shall
be designated as the “Operating Manual of the Frisco fire department.” (Ordinance 86-08-01, sec. 3, adopted
8/5/86)
Sec. 38-24 Property
(a) All property, real or personal, tangible or intangible, of the fire department shall be the property of the city.
(b) The city council and fire chief are the sole authorities to accept contributions to the fire department. Said
contributions shall be used for the purchase of equipment or property for use by the fire department or its
members. All contributions shall be made of record and said record shall be maintained by the city secretary.
(c) Any contribution of personal or real property to the fire department shall become property of the city. All
property or goods purchased with money donated to the fire department shall become property of the city.
(Ordinance 86-08-01, sec. 5, adopted 8/5/86)
Secs. 38-25–38-51 Reserved
ARTICLE III. FIREWORKS*
Sec. 38-52 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Fireworks means any composition or device designed to produce a visible or audible effect by combustion,
explosion, deflagration or detonation, and that is defined as “special fireworks” by 49 CFR 173.88(d) or as
“common fireworks” by 49 CFR 173.100(r).
Person means a natural or legal person, parent, guardian, association, firm, company, whether incorporated or
unincorporated.
(Ordinance 307, sec. I, adopted 8/3/72)
Sec. 38-53 Prohibition
It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, sell, or offer for sale, discharge or possess fireworks of any
type, or to permit any such violation of this article. (Ordinance 307, sec. II, adopted 8/3/72)
Sec. 38-54 Exceptions
This article excludes from the general prohibition of fireworks the following items:
(1) A toy pistol, toy cane, toy gun, or other device that uses paper or plastic caps in sheets, strips,
rolls, or individual caps that contain not more than an average of 2500ths of a grain of explosive
composition per cap and that is packed and shipped under 49 CFR 173(1996);
(2) A model rocket or model rocket motor designed, sold and used to propel recoverable aero
models;
(3) A propelling or expelling charge consisting of a mixture of sulfur, charcoal, and potassium
nitrate;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 322/684
(4) Novelties or trick noisemakers;
(5) The sale, at wholesale, of any type of fireworks by a resident manufacturer, distributor,
importer, or jobber if the fireworks are intended for shipment directly out of state under state and
federal regulations;
(6) The sale or use of, in emergency situations, pyrotechnic signaling devices or distress signals for
marine, aviation or highway use;
(7) The use of a fuse or a railway torpedo by a railroad;
(8) The sale of blank cartridges for use in a radio, television, film or theater production; a signal or
ceremonial purpose in an athletic event; or an industrial use; or
(9) The use of a pyrotechnic device by a military organization.
(Ordinance 307, sec. III, adopted 8/3/72)
Sec. 38-55 Public nuisance
The presence of any fireworks in violation of this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. The fire
marshal is hereby directed to seize and safely destroy any fireworks found within the jurisdiction of the city. Any
member of the fire or police department is empowered to stop and detain the illegal transportation of any
fireworks, and to close any building where fireworks are illegally stored, in order that said fireworks may be
seized and destroyed. Notwithstanding any penal provision afforded in this article, the city attorney is authorized
to file suit on behalf of the city for such injunctive relief as may be necessary to prevent the violation of any
provision of this article, but it shall not be necessary to obtain any such injunctive relief as a prerequisite to such
seizure and destruction. Any member of the fire department is hereby authorized to enter any building where the
presence of fireworks is prohibited, in order to carry out the provisions of this article. (Ordinance 307, sec. IV,
adopted 8/3/72)
Sec. 38-56 Penalty
Any person, firm, corporation or business entity violating this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction thereof shall be fined any sum not exceeding $2,000.00. Each continuing day's violation
under this article shall constitute a separate offense. The penal provisions imposed under this article shall not
preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin the violation. The city retains all legal rights and remedies available to
it pursuant to local, state and federal law. (Ordinance 307, sec. V, adopted 8/3/72; Ordinance 01-05-37, sec. 2,
adopted 5/1/01)
Sec. 38-57 Territorial application
This article shall be applicable within the corporate limits of the city and further within the area immediately
contiguous and adjacent to the city limits, extending for a total distance of 5,000 foot; provided, however, that
this article shall not apply within any portion of said 5,000-feet area which is contained within the territory of
any other municipal corporation. (Ordinance 307, sec. VI, adopted 8/3/72)
Secs. 38-58–38-87 Reserved
ARTICLE IV. FIRE CODE AND TECHNICAL REGULATIONS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY*
Sec. 38-88 Adoption of the International Fire Code
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 323/684
The 2018 International Fire Code (“2018 International Fire Code”), copyrighted by the International Code
Council, Inc., including appendices A–N, save and except the deletions and additions set forth in exhibit A,
attached to Ordinance 19-11-113 and incorporated herein for all purposes, is hereby adopted as the fire code for
the city, regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising
from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices and from conditions
hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises located within the city. The 2018
International Fire Code is made a part of this section as if fully set forth herein. Three (3) copies of the 2018
International Fire Code are on file in the office of the city secretary, being marked and designated as the 2018
International Fire Code. The deletions and additions set forth in exhibit A to Ordinance 19-11-113 also are
located on city's website under development services. (Ordinance 08-04-39, sec. 3, adopted 4/1/08; Ordinance
15-06-37, sec. 3, adopted 6/16/15; Ordinance 17-11-77 adopted 11/7/17; Ordinance 19-11-113, sec. 3, adopted
11/19/19)
Sec. 38-89 Amendments to fire code
The deletions and additions to the 2018 International Fire Code set forth in exhibit A to Ordinance 19-11-113 are
on file in the office of the city secretary and are also located on the city's website under development services.
(Ordinance 08-04-39, sec. 4, adopted 4/1/08; Ordinance 10-01-05, sec. 2, adopted 1/19/10; Ordinance 15-06-37,
sec. 3, adopted 6/16/15; Ordinance 17-11-77 adopted 11/7/17; Ordinance 19-11-113, sec. 3, adopted 11/19/19)
Sec. 38-90 Texas accessibility standards
At a minimum, visual signal appliances must be provided in restrooms and any other general usage areas (e.g.,
meeting rooms and break rooms), hallways, lobbies, and any other area for common use. If emergency warning
systems are provided, then they shall include both audible alarms and visual alarms. (Ordinance 08-04-39, sec.
5, adopted 4/1/08)
Sec. 38-91 Controlled intersection emergency systems
All traffic-controlled intersections installed in the city shall be equipped with a device that is compatible with the
GTT Opticom Priority Control System, or an equivalent thereof. All optical detectors shall be mounted at or near
the intersection that permits a direct, unobstructed line-of-sight to the oncoming vehicle. Card racks and phase
selectors must be mounted in traffic control cabinets. (Ordinance 08-04-39, sec. 6, adopted 4/1/08; Ordinance
19-11-113, sec. 4, adopted 11/19/19)
Sec. 38-92 Penalty provision
Any person, firm, corporation or entity violating this division, as it exists or may be amended, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding two thousand
and no/100 dollars ($2,000.00). Each continuing day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. The penal
provisions imposed under this division shall not preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin the violation. The city
retains all legal rights and remedies available to it under local, state and federal law. (Ordinance 08-04-39, sec. 7,
adopted 4/1/08; Ordinance 19-11-113, sec. 5, adopted 11/19/19)
Secs. 38-93–38-110 Reserved
DIVISION 2. GENERAL INSTALLATION OF SPRINKLER SYSTEMS
Sec. 38-111 Adoption of the 2016 NFPA 13
The 2016 NFPA 13, save and except the deletions and additions set forth below, is hereby adopted as the
regulations governing the installation of sprinkler systems in the city. Three (3) copies of the 2016 NFPA 13 are
on file in the office of the city secretary, being marked and designated as the 2016 NFPA 13. (Ordinance 00-12-
16, sec. 1, adopted 12/19/00; Ordinance 15-06-38, sec. 3, adopted 6/16/15; Ordinance 17-11-76 adopted 11/7/17;
Ordinance 19-11-112 adopted 11/19/19)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 324/684
Sec. 38-112 Deletions and additions
The following deletions and additions to the 2016 NFPA 13 are approved and adopted (deletions are evidenced
by strikethrough and additions are evidenced by underline):
Chapter 6: System Components and Hardware of the 2016 NFPA 13 is amended as follows:
Section 6.7 Valves of the 2016 NFPA 13 is amended as follows:
6.6.1.3.2 A listed water control valve assembly with a reliable position indication connected to
a remote supervisory station shall be permitted. Valves on connections to water supplies,
sectional control and isolation valves, and other valves in supply pipes to sprinklers and other
fixed water-based fire suppression systems shall be supervised in accordance with the current
International Fire Code, as adopted and amended by the Frisco City Council.
Section 6.7 Fire Department Connections of the 2016 NFPA 13 is amended as follows:
6.7.1.3 [Entire subsection deleted.]
6.7.2 [Entire subsection deleted.]
6.7.2 Fire Department connections shall be equipped with listed Knox locking caps, properly
secured and arranged for easy removal by fire departments.
Section 6.8 Waterflow Alarm Devices of the 2016 NFPA 13 is amended as follows:
6.8.3.1 [Entire subsection deleted.]
6.8.3.1 An alarm unit shall include a listed mechanical alarm. No electrically operated
appliance shall be used.
Chapter 8: Installation Requirements of the 2016 NFPA 13 is amended as follows:
Section 8.15 Special Situations is amended to read as follows:
8.15.5.3 and Items 1 5 [Entire subsection deleted.]
8.15.5.3 Automatic sprinklers shall be installed in elevator machine rooms and elevator
machine spaces. Automatic sprinklers shall be installed in elevator hoistways where
combustible materials are present or the elevator shaft is constructed of combustible
construction.
8.15.7.1 Unless the requirements of 8.15.7.2, 8.15.7.3, or 8.15.7.4 are met, sprinklers shall be
installed under exterior roofs, canopies, porte-cocheres, balconies, decks, or similar projections
exceeding 4 ft. (1.2m) in width. Sprinklers must be provided beneath exterior roofs, canopies,
porte-cocheres, balconies, decks or similar projections when a vehicle or truck can stop or park
beneath the roof, canopy, porte-cochere, balcony, deck or similar projection, regardless of
construction type of the structure.
8.15.7.2 [Entire subsection deleted.]
8.15.7.3 [Entire subsection deleted.]
8.15.7.5 Sprinklers shall be installed under exterior projections greater than 2 ft (0.6 m) wide
over areas where combustibles are stored or present. Dining establishments must have
sprinklers provided beneath the projection where seating is provided.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 325/684
8.15.8.1.1 [Entire subsection deleted.]
8.15.8.1.1 Sprinklers are required in all bathrooms regardless of construction type and/or size.
8.15.8.2* [Entire subsection deleted.]
8.15.8.2* Sprinklers are required in all clothes closets, linen closets, and pantries within
dwelling units regardless of size or construction type.
Section 8.16 Piping Installation is amended as follows:
8.16.1.1.2.1 [Entire subsection deleted.]
8.16.1.1.2.1 Valves on connections to water supplies, sectional control and isolation valves, and
other valves in supply pipes to sprinklers and other fixed water-based fire suppression systems
shall be supervised in accordance with the current International Fire Code, as adopted and
amended by the Frisco City Council.
Section 25.2.1.8 Hydrostatic Test is amended as follows:
25.2.1.8 When systems are being hydrostatically tested, tests shall be permitted to be conducted
with pendent or horizontal sidev1all sprinklers or plugs installed in fittings. Any plugs shall be
replaced with pendent or horizontal sidev1all sprinklers after the test is completed.
(Ordinance 00-12-16, sec. 2, adopted 12/19/00; Ordinance 15-06-38, sec. 4, adopted 6/16/15; Ordinance 17-11-
76 adopted 11/7/17; Ordinance 19-11-112 adopted 11/19/19)
Sec. 38-113 Penalty
Any person, firm, corporation or entity violating this division, as it exists or may be amended, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding two thousand
and no/100 dollars ($2,000.00). Each continuing day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. The penal
provisions imposed under this division shall not preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin the violation. The city
retains all legal rights and remedies available to it under local, state and federal law. (Ordinance 00-12-16, sec. 3,
adopted 12/19/00; Ordinance 15-06-38, sec. 6, adopted 6/16/15; Ordinance 17-11-76 adopted 11/7/17;
Ordinance 19-11-112 adopted 11/19/19)
Secs. 38-114–38-139 Reserved
DIVISION 3. SPRINKLER SYSTEMS IN RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY
Sec. 38-140 Adoption of the 2016 NFPA 13R
The 2016 NFPA 13R, save and except the deletions and additions set forth below, is hereby adopted as the
regulations governing the installation of sprinkler systems in the city for residential occupancies up to and
including four (4) stories in height. Three (3) copies of the 2016 NFPA 13R are on file in the office of the city
secretary, being marked and designated as the 2016 NFPA 13R. (Ordinance 00-12-17, sec. 1, adopted 12/19/00;
Ordinance 15-06-39, sec. 3, adopted 6/16/15; Ordinance 17-11-75 adopted 11/7/17; Ordinance 19-11-111
adopted 11/19/19)
Sec. 38-141 Deletions and additions
The following deletions and additions to the 2016 NFPA 13R are approved and adopted (deletions are evidenced
by strikethrough and additions are evidenced by underline):
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 326/684
Chapter 6: Installation Requirements of the 2016 NFPA 13R is amended as follows:
Section 6.6 Location of Sprinklers of the 2016 NFPA l 3R is amended as follows:
6.6.2* [Entire subsection deleted.]
6.6.2* Sprinklers shall be required in all bathrooms regardless of size.
6.6.3 [Entire subsection deleted.]
6.6.3 Sprinklers shall be required in all closets, linen closets and pantries within the dwelling
units.
6.6.5* [Entire subsection deleted.]
6.6.5* Sprinklers are required on all porches, balconies, corridors, and stairs that are open and
attached.
6.6.6 [Entire subsection deleted.]
6.6.6 Sprinklers are required in all attics, penthouse equipment rooms, elevator machine rooms,
crawl spaces, floor/ceiling spaces, elevator shafts constructed of combustible construction or
containing combustible materials and other concealed spaces that are not used or intended for
living purposes or storage.
6.6.7 [Entire subsection deleted.]
6.6.7 Sprinklers shall be required in closets (regardless of size) on exterior balconies and
exterior breezeways/corridors regardless of size.
Section 6.8 Valves of the 2016 NFPA 13R is amended as follows:
6.8.2 [Entire subsection deleted.]
6.8.2 A listed water control valve assembly with a reliable position indication connected to a
remote supervisory station shall be permitted. Valves on connections to water supplies,
sectional control and isolation valves, and other valves in supply pipes to sprinklers and other
fixed water-based fire suppression systems shall be supervised in accordance with the adopted
International Fire Code.
Section 6.11* Fire Department Connection of the 2016 NFPA 13R is amended as follows:
6.11.2 [Entire subsection deleted.]
6.11.2 At least two 2-1/2-inch diameter fire department connections shall be provided.
Connections shall be equipped with listed Knox locking caps properly secured and arranged for
easy removal by the fire department.
Chapter 7: Discharge Criteria of the 2016 NFPA 13R is amended as follows:
Section 7.2 Design Criteria-Outside Dwelling Units of the 2016 NFPA 13R is amended as follows:
7.2.5 [Entire subsection deleted.]
7.2.5 The design discharge, number of design sprinklers, water demand of the system, sprinkler
coverage and position of sprinklers for areas to be sprinklered outside the dwelling unit, that is
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 327/684
not addressed in NFPA 13R, shall comply with the specifications in the 2016 NFPA 13,
Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems, as adopted and amended by the Frisco City
Council.
(Ordinance 00-12-17, sec. 2, adopted 12/19/00; Ordinance 15-06-39, sec. 4, adopted 6/16/15; Ordinance 17-11-
75 adopted 11/7/17; Ordinance 19-11-111 adopted 11/19/19)
Sec. 38-142 Penalty
Any person, firm, corporation or entity violating this division, as it exists or may be amended, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding two thousand
and no/100 dollars ($2,000.00). Each continuing day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. The penal
provisions imposed under this division shall not preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin the violation. The city
retains all legal rights and remedies available to it under local, state and federal law. (Ordinance 00-12-17, sec. 3,
adopted 12/19/00; Ordinance 15-06-39, sec. 6, adopted 6/16/15; Ordinance 17-11-75 adopted 11/7/17;
Ordinance 19-11-111 adopted 11/19/19)
Secs. 38-143–38-167 Reserved
ARTICLE V. PORTABLE GRILLS IN APARTMENTS
Sec. 38-168 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Approved signage means a sign, placard or decal no less than 24 square inches and no greater than 30 square
inches in size, contrasting in color to its background with bold lettering no less than one-quarter inch in size
stating, “-PROHIBITED- THE USE OF ANY GRILL, HIBACHI, OR SMOKER IN OR WITHIN TEN FEET
OF BUILDING OR OVERHANG FRISCO FIRE CODE, $2,000 FINE” and with graphics as indicated in the
illustrations below:
PROHIBITED
THE USE OF ANY GRILL, HIBACHI, OR SMOKER IN OR WITHIN 10 FEET OF BUILDING OR
OVERHANG
FRISCO FIRE CODE $2,000 FINE
(5" × 5")
- PROHIBITED -
THE USE OF ANY GRILL, HIBACHI, OR SMOKER IN OR WITHIN 10 FEET OF BUILDING OR
OVERHANG
FRISCO FIRE CODE $2,000 FINE
(3" × 8")
Grill means a fixed or portable cooking utensil on which food is exposed directly to red heat or open flame as
from heated briquettes, charcoal, electricity, natural gas, propane compressed gas or wood, which is commonly
referred to as a barbecue pit, barbecue grill, hibachi or smoker.
(Ordinance 94-08-04, sec. 1, adopted 8/2/94)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 328/684
Sec. 38-169 Apartment buildings
(a) It is unlawful for a tenant, the management or an owner of an apartment house or any other person to use
or allow or permit to be used a grill in an apartment house or within ten feet of any part of an apartment house or
on or under any portion of the structure of an apartment house.
(b) It is unlawful for any person to own or manage any apartment house without installing and maintaining on
each balcony and patio of each dwelling unit approved signage readily visible to the occupants prohibiting the
use of any grill.
(c) It is unlawful for any person to own or manage an apartment house structure that is designed without
patios or balconies without installing and maintaining approved signage in each separate common area.
(d) It is unlawful for any person to own or manage an apartment house without providing written proof to the
city that approved signage has been installed on each balcony and patio of each dwelling unit.
(e) It is unlawful for any person to own or manage an apartment house without notifying each tenant as part of
the lease agreement upon move-in that such approved signage exists.
(Ordinance 94-08-04, sec. 2, adopted 8/2/94)
Sec. 38-170 Penalty
Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a separate
offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of this article is committed,
continued, or permitted and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished by a fine in an
amount not less than $200.00 nor more than $2,000.00. (Ordinance 94-08-04, sec. 3, adopted 8/2/94)
Secs. 38-171–38-190 Reserved
ARTICLE VI. EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AND PRIVATE AMBULANCES
Sec. 38-191 Definitions
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall, for the purpose of this article, have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section.
Ambulance. Any motor vehicle constructed, reconstructed, arranged, equipped, or used for the purpose of
transporting sick or injured persons.
Ambulance call. The act of responding with an ambulance to a request for transportation of a sick or injured
person.
Ambulance personnel. A person who has the duty of performing or assisting in the performance of an ambulance
call, including driving or acting as an attendant on an ambulance.
City. The City of Frisco, Texas.
Critical care transport. The provision of medical care by a critical care transport team to a patient requiring
critical care transport by a critical care transport agency such that the failure to initiate on an urgent basis or
maintain during transport acute medical interventions, pharmacological interventions, or technologies would
likely result in sudden, clinically significant or life threatening deterioration in the patient's condition.
Director. The director of the department designated by the city manager to enforce and administer this article, or
the director's authorized representative.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 329/684
Emergency. Any circumstance that calls for immediate action and in which the element of time in transporting
the sick or injured for medical treatment is essential to the health, life, or limb of the person. Such circumstances
include, but are not limited to, accidents generally, acts of violence resulting in personal injury, and illnesses.
Emergency ambulance. An ambulance operated or approved to operate by a member of the fire department, or
any town, county, state, or agency of the United States, specially designed, constructed, equipped, and used for
transporting the sick or injured in answer to an emergency call.
Emergency call. Any request for ambulance service that is made by telephone or other means of communication
in circumstances that are, or have been represented to be, an emergency.
Emergency care. Care provided to the sick or injured during emergency transportation to a medical facility and
includes any necessary stabilization of the sick or injured in connection with that transportation.
Emergency patient. A person in whom a sickness or injury may cause a significant risk to the person's life or
limb. Such sickness or injury may include, but is not limited to, trauma (major injury to the body, head, or
extremities), chest pain, abdominal pain, unconsciousness, delirium, imminent delivery of a child, and serious
infection.
Emergency run. An emergency ambulance trip, requiring the use of warning lights or sirens, to the place where
an emergency exists or from the place of the emergency to a hospital, medical clinic or office, or other
appropriate destination for the patient.
Fire chief. The chief of the fire department of the City of Frisco or the chiefs duly authorized representative.
Fire department. The fire department of the City of Frisco, Texas.
Frisco Public Safety Communication Center. The central communications center of the city's police and fire
department.
Neonate/pediatric transport personnel. A registered nurse, physician, or respiratory therapist specially trained in
the emergency and transport care of newborn and pediatric patients.
Operate. To drive or to be in control of an ambulance.
Operator. The driver of an ambulance, the owner of an ambulance, or the holder of a private ambulance service
license.
Owner. The person to whom state license plates for a vehicle were issued.
Person. Any individual, corporation, business, trust, partnership, association, or other legal entity.
Police chief. The chief of police of the City of Frisco or the chiefs duly authorized representative.
Private ambulance. An ambulance constructed, equipped, and used for transporting sick, injured, or deceased
persons under circumstances that do not constitute an emergency and have not been represented as an
emergency.
Private ambulance service. The business of transporting, for compensation, sick, injured, or deceased persons
under circumstances that do not constitute an emergency and have not been represented as an emergency.
Private ambulance service registration. A permit issued by the city to allow a private ambulance service to
operate within the city. A private ambulance service becomes registered when it applies, meets the requirements
specified in this article, and has been approved by the city.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 330/684
Registered agency. A person or entity authorized under this article to engage in private ambulance service. The
term includes any owner, operator, driver, ambulance personnel, employee, or agent of the licensed business, but
does not include a subcontractor.
Special event. Any parade, sporting event, concert, or other event or gathering requiring on-site standby medical
personnel.
Specialized emergency medical services vehicle. A vehicle that is designed for responding to and transporting
sick or injured persons by any means of transportation other than by standard automotive ground ambulance or
rotor or fixed wing aircraft and that has sufficient staffing, equipment and supplies to provide for the specialized
needs of the patient transported. This category includes, but is not limited to, watercraft, off-road vehicles, and
specially designed, configured or equipped vehicles used for transporting special care patients such as critical
care or burn patients.
Street. Any street, alley, avenue, boulevard, drive, highway or other surface commonly used for the purpose of
travel within the corporate limits of the city.
(Ordinance 15-01-04 adopted 1/19/15)
Sec. 38-192 Emergency ambulance service provided by fire department
(a) The fire department shall provide all emergency ambulance response to emergency calls for service within
the city except as provided herein.
(b) The fire department shall provide all special event emergency medical services (EMS) upon the streets,
alleys or any public way or place within the city; provided, however, the fire department may authorize
registered private ambulance services to provide special event services when fire department ambulances are not
available.
(c) The city shall charge fees for emergency ambulance services in the city provided in response to a call
received by the fire department requesting the services.
(d) The person receiving emergency ambulance service, whether transported by ambulance or treated without
being transported by ambulance and any person contracting for the service shall be responsible for payment of
all fees. In the case of service received by a minor, the parent or guardian of the minor shall be responsible for
payment of all fees.
(Ordinance 15-01-04 adopted 1/19/15)
Sec. 38-193 Private ambulance service registration–Required
(a) A person commits an offense if he operates a private ambulance service within the city without a valid
private ambulance service registration issued by the fire department or operates or attempts to operate a private
emergency ambulance service within the city in violation of this article.
(b) A person commits an offense if he advertises or causes to be advertised the operation of a private
ambulance service that does not have a valid private ambulance service registration granted under this article
when the advertisement is reasonably calculated to be seen by persons seeking private ambulance service in the
city.
(c) A person commits an offense if he transports or offers to transport, for compensation, a sick, injured, or
deceased person by private ambulance from a location within the city to a location either inside or outside the
city without holding or being employed by a person holding a valid private ambulance service registration issued
under this article.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 331/684
(d) A person commits an offense if he hires or employs a private ambulance service to pick up a sick, injured,
or deceased person in the city when he knows the private ambulance service does not have a valid private
ambulance service registration under this article.
(e) No person shall furnish, operate, conduct, maintain, advertise or otherwise be engaged in the operation of
medical transfer services upon the streets of the city without having first registered in accordance with the terms
and provisions of this article.
(Ordinance 15-01-04 adopted 1/19/15)
Sec. 38-194 Same–Requirements
(a) To obtain a private ambulance service registration, a person must make written application to the fire
department upon a form provided for that purpose. The application must be signed by an applicant who is the
owner of the private ambulance service and notarized.
(b) The application must be submitted annually and include the following:
(1) The name, address, telephone number and email address of the applicant, the trade name under
which the applicant does business, and the street address and telephone number of the business
establishment from which the private ambulance service will be operated;
(2) The form of business of the applicant and, if the business is a sole proprietorship, partnership,
corporation, or association, a copy of the documents establishing the business and the name and
address of each person with a direct interest in the business;
(3) A statement of the nature and character of the service that the applicant proposes to provide, the
facts showing the demand for the service, the experience that the applicant has had in providing such
service, the fees charged for the service, and the time period, if any, that the applicant provided such
service within the city;
(4) The number and description of vehicles to be operated in the proposed service, including the
year, make, model, vehicle identification number, and state registration plate number and the class,
size, design, and color scheme (including color photograph) of each ambulance;
(5) Documentary evidence from an insurance company indicating the applicant has obtained
liability insurance as required by this article;
(6) Documentary evidence of payment of ad valorem taxes owed on the real and personal property
to be used in connection with the operation of the proposed service if the business establishment is
located in the city;
(7) A list, to be current at all times, of the owners and management personnel of the private
ambulance service including names, addresses, dates of birth, state driver's registration numbers;
(8) A list of any claims or judgments against the applicant, other owners or management personnel,
or employees for damages resulting from the negligent operation of an ambulance or any other
vehicle;
(9) Proof of a registration from the Texas Department of State Health Services to operate as an
emergency medical services provider;
(10) Any other information determined by the director to be necessary to the implementation and
enforcement of this article or to the protection of the public safety; and
(11) A nonrefundable application processing fee of $250.00.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 332/684
(Ordinance 15-01-04 adopted 1/19/15)
Sec. 38-195 Expiration and renewal of registration
A private ambulance service registration expires one year from the date of issuance. A registrant shall apply for
a renewal at least thirty (30) days before the expiration of the registration. (Ordinance 15-01-04 adopted 1/19/15)
Sec. 38-196 Private ambulance service insurance required
(a) A registered agency shall procure and keep in full force and effect automobile liability insurance,
professional liability insurance, and commercial general liability insurance written by an insurance company
approved by the state and acceptable to the city and issued in the standard form approved by the state department
of insurance. All provisions of the policies must be acceptable to the city. The insured provisions of each policy
must name the city and its officers and employees as additional insureds, and the coverage provisions must
provide coverage for any loss or damage that may arise to any person or property by reason of the operation of a
private ambulance service by the registrant.
(b) Each registrant shall provide documentation meeting the following minimum requirements:
(1) Automobile liability. Coverage for claims for damages resulting from an automobile accident
resulting in property damage and/or personal injury or death in an amount of not less than one million
dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence combined single limit. Such coverage is to include
uninsured/underinsured motorist coverage in an amount of not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) per occurrence;
(2) Professional liability. Coverage for claims for damages resulting from professional malpractice
liability in an amount of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) annual aggregate. If coverage is provided on a “claims made” basis,
extended period or “tail” coverage shall be provided for a minimum of four years after the expiration
date of the period the ambulance provider is authorized to operate in the city; and
(3) Commercial general liability. Coverage for claims for damages because of bodily injury,
sickness or disease or death of any person other than ambulance service provider's employees, claims
insured by usual bodily injury liability coverages, and claims for damages because of injuries to or
destruction of tangible property, including loss of use resulting therefrom in an amount of not less
than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence.
(c) Insurance required under this section must include:
(1) A cancellation provision in which the insurance company is required to notify the fire
department in writing not fewer than 10 days before canceling, failing to renew, or making a material
change to the insurance policy; and
(2) A provision to cover all vehicles, whether or not owned by the registrant, operating under the
private ambulance service registration.
(Ordinance 15-01-04 adopted 1/19/15)
Sec. 38-197 Private ambulance service regulations
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, either as owner, agent or otherwise, other than a member of the fire
department, or any to, county, state or agency of the United States, or duly appointed representative of the city,
to furnish, operate, conduct, maintain, advertise or otherwise be engaged in or profess to be engaged in the
operation of emergency ambulance service or special event EMS service, upon the streets, alleys or any public
way or place within the city, for the purpose of treating and/or transporting patients within the city, except in the
following circumstances:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 333/684
(1) A person shall operate an emergency ambulance within the city to render assistance during a
catastrophe or major emergency, whether an emergency exists, if requested to do so by the city's
public safety communications center or the fire chief, when fire department emergency ambulances
are determined to be insufficient in number or inadequate for other reasons.
(2) A registered agency may operate a private ambulance within the city as a backup emergency
ambulance if requested to do so by the city's public safety communications center when fire
department emergency ambulances are not available.
(3) A person may operate a private ambulance on an emergency run to a hospital within the city, if:
a. The emergency patient was picked up by the ambulance outside the city limits; and
b. The ambulance making the emergency run is licensed and operated in accordance with the
Emergency Medical Services Act (chapter 773, Texas Health and Safety Code), as amended.
(4) A registered agency may operate a private ambulance on an emergency run if, upon responding
to a direct call for nonemergency private ambulance service within the city, the registered agency
determines that an emergency exists requiring the sick or injured person to be transported with all
practical speed to a hospital and notifies the city's public safety communications center of the
emergency run.
(5) A registered agency may operate a private ambulance on an emergency run if, while
performing the service of maintaining a private ambulance at a particular location for a special event
within the city, the registered agency determines that an emergency exists requiring a sick or injured
person to be transported with all practical speed to a hospital and notifies the city's public safety
communications of the emergency run.
(6) A registered agency may operate a private ambulance on an emergency run to transport vital
organs, including, but not limited to, hearts, lungs, kidneys, and eyes, to or from a hospital within the
city.
(7) A registered agency may operate a private ambulance, critical care transport ambulance, or
other specialized emergency medical service vehicle on an emergency run to transport a newborn,
pediatric or other critical care patient from a lower level skill facility to a higher level skill facility if:
a. The patient's doctor has determined that an emergency exists; and
b. The patient is accompanied by neonate, pediatric or critical care transport personnel.
(b) This prohibition does not apply to the operation of an air ambulance that is regulated and certified by the
U.S. Federal Aviation Administration and that is operating in compliance with state licensing requirements.
(c) Any person who operates a registered private ambulance on an emergency run under this section shall, if
requested in writing by the fire department, within 10 days of each emergency run, submit to the fire chief a
report describing the circumstances requiring the emergency run.
(d) In the event a patient dies while being transported from one place within the city to another place within or
beyond its limits, the registrant of such ambulance shall:
(1) Immediately notify the city's public safety communication center of such death, by two-way
radio or public telephone; and
(2) Within twenty four hours of the incident, file a written report with the chief of police upon such
forms as he may provide or prescribe, giving all information therein required and any other relevant
information which the police chief may require.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 334/684
(Ordinance 15-01-04 adopted 1/19/15)
Sec. 38-198 Vehicles and equipment
(a) Each private ambulance must be licensed as an emergency medical services vehicle with the Texas
Department of State Health Services. Each private ambulance and all private ambulance equipment must comply
with all applicable federal and state motor vehicle safety standards and with the standards for emergency
medical services vehicles set forth in the Emergency Medical Services Act (chapter 773, Texas Health and
Safety Code), as amended. All safety mechanisms on each vehicle must be operative and in good repair,
including, but not limited to, headlights, taillights, turn signals, brakes, brake lights, emergency lights,
windshield wipers, wiper blades, handles opening doors and windows, tires, and spare tires.
(b) Each private ambulance, while on an ambulance call, must be accompanied by at least two ambulance
personnel. One of the ambulance personnel shall serve as the driver while the other remains in attendance on the
sick or injured patient.
(c) Clean and sanitary bed linens must be provided on each private ambulance for each patient carried. Bed
linens must be changed as soon as practical after the discharge of a patient, but before picking up another
patient.
(Ordinance 15-01-04 adopted 1/19/15)
Sec. 38-199 Unlawful operations and prohibited acts
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly:
(1) Follow any police car, ambulance or fire apparatus which is responding to an emergency call
on the streets of the city.
(2) Solicit on the streets of the city the business of transporting injured or sick persons.
(3) Intercept any communication concerning emergency incidents within the city and divulge or
publish the existence, contents, substance, purpose, effect or meaning of such intercepted
communication and no such solicitor, owner or person, not being entitled thereto, shall receive or
assist in receiving any such message emanating through the radio medium of the police or fire
department for his own benefit or for the benefit of another solicitor, owner, operator or person in the
business of furnishing ambulance service.
(4) Unless on an emergency run, use on a vehicle a siren and/or emergency warning light(s)
without prior authorization by the city's safety communication center.
(5) Use a uniform, insignia, badge, title, identification card, or vehicle marking for the purpose of
identification to the public or others as an authorized provider of emergency medical services without
prior approval from the fire chief.
(6) Operate or cause to be operated an ambulance on any street of the city or provide ambulance
standby services at any location within the city without first having registered in accordance with this
article or unless exempted therefrom by the provisions of this article.
(7) Operate a private ambulance or uses any equipment in providing private ambulance service that
fails to comply with all minimum safety and equipment standards required for a basic life support
vehicle by the Emergency Medical Services Act (chapter 773, Texas Health and Safety Code), as
amended, or by any rule or regulation promulgated under that act.
(8) Sell or attempt to sell any plan including subscription to provide any ground ambulance
services within the city limits which are not allowed by this article or any applicable law.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 335/684
(9) Request the services of any ambulance which is not registered in accordance with the
provisions of this article or exempted therefrom by the provisions of this article.
(10) Give false information to induce the dispatch of an ambulance or helicopter rescue unit.
(11) Give false information on applications for private ambulance registration.
(Ordinance 15-01-04 adopted 1/19/15)
Sec. 38-200 Authority to inspect
The fire chief, police chief, or their designee may inspect a private ambulance service operating in the city to
determine whether the service complies with this article, rules and regulations established by this article, and
other applicable law. (Ordinance 15-01-04 adopted 1/19/15)
Sec. 38-201 Enforcement by police department
Officers of the police department may assist in the enforcement of this article. A police officer, upon observing a
violation of this article or the rules and regulations established by this article, may take necessary enforcement
action to ensure effective regulation of private ambulance service. (Ordinance 15-01-04 adopted 1/19/15)
Sec. 38-202 Penalties
(a) Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and each
day the violation continues shall be a separate offense. Each offense shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed
five hundred ($500.00) dollars.
(b) Each day that any violation of this article is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate
offense.
(c) This section shall not serve to limit any other remedies available to the city in law or equity.
(Ordinance 15-01-04 adopted 1/19/15)
Sec. 38-203 Other laws and regulations
No portion of this article shall be construed in a manner inconsistent with state laws and regulations, including
but not limited to chapter 773 of the Texas Health and Safety Code and any other relevant state and federal law.
(Ordinance 15-01-04 adopted 1/19/15)
CHAPTERS 39-41
RESERVED
CHAPTER 42
FLOOD PREVENTION*
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 336/684
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 42-1–42-20 Reserved
ARTICLE II. FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 42-21 Findings of fact
(a) The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.
(b) These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an
increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods
and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from
flood damage.
(Ordinance 96-01-04 adopted 1/2/96; Ordinance 09-05-26, sec. 3, adopted 5/5/09; Ordinance 13-09-56, sec. 3,
adopted 9/17/13)
Sec. 42-22 Statement of purpose
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone
areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
(7) Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
(Ordinance 96-01-04 adopted 1/2/96; Ordinance 09-05-26, sec. 3, adopted 5/5/09; Ordinance 13-09-56, sec. 3,
adopted 9/17/13)
Sec. 42-23 Methods of reducing flood losses
In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or
cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 337/684
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers,
which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage;
and
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters
or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
(Ordinance 96-01-04 adopted 1/2/96; Ordinance 09-05-26, sec. 3, adopted 5/5/09; Ordinance 13-09-56, sec. 3,
adopted 9/17/13)
Sec. 42-24 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the
meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application.
Alluvial fan flooding. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates
at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and
deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
Apex. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed
the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
Appurtenant structure. A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be
insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
Area of future conditions flood hazard. The land area that would be inundated by the 1-percent-annual chance
(100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology.
Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with a 1-percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of 1 to 3
feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where
velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of special flood hazard. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a 1-percent or greater
chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map
(FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A
usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A,
VO, V1-30, VE or V.
Base flood. The flood having a 1-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Base flood elevation (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the
accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a 1% chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any
given year - also called the base flood.
Basement. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Breakaway wall. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its
design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 338/684
Critical feature. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood
protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
Development. Any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
Elevated building. For insurance purposes, a non-basement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised
above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
Existing construction. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction
commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that
date. Existing construction may also be referred to as existing structures.
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at
a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Flood elevation study. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate,
corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e.,
mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable
to the community.
Flood insurance study (FIS). See flood elevation study.
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood protection system. Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated,
and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the area within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the depths of associated flooding.
Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized
flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
Floodplain management. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for
reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and
floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain management regulations. Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health
regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 339/684
Floodplain or floodprone area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see
definition of flooding).
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
Floodway. See regulatory floodway.
Functionally dependent use. A use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out
in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the
loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include
long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Highest adjacent grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the
proposed walls of a structure.
Historic structure. Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary [of the Interior] to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified either:
(A) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(B) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Levee. A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with
sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.
Levee system. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as
closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area
is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations.
Manufactured home. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and
is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
manufactured home does not include a recreational vehicle.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 340/684
Manufactured home park or subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean sea level. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate
map are referenced.
New construction. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, new
construction means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
New manufactured home park or subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
Recreational vehicle. A vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Regulatory floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than a designated height.
Riverine. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Special flood hazard area. See area of special flood hazard.
Start of construction. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier
Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or
other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
Structure. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage
tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 341/684
Substantial damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to
it before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before
the damage occurred.
Substantial improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the
cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before start of construction
of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
Variance. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full
requirements see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.)
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain
management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in sections 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) [of
the National Flood Insurance Program regulations] is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
Water surface elevation. The height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other
datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine
areas.
(Ordinance 96-01-04 adopted 1/2/96; Ordinance 09-05-26, sec. 3, adopted 5/5/09; Ordinance 13-09-56, sec. 3,
adopted 9/17/13)
Sec. 42-25 Lands to which this article applies
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. (Ordinance 96-01-
04 adopted 1/2/96; Ordinance 09-05-26, sec. 3, adopted 5/5/09; Ordinance 13-09-56, sec. 3, adopted 9/17/13)
Sec. 42-26 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current
scientific and engineering report entitled, “The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Collin County, Texas and
incorporated areas,” dated June 2, 2009, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps dated June 2, 2009: “The
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Denton County, Texas and incorporated areas,” dated April 18, 2011, with
accompanying flood insurance rate maps dated April 18, 2011, and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this article. (Ordinance 96-01-04 adopted 1/2/96; Ordinance 09-05-26, sec.
3, adopted 5/5/09; Ordinance 13-09-56, sec. 3, adopted 9/17/13)
Sec. 42-27 Establishment of development permit
A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article.
(Ordinance 96-01-04 adopted 1/2/96; Ordinance 09-05-26, sec. 3, adopted 5/5/09; Ordinance 13-09-56, sec. 3,
adopted 9/17/13)
Sec. 42-28 Compliance
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 342/684
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the
terms of this article and other applicable regulations. (Ordinance 96-01-04 adopted 1/2/96; Ordinance 09-05-26,
sec. 3, adopted 5/5/09; Ordinance 13-09-56, sec. 3, adopted 9/17/13)
Sec. 42-29 Abrogation and greater restrictions
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
However, where this article and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ordinance 96-01-04 adopted 1/2/96; Ordinance
09-05-26, sec. 3, adopted 5/5/09; Ordinance 13-09-56, sec. 3, adopted 9/17/13)
Sec. 42-30 Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(Ordinance 96-01-04 adopted 1/2/96; Ordinance 09-05-26, sec. 3, adopted 5/5/09; Ordinance 13-09-56, sec. 3,
adopted 9/17/13)
Sec. 42-31 Warning and disclaimer of liability
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas
of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ordinance 96-01-04 adopted 1/2/96; Ordinance 09-05-26, sec. 3, adopted 5/5/09; Ordinance 13-09-56, sec. 3,
adopted 9/17/13)
Secs. 42-32–42-60 Reserved
DIVISION 2. ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 42-61 Designation of the floodplain administrator
The city engineer and/or his designee is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and
implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and
Assistance - National Flood Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. (Ordinance
96-01-04 adopted 1/2/96; Ordinance 09-05-26, sec. 3, adopted 5/5/09; Ordinance 13-09-56, sec. 3, adopted
9/17/13)
Sec. 42-62 Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this
article.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 343/684
(2) Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site
project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding.
(3) Review, approve or deny all applications for floodplain development permits required by
adoption of this article.
(4) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been
obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior
approval is required.
(5) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
(6) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the State Coordinating Agency, which
is the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB) and also the Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality (TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(7) Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse is maintained.
(8) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 42-26, the
floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and
floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of
division 3.
(9) When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require
that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be
permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than
one foot at any point within the community.
(10) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on
the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than 1
foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by section 65.12.
(Ordinance 96-01-04 adopted 1/2/96; Ordinance 09-05-26, sec. 3, adopted 5/5/09; Ordinance 13-09-56, sec. 3,
adopted 9/17/13)
Sec. 42-63 Permit procedures
(a) Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on
forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the
location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures,
including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special
flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
(1) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new
and substantially improved structures;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 344/684
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be
floodproofed;
(3) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential
floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 42-92(2);
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development; and
(5) Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 42-62(1).
(b) Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on
all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors:
(1) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(2) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of
such damage on the individual owner;
(3) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(4) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(5) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(6) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including
maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems;
(7) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters
and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
(8) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; and
(9) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the
proposed use.
(Ordinance 96-01-04 adopted 1/2/96; Ordinance 09-05-26, sec. 3, adopted 5/5/09; Ordinance 13-09-56, sec. 3,
adopted 9/17/13)
Sec. 42-64 Variance procedures
(a) The board of adjustment (“appeal board”) shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from
the requirements of this article.
(b) The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in
any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this article.
(c) Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the
courts of competent jurisdiction.
(d) The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report
variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 345/684
(e) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures
set forth in the remainder of this article.
(f) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2
acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 42-63(b) have been fully considered. As the lot size
increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(g) Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the appeal board may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this
article.
(h) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the
base flood discharge would result.
(i) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the
proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
(j) Prerequisites for granting variances:
(1) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(2) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(A) Showing a good and sufficient cause;
(B) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to
the applicant; and
(C) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud
on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(3) Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure
will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that
the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced
lowest floor elevation.
(k) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other
development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
(1) The criteria outlined in subsections (a)–(i) are met; and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages
during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
(Ordinance 96-01-04 adopted 1/2/96; Ordinance 09-05-26, sec. 3, adopted 5/5/09; Ordinance 13-09-56, sec. 3,
adopted 9/17/13)
Secs. 42-65–42-90 Reserved
DIVISION 3. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 346/684
Sec. 42-91 General standards
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial
improvements:
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage;
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant
to flood damage;
(4) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding;
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
(Ordinance 96-01-04 adopted 1/2/96; Ordinance 09-05-26, sec. 3, adopted 5/5/09; Ordinance 13-09-56, sec. 3,
adopted 9/17/13)
Sec. 42-92 Specific standards
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 42-
26, section 42-62(8), or section 42-93(c), the following provisions are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood
elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification
to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in section 42-63(a) is
satisfied.
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered
professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such
certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 347/684
(3) Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below
the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area
other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(A) A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than 1
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
(B) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than 1 foot above grade.
(C) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices
provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4) Manufactured homes.
(A) Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's
FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage.
For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to
resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not
limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition
to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(B) Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones
A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites: (i) outside of a manufactured home
park or subdivision; (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (iii) in an expansion
to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (iv) in an existing manufactured home
park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result
of a flood; be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to
an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(C) Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an
existing manufactured home park or subdivision with zones A1-30, AH and AE on the
community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of paragraph (4) of this section be
elevated so that either:
(i) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation;
or
(ii) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation
elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above
grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(5) Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30,
AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either: (A) be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive
days; or (B) be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or (C) meet the permit requirements of
section 42-63(a), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in paragraph
(4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking
system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no
permanently attached additions.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 348/684
(Ordinance 96-01-04 adopted 1/2/96; Ordinance 09-05-26, sec. 3, adopted 5/5/09; Ordinance 13-09-56, sec. 3,
adopted 9/17/13)
Sec. 42-93 Standards for subdivision proposals
(a) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be
consistent with sections 42-21, 42-22 and 42-23 of this article.
(b) All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks
and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of sections 42-27, 42-63 and the
provisions of this division.
(c) Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development
including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or 5 acres,
whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to sections 42-26 or 42-62(8) of this article.
(d) Base flood elevation data shall be generated by a detailed engineering study for all zone A areas, within
100 feet of the contour lines of zone A areas, and other streams not mapped by FEMA, as indicated on the
community's FIRM.
(e) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall
have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(f) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damage.
(Ordinance 96-01-04 adopted 1/2/96; Ordinance 09-05-26, sec. 3, adopted 5/5/09; Ordinance 13-09-56, sec. 3,
adopted 9/17/13)
Sec. 42-94 Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones)
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 42-26, are areas designated as shallow
flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly
defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow, therefore, the following provisions apply:
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade
at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no
depth number is specified).
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures:
(A) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation
or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the
community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth number is specified); or
(B) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base
specified flood depth in an AO zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH zone, level the
structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with
structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of
effects of buoyancy.
(3) A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain
administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 42-63 are satisfied.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 349/684
(4) Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide
floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(Ordinance 96-01-04 adopted 1/2/96; Ordinance 09-05-26, sec. 3, adopted 5/5/09; Ordinance 13-09-56, sec. 3,
adopted 9/17/13)
Sec. 42-95 Floodways
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 42-26, are areas designated as floodways.
Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris,
potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:
(1) Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and
other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that
the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community
during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) If subsection (1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall
comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this division.
(3) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory
floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first
completes all of the provisions required by section 65.12.
(Ordinance 96-01-04 adopted 1/2/96; Ordinance 09-05-26, sec. 3, adopted 5/5/09; Ordinance 13-09-56, sec. 3,
adopted 9/17/13)
Secs. 42-96–42-155 Reserved
ARTICLE III. REMOVAL OF TREES
Sec. 42-156 Conflicting ordinances
All ordinances in conflict with this article are repealed to the extent they are in conflict. Any remaining portions
of said ordinances shall remain in full force and effect. (Ordinance 01-03-25, sec. 2, adopted 3/20/01)
Sec. 42-157 Application
This article applies to real property that does not have a pending or approved final plat by the city council as of
the effective date of Ordinance No. 01-03-25, adopted on March 20, 2001. (Ordinance 01-03-25, sec. 3, adopted
3/20/01)
Sec. 42-158 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Base floodplain as used herein shall have the same meaning as set forth in the city's Subdivision Regulation
Ordinance No. 94-08-19, as it exists or may be amended.
Floodway as used herein shall mean the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land area that
must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
by more than a designed height. Floodway refers to the floodway resulting from a 100-year flood event based on
ultimate development conditions.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 350/684
Landscaping as used herein shall have the same meaning as set forth in the city's Zoning Ordinance No. 00-11-
01, as it exists or may be amended.
Major creeks as used herein shall have the same meaning as set forth in the city's Subdivision Regulation
Ordinance No. 94-08-19, as it exists or may be amended.
Tree or trees as used herein shall have the same meaning as set forth in the city's Zoning Ordinance No. 00-11-
01, as it exists or may be amended.
Vegetation shall mean plant material except, landscaping and agricultural production of row crops and hay
production intended for livestock consumption.
(Ordinance 01-03-25, sec. 4, adopted 3/20/01)
Sec. 42-159 Regulation of trees and vegetation removal
(a) Removal of tree and/or other vegetation by, including but not limited to, the use of poison, chemicals or by
any other acts that affect the health and/or life of the tree and/or other vegetation is subject to this article.
(b) A grading permit or letter of approval from the city manager, or his designee, is required for removal of
any trees and/or other vegetation in the base floodplain and/or floodway (the “permit/letter”).
(Ordinance 01-03-25, sec. 5, adopted 3/20/01)
Sec. 42-160 Exceptions
(a) A permit/letter shall be required to remove any tree and/or other vegetation, except that the city manager,
or his designee, must authorize, in writing, removal of any tree and/or other vegetation provided the tree and/or
other vegetation:
(1) Is determined to be in a hazardous or dangerous condition so as to endanger the public health,
welfare or safety;
(2) Hinders or obstructs the construction, maintenance, repair and/or replacement of the city's
streets, water and sewer lines and drainage and storm sewer;
(3) Is located in any right-of-way and/or easement dedicated to and accepted by the city;
(4) Hinders or obstructs the construction, repair, maintenance and/or replacement of public
improvement projects including, but not limited to, major collection lines for sanitary sewer,
distribution lines for water, collection and management of stormwater runoff and thoroughfares
pursuant to the city's capital improvement project, water and sanitary distribution line maps and/or
thoroughfare plan; or
(5) Is damaged or killed by a tornado, ice or wind storm, flooding or other acts of nature.
(b) Agricultural crop harvesting of planting row crops, hay production and grazing of livestock are excepted
from this article. However, any property that is increased and/or expanded, after the effective date of the
ordinance from which this article is derived, for agricultural use and/or production, by removal of tree and/or
vegetation, is subject to this article.
(c) Landscaping is also excepted from this article.
(Ordinance 01-03-25, sec. 6, adopted 3/20/01)
Sec. 42-161 Penalty provision
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 351/684
(a) Any person, firm, corporation or business entity violating this article, or as amended, or any provision of
this article, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined as follows:
(1) Each individual tree removed in violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense.
Fines shall be based on the following: $300.00 per caliper inch of each tree as measured four feet, six
inches above the grade or soil stain on the damaged or fallen tree.
(2) Each individual 100 square feet, or less, of vegetation removed in violation of this article shall
constitute a separate offense. Fines shall be based on the following: $300.00 for each 100 square feet,
or less, of vegetation that has been removed.
(b) No fine for any offense committed in violation of this article shall exceed $2,000.00.
(c) The penal provisions imposed under this article shall not preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin the
violation. The city retains all legal rights and remedies available to its pursuant to local, state and federal law.
This article is intended to provide for the preservation of all trees and/or all other vegetation within the
floodplain and/or floodway, including but not limited to, major creeks, tributaries and other watercourses that
enable the discharge of the base floodplain.
(d) Fines shall be issued to the property owner as shown on the certified tax roll on the date of the violation.
The contractor, subcontractor, contracting company, and/or individual committing the violation is also subject to
the same fines as the property owner.
(e) Property companies, contracting companies, and/or individuals in violation of this article will be halted on
the site where trees and/or other vegetation have been removed until the city manager and/or his designee have
made an assessment.
(Ordinance 01-03-25, sec. 7, adopted 3/20/01)
Sec. 42-162 Appeal
An appeal for relief from the regulation set forth in section 42-159 herein may be made to and shall be
considered by the city council. An appeal must be submitted in writing and shall be made within five days from
the denial of the permit/letter. The appellant has the burden of proof to establish, by clear and convincing
evidence, that the regulation set forth in section 42-159 herein does not meet constitutional guarantees and/or
statutory requirements. If the appellant meets its burden of proof, the city council shall have the right to grant
relief from the regulation set forth in section 42-159 herein. The decision of the city council is final. (Ordinance
01-03-25, sec. 8, adopted 3/20/01)
CHAPTERS 43–45
RESERVED
CHAPTER 46
LAW ENFORCEMENT*
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 352/684
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 46-1–46-30 Reserved
ARTICLE II. POLICE RESERVE FORCE
Sec. 46-31 Police reserve force established
There is hereby established a Frisco Police Reserve Force (“reserve”). (Ordinance 11-05-13, sec. 2, adopted
5/17/11)
Sec. 46-32 Qualifications and standards of training
(a) State. Reserve police officers must comply with the minimum training standards established by the Texas
Commission on Law Enforcement Officer Standards and Education. Such minimum standards, established for
all reserve law enforcement officers, must be fulfilled before a person appointed as a reserve police officer may
carry a weapon or otherwise act as a peace officer.
(b) Local. Reserve police officers must also comply with the qualifications, standards, policies and regulations
established by the Frisco Chief of Police (“chief”). The chief may establish, among other things, minimum
physical, mental, educational and moral standards as used by the regular police department, but in no case shall
the standards be less than that established by the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement Officer Standards and
Education.
(Ordinance 11-05-13, sec. 3, adopted 5/17/11)
Sec. 46-33 Number of members
The reserve shall not exceed 12 members. (Ordinance 11-05-13, sec. 3, adopted 5/17/11)
Sec. 46-34 Appointment/removal of members
Members of the reserve shall be appointed and/or removed in accordance with the statue and at the discretion of
the chief. (Ordinance 11-05-13, sec. 4, adopted 5/17/11)
Sec. 46-35 Authority of chief
Members of the reserve shall serve at the discretion of the chief and may be called into active service at any time
the chief, or his designee, considers it necessary to have additional police officers to preserve the peace and
enforce the law. (Ordinance 11-05-13, sec. 5, adopted 5/17/11)
Sec. 46-36 Benefits for members
Members of the reserve may serve without compensation. Uniforms and uniform compensation may be provided
to the members of the reserve at the discretion of the chief. Frisco may provide hospital and medical assistance
to members of the reserve who sustain injury in the course of performing official duties, in the same manner as
provided by Frisco for its full-time police officers. (Ordinance 11-05-13, sec. 6, adopted 5/17/11)
CHAPTERS 47–49
RESERVED
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 353/684
CHAPTER 50
LIBRARY
Sec. 50-1 Mission statement
The mission of the public library is to inspire intellect, curiosity, and imagination. (Ordinance 03-06-39, sec. 2,
adopted 6/3/03)
Sec. 50-2 Long range plan of service
The library director and such staff members as he selects will periodically review, revise, or redraft a long-range
plan of service, included as part of the appendices attached the ordinance from which this section is derived. The
library will establish budgets and procedures in accordance with this plan of service. (Ordinance 03-06-39, sec.
3, adopted 6/3/03)
Sec. 50-3 Library advisory board
The city council recognizes the importance of a citizen board for input on matters relating to library service for
the citizenry. The city council hereby recognizes that a board should be responsible for fulfilling the roles and
responsibilities of such a citizen board. The council contemplates and anticipates that when created, a board of
the Public Library Foundation, Inc., a 501(c)3 not-for-profit corporation (the “foundation”), would fulfill the
roles and responsibilities of such a citizen board. Since the foundation would be a separate legal entity, the
council cannot and will not attempt to make regulations concerning the establishment or operation of such a
board. The council, however, reserves the right of governance and management over the library and its personnel
and states that the foundation shall have no power to obligate the city in any manner whatsoever. The council
realizes that the foundation must operate within and under the state and federal regulations, including those
mandated by the Internal Revenue Service. The council does request occasional communication from the
foundation concerning its recommendations for the library system. (Ordinance 03-06-39, sec. 4, adopted 6/3/03)
Sec. 50-4 Persons who may use the library
(a) Use of library materials and services.
(1) The library will serve the following customers:
a. Residents of the city;
b. Residents of such governmental districts as determined by the city council;
c. Residents of the state as long as state funding and/or access to electronic collections
mandate such service;
d. All who qualify by the terms of this section, without denial nor abridgment because of
gender, race, ethnicity, age, or religious, racial, social, economic, or political views or status.
(2) The library may deny its use or services or may require any individual or group to leave the
premises for due cause. Due cause may include but is not limited to the following actions:
a. Failure to return books or to pay penalties;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 354/684
b. Destruction of library property;
c. Disturbance of other customers including but not limited to verbal, auditory, physical, or
olfactory assault;
d. Any objectionable or illegal conduct on library premises;
e. Theft or improper removal of library materials from the premises;
f. Violation of any terms or conditions of this policy.
(3) The library reserves the right to limit its use and services.
(b) Use of the facilities.
(1) Statement of purpose, meeting spaces.
a. The city created the public library and designated all the meeting spaces and display areas
for educational and cultural activities supporting the library's program.
b. Only under the special conditions listed below may community organizations use these
areas for meetings or for displays.
c. Library sponsored support organizations such as the friends of the public library
(“friends”) and foundation are largely exempted from these guidelines.
(2) General meeting guidelines. After the library schedules its programs and displays, other
educational or cultural community organizations that are nonprofit, non-partisan, and nonsectarian
may apply to use a room or display area. The following general guidelines apply to such groups:
a. The facility is available only during library service hours (this includes all set-up and takedown
time). Meetings must conclude at least 15 minutes prior to the closing of the library.
b. To use any space, organizations must apply in writing using the forms available at the
library circulation desk. (The library limits standing reservations and will not host regular
meetings to give all groups equal access.)
c. Groups using the rooms shall be responsible for setting up chairs, tables, and other
equipment before the meeting, maintaining order during the meeting, taking down whatever
they put up after the meeting, and seeing that the facility is neat and clean at the conclusion of
the program.
d. Organizations may not charge admission, accept donations, nor take collections.
e. Organizations may not sell, offer, nor in any way advertise merchandise or service.
f. Organizations must open their programs to the public without exclusion.
g. Young people's groups must provide adequate supervision by adults.
h. Groups are responsible for providing their own equipment, other than chairs, tables, and a
lectern.
i. Groups are responsible for enforcing the city's smoking ordinance, which does not permit
smoking in any area of the library.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 355/684
j. Groups must provide adequate protection for their program materials, exhibits, etc.
k. Organizations will hold harmless the library and the city of any damage suffered because
of or resulting from use of the facility.
l. No reservation shall be legally binding. The library director may cancel any room
reservation or display at any time, for failure to comply with any of these policies or if a city
organization has need for the meeting space.
m. Permission to meet or display in the library does not constitute endorsement by the
library, the foundation, or the council of any aspect of a meeting or display.
(3) Meeting room occupancy.
a. The fire marshal periodically establishes maximum capacities for library meeting spaces.
These are outlined on the schedules in the appendices the ordinance from which this section is
derived.
b. Organizations may serve light refreshments, but no alcoholic beverages. If they use a
pantry facility, they are responsible for cleaning it thoroughly.
c. The library director shall annually review the library's needs for space and will allocate
remaining space for the public following that determination.
(4) Displays.
a. Display committee. This committee consists of three members of the foundation board,
appointed annually by the president of the foundation, an art instructor from a local educational
institution, and a library staff member, appointed by the library director. The library director
will be an ex officio member (interpreted throughout this policy to be voting member) of the
display committee. In the event of a tie vote, the foundation president will be called upon to
cast the deciding vote.
b. Library sponsored displays.
1. The display committee will encourage citizens or groups to exhibit items of artistic
and educational value in library sponsored displays.
2. Displays sponsored or cosponsored by the library may not be subject to the
guidelines below.
3. The library regularly provides display space for student artists in area educational
institutions.
c. Displays without library sponsorship.
1. The display committee will review the appropriateness of proposed displays.
2. Potential displayers must submit the following to the public library:
(i) A completed application on the approved form.
(ii) A resume, portfolio, or other descriptive materials.
3. The library will not grant permission to display if such display interferes with the
proper functioning of the library as determined by the library director.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 356/684
4. Decisions of the display committee are final.
5. Responsibilities of the exhibitor/displayer shall include, but not be limited to the
following:
(i) Identification, on the display, of the group or individual sponsoring it;
(ii) Setting up and removing the display according to the “Display Guidelines” in
the appendices the ordinance from which this section is derived;
(iii) Maintaining the display in a condition acceptable to the library director;
(iv) Signing a written release assuming sole responsibility for any and all damages
to the display and any and all damages to the facility because of or resulting from
the display, either directly or indirectly;
(v) Providing a statement, if required by the library, that the viewpoints of the
display are not necessarily those of the library.
6. Responsibilities of the library are limited as enumerated below:
(i) The library is not responsible for the theft of or damage to displays;
(ii) The library will not set-up, remove, maintain, ensure, or transport displays
other than those that it owns, sponsors, or co-sponsors.
7. Other rules may apply as mandated by the risk management division.
(Ordinance 03-06-39, sec. 5, adopted 6/3/03)
Sec. 50-5 Library responsibility
(a) To the customer.
(1) Confidentiality of records. As mandated by state law, with exceptions noted herein (including
the appendices):
a. The library will protect, as far as possible, the privacy of any customer who uses the
library.
1. Except as may be required by law, the staff of the library will not provide
information to a third party about what a customer of the library is reading, viewing, or
calling for from the library's collection.
2. The library will not yield any information about its customers or their reading to any
agency of government, whether local, state, or federal, without an order from a court of
competent jurisdiction.
b. Unless required by law or to determine the customer's needs, the library will not inquire
into the purposes for which a customer requests information or books.
c. The library may keep records required for loaning books or answering reference questions.
The sole purpose of such records is to protect public property or to provide better service.
(2) Services provided. The library staff:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 357/684
a. Will select from the mass of available materials items that best meet the needs of the
community;
b. Will organize library collections for easy access;
c. Will provide guidance for people to obtain the information they seek;
d. Will initiate programs, exhibits, book lists, etc., to stimulate the use of library materials;
e. Will cooperate with other community agencies and organizations to determine and strive to
meet the educational needs of the community;
f. Will encourage, provide, and work with a library volunteer program;
g. Accepts a responsibility for securing information beyond the library's own resources by
these means:
1. Collecting information about resources of agencies, institutions, organizations, and
individuals in and beyond the community;
2. Borrowing materials for customers in accordance with Interlibrary Loan Codes.
These materials must be items that the library does not own or cannot purchase because of
budget limitations or lack of demand.
h. Will, once collections are maintained at a minimum of one item per capita, lend circulating
materials to other libraries that do not have access to those items (in accordance with the
Interlibrary Loan Code);
i. Will endeavor to maintain a balance in its services to men, women, young people, and
children. Therefore, the library will cooperate with, but cannot perform the functions of school
or other institutional libraries, which are designed to meet curricular or other specialized needs;
j. Will provide services during the hours determined by the library director and city manager;
k. Will periodically review library services to determine whether available resources and/or
the needs of the community indicate the discontinuance or addition of services;
l. Will, as staff and schedules permit, offer hours, lessons, and programs on a limited basis
and only if scheduled in advance.
(3) Service limitations.
a. The library reserves the right to deny or limit its use and services to groups or individuals
making excessive demands. Such demands may include those made by students, educators,
puzzle contestants, and others. Often these individuals and/or groups' needs for staff time,
available materials, or space prohibit attention to other individuals and groups.
1. The library will not take the place of the school or institutional media center.
Student's assignments are made to teach them to think, to apply themselves, and to learn
to use reference sources. Provision of in-depth aid is counter-productive to the learning
experience.
2. Except as may be required by law, the library will not address or answer lists of
questions.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 358/684
b. The library reserves the right to limit the number of titles borrowed by any one person or
loaned to any single address at any one time or during concurrent checkout periods.
c. Staff will answer telephone questions as soon as possible, but individuals who come to the
library have first priority. Staff cannot respond over the telephone to requests involving
extensive research. The library asks that customers make longer requests by email, when that is
available.
d. The library is not responsible for any additions or other alterations to materials.
e. Staff will not give information from city directories (e.g., crisscross or Polk directories) by
telephone.
f. During or following severe weather, acts of God, or civil disobedience, the library closes,
along with other city offices at the discretion of city management. Due dates for the return of
borrowed materials will be adjusted for situations where travel to the library is inadvisable.
(b) To the community.
(1) The library: serving the community and the family. The library supports parents' rights to guide
their own children's moral development and thought processes. The library maintains a policy of
open stacks and easy access to books, magazines, and nonprint materials because the collection is
designed to serve the whole community. Therefore, parents must take the responsibility to help their
children select appropriate materials. The library staff is ready to assist all persons using the library in
locating appropriate materials.
(2) Cooperation with other libraries.
a. The public library expands its services to customers by active participation in such groups
as the Northeast Texas Library System (NETLS).
b. The library director will maintain membership in both the Texas Library Association
(TLA) and the American Library Association (ALA) and encourage the professional staff to do
the same. The library will use the consulting, training, and networking services of TLA, ALA,
the state library, and NETLS as the need arises.
c. The library subscribes to the Interlibrary Loan Code and is prepared to loan materials when
its collections reach the benchmark of one item per capita.
(3) Library auxiliary organizations.
a. The public library may sponsor worthwhile organizations by providing one or more of the
following:
1. Special use of the facility or materials;
2. Staff support;
3. Inclusion in the library's long-range organizational goals;
4. Budgetary support;
5. Other help or support.
b. In return for such sponsorship, the organization will assist the public library in achieving
its “plan of service” and “long range goals.”
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 359/684
c. This “sponsorship” is represented in such groups as the friends of the public library and the
foundation.
(4) Public relations.
a. The following are the primary public relations goals of the library:
1. To make the general public aware through publicity in local news media, programs,
bibliographies, and other forms of communication of the many services available to them
in their local library;
2. To encourage active participation in the varied services offered by the library to
people of all ages.
b. The library recognizes that public relations involve every person officially associated with
the library.
c. The library director and professional staff will be expected to give talks and to participate
in community activities. A reasonable amount of library time will be available to staff members
for preparation, speaking, and participation. The library director must approve any materials to
be used by the press, radio, television, or other communications media.
d. Staff members are encouraged to enhance their professional growth by participating in
local and national professional meetings, conferences, and workshops on library time at the
discretion of the library director.
(5) Statistics. The library staff will track those measures that can illuminate to the citizens of the
city, the value of their investments in the library.
a. The public library will, on a schedule to be determined by the library director, conduct a
period of output measure surveys according to standard library practice to measure the
following levels of service:
1. Number of reference questions answered for the customer in the library, by
telephone, email or by other electronic method;
2. Volume count of materials removed from the shelves and used in the library building;
3. Numbers of persons visiting the library;
4. Additional information needed to aid the library staff in providing the best service
possible;
5. Other levels to be determined by the library director.
b. To gather these statistics during the designated periods, the library staff and volunteers will
count:
1. Every person entering the library or using its several divisions;
2. Library transactions;
3. Telephone questions;
4. Magazines used in the library.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 360/684
c. These counts will show, as precisely as possible, what the library does on a daily basis to
serve the community. Statistics, drawn from the periods surveyed, will indicate the total library
service provided during the year.
(6) Building collections. One of the library staff's greatest responsibilities to the community is that
of fully utilizing the moneys allocated for collection development. The selection and acquisition of
materials is so important to the citizens, an entire section of this policy is dedicated to the principles
and policies under which the staff will operate.
(c) To the staff.
(1) The public library will provide staff members a safe, clean working environment.
(2) The library staff will adhere to the city's personnel handbook.
(3) In the event of severe weather, the library will adhere to admonitions from regional public
safety officials about the advisability of travel on local roadways. If law enforcement officers are
recommending that the public not travel, then the library will close, both to discourage customers
from traveling to the library in unsafe conditions and to protect the well-being of the library staff.
Staff members' leave accounts will not be charged for time the staff members don't work, when those
times are beyond the staff member's individual control and are not due to illness (i.e. for times the
library actually closes).
(Ordinance 03-06-39, sec. 6, adopted 6/3/03)
Sec. 50-6 Customer responsibility
(a) General. The city council asks that customers:
(1) Respect public property;
(2) Respect the rights of others;
(3) Mention all dissatisfaction with library service to the library director or his designee;
(4) Suggest improvements perceived as necessary or desirable in service and/or collections;
(5) Obey all laws and ordinances.
(b) Public property.
(1) Materials.
a. Customers are solely responsible for compliance with all current laws applying to their use
of library materials (such as the Copyright Law).
b. Registered borrowers sign contracts and are responsible for materials borrowed on their
cards including, but not limited to, the following provisions:
1. Proper care of materials as interpreted by the standard library practice;
2. Return of all items borrowed by the date on which they are due;
3. Payment for damages to materials;
4. Payment of overdue fines should these ever be assessed;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 361/684
5. Payment for lost materials;
6. Payment of all collection costs, including court fees, necessary to recover borrowed
materials and/or fines owed;
7. Responsibility for notifying the library if a card is lost or stolen. If the library does
not receive notification, the customer is responsible for any material borrowed on the
card. Certified mail will ensure that the library receives notifications.
c. Customers are responsible for reimbursing the library the value of lost items.
d. Customers assume all responsibility for damages incurred to their person or property
resulting from the use of the facility, equipment, materials, and/or information borrowed and/or
obtained from the library.
e. Customers will comply with such library rules or regulations enacted, approved, or
amended in accordance with provisions made by the city council or its legal designees.
f. Customers are subject to search of all parcels, purses, bags, briefcases, etc., upon existing
library premises.
(2) Facilities.
a. Customers will be careful not to damage the grounds, buildings, or furnishings.
b. Customers should notify either the staff or police should they witness someone vandalizing
or otherwise damaging the library building or materials.
c. Skateboards, rollerskates and rollerblades are not allowed on the premises of the public
library.
(c) Respect for the rights of others.
(1) General regulations. Libraries should be inviting environments in which the greatest number of
people will feel comfortable. This is why council and staff have determined that customers should
refrain from the following behaviors while on library premises:
a. Smoking inside the building;
b. Sleeping;
c. Soliciting;
d. Bringing animals inside the building, except for special service animals for the blind,
hearing impaired, or physically handicapped;
e. Sitting or standing on display and work surfaces such as tables, end tables, counters, desks,
etc.;
f. Making disruptive noises or gestures;
g. Playing music except on designated equipment in designated areas at appropriate times as
determined by library staff;
h. Carrying in bedrolls, sleeping bags, tents, or hiking or sports equipment;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 362/684
i. Exhibiting poor personal hygiene.
(2) Disruptive behavior.
a. Customers will not physically, verbally, or with gesture threaten, abuse, or assault another
person on library property. Any person committing such an offense will be evicted from the
premises and may be subject to prosecution where applicable.
b. Customers will not be intoxicated or under the influence of a controlled substance.
c. Customers will set cell phones to either silent or vibrate-only mode upon entering a library
building.
d. Customers will be aware of others and keep the volume of their conversations as low as
practical, including on portable communications devices such as cell phones.
e. Improper acts or those which are subject to prosecution under penal laws of the state are
expressly forbidden in the library.
f. Because of state liability laws, children, age nine and under, must be accompanied by an
adult and supervised at all times.
1. Library staff may reprimand disruptive children.
2. If the disruptive behavior continues, a staff member will inform the parent that their
child is disturbing others.
3. If parents refuse or are unable to control the child, a staff member may ask the family
to leave.
g. Disruptive children over age nine will be dealt with in the following manner:
1. A staff member will warn the young person that he is causing a disturbance.
2. If the disruptive behavior continues, staff will ask the young person to leave.
3. If library staff deems it to be necessary, they will call the police.
h. Library staff may ask any disruptive customer to leave and may summon the police if the
staff cannot or wishes not to contend with the situation.
(3) Children left unattended. Although the public library is pleased to offer numerous services for
children and their parents, the library is not a day-care facility and will not serve as such. Staff will
deal with “unattended children,” of less than nine years of age by calling the police department who
may refer unattended children to the appropriate social services agency.
(d) Violations. At its discretion, the library may cite, exclude from use or revoke borrowing privileges for
anyone known to have violated any rule in this policy. In some cases, the library may prosecute to the full extent
allowable by law.
(e) Customer communications.
(1) Customers are encouraged to comment on library service or make suggestions for
improvement.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 363/684
(2) The library provides convenient forms to take customer input and staff members are committed
to keeping such input confidential when requested and where possible.
(3) Leaders of the library's administrative units will evaluate suggestions and complaints and
recommend an appropriate disposition to the library director.
(Ordinance 03-06-39, sec. 7, adopted 6/3/03)
Sec. 50-7 Access to ideas and information through purchased materials
(a) Print, magnetic, and digital materials - principles.
(1) The First Amendment to the United States Constitution protects the freedom to read. It is
essential to our democracy and will be upheld in the selection and access to all library materials.
(2) The staff will uphold this essential principle of our democracy. Selection of materials provides
a safeguard to the freedom to read.
(3) The library will uphold the freedom to read principles contained in the statements of the
American Library Association and Texas Library Association. Examples of these, which are
appended, include the Library Bill of Rights and The Freedom to Read Statement.
(4) Forms of expression that are unprotected by the First Amendment will not be included in the
collection. All materials selected under this policy are considered constitutionally protected until such
time as any item, taken individually, is determined by judicial action in courts of jurisdiction to be
unprotected and after all appeals have been exhausted.
(5) While it is this policy's intent to encourage free access to materials, the library reserves the
right to restrict the customer's opportunity to remove selective materials that may be available on site.
Often these materials are designated as “reference.”
(6) Parents and/or legal guardians have sole responsibility for what their children read, view, or
hear. The library and its associated authorities do not serve in loco parentis (in place of parents). Only
parents or guardians may restrict their own children's access to library materials. Selection of library
materials will not be restricted by the possibility that materials may inadvertently come into a child's
possession.
(7) The library will attempt to provide materials for all members of the community. Access to and
use of material will not be denied or abridged because of origin, race, ethnicity, age, background,
gender, or views. Likewise, none of these factors shall be cause to exclude any material of authors,
artists, publishers, or producers. However, library staff may legitimately consider other resources
available to clientele groups when selecting materials.
(8) The library will consider the following criteria as valid factors in the selection process
especially as they relate to library customers of all ages, walks of life, value and interest patterns,
education, opinion, and persuasion:
a. Interest;
b. Information;
c. Education;
d. Entertainment;
e. Budgetary constraints;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 364/684
f. Enrichment;
g. Variety;
h. Materials availability;
i. Librarian's understanding of the above criteria and patron categories.
(9) Selection of materials by the librarian does not imply agreement with or approval of the
content, viewpoint, implication, or expression of the material.
(10) Librarians will judge materials on the basis of the content and style of the work as a whole,
not by selected or random passages or scenes.
(11) The public library is not a curriculum center and does not provide basic texts, curriculum
resources, nor materials needed in quantity for schoolwork. However, the individual student or
teacher will often find the supplementary resources of the library to be enriching and useful. The staff
will not develop the collection nor arrange it by the curriculum needs of the local school districts,
colleges, or universities.
(b) Policy. The following policy is established in accordance with the principles above:
(1) Selection. The library has funds to purchase only a small portion of what is published or
produced each year. Therefore, to best use public money, library staff will select materials in
accordance with the principles and policies of this chapter. At the same time, they will strive to
maintain diversity, quality, and responsiveness to community interest patterns.
a. Diversity of materials to meet the purposes of use, age levels, and educational levels will
be maintained by providing for alternative and/or opposing views and unpopular as well as
popular materials in order to reflect the diversity that exists in our culture and society.
b. Quality of materials will be maintained by the application of professional discretion and
standards established by the library profession and through the use of appropriate selection
tools.
c. Responsiveness to interest patterns will be maintained by careful consideration of requests
for purchase, patterns of use of existing materials, patterns of purchase of similar materials from
retailers, and any other source of information that helps librarians to know of community
interest patterns. Library staff will not restrict selection in response to the interest of one
individual or group on the basis of the prejudice of another individual or group.
d. Library staff may select materials on the basis of any one, several, or all of the above
criteria. No single standard applies in all cases. Some material may be judged primarily on its
artistic merit or scholarly value, while other material may be selected because of substantial
local demand. No materials will be excluded solely on the basis of language or frankness of
expression. Individual items, which in and of themselves may be controversial or offensive to
some, may appropriately be selected if their inclusion in the collection will contribute to the
balance and effectiveness of the library as a whole.
e. The library will not duplicate materials already covered by existing or other local
collections such as textbooks, professional works, or religious works.
f. The library will not purchase materials which do not conform to or lend themselves to
library use or formal, e.g., those with spiral bindings, game books, paperbacks, pop-ups, etc.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 365/684
g. The library must always consider available funds and budgetary constraints in making
selections.
h. The library staff will evaluate customers' “requests for purchase” by applying this policy.
(2) Accessibility. The library will not restrict access to any library materials in public areas.
a. The library will not house, maintain, or otherwise accommodate private collections. The
library welcomes and encourages gifts of collections made in accordance with the provisions of
this section of this policy.
b. All library cardholders may check out any circulating library material, regardless of
customers' origin, race, age, background, gender, or views.
c. The library will not label materials other than by standard library classification (such as
Dewey Decimal, Cutter number, etc.), directional aids, and major categorization of public
interest patterns (such as “Mystery,” Biography,” etc.). The library observes a distinction
between children/youth collections and adult collections only on the assumed differences in
interests. However, children's collections will be housed in the children's area of the public
library. Determining appropriateness of adult material for minors is the sole responsibility of a
child's own parent and/or guardian.
(c) Weeding. The professional staff will systematically discard (“weed”) worn, dated, or damaged library
materials as an integral part of the selection process. This process helps maintain the quality of the library
collections and is not intended to sanction removal of library materials based upon any controversy surrounding
the material. Staff, during this process, should consider the selection principles stated in this policy.
(d) Reconsideration of library materials.
(1) The city council recognizes that full information about issues of public concern requires access
to information sources that embody, represent, and illustrate those concerns. However, the council
recognizes the right of individuals to question both materials in the library or those excluded from it.
An individual questioning either selections or exclusions may state his opinion in writing on a form
available at the library.
(2) Customers must complete the appropriate “request for reconsideration” form to initiate the
review process.
(3) The staff selection committee will make the first review of these “requests for reconsideration.”
(4) Complainants who disagree with the findings of the staff committee may appeal the decision to
the review board.
(5) Appeals of review board decisions will be made to a court of competent jurisdiction.
(6) In the event that a complainant charges that a particular item is not protected under the First
Amendment to the Constitution, the onus of proof rests with the complainant.
(7) Material under question will remain in the active collection until such judicial determination is
made.
(8) The library director shall periodically establish a review board to hear appeals of requests for
reconsideration. This board shall include, where possible, representatives from appropriate groups
within the city, which could include: city council, the friends of the public library, an area college or
university, a local school district, the local print media, the local clergy, the library staff, and a local
writers' group. One member may represent several of these groups.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 366/684
(e) Responsibility and authority. The responsibility for selection and discarding is vested in the library
director and, under his direction, in such members of the staff who are qualified by education or training. Library
materials so selected or discarded shall be held to be selected or discarded by the city council of the city.
(Ordinance 03-06-39, sec. 8, adopted 6/3/03)
Sec. 50-8 Gifts
(a) Cash. The library maintains an active policy of accepting funds that allow its staff to purchase materials in
honor of living individuals and in memory of those who are deceased. Where possible, staff members attempt to
select items that are appropriate to the person being honored or remembered. Although the staff welcomes
suggestions for specific titles or items, all choices must be made in accord with this policy as set forth in section
50-7(b). Council asks that donors channel large contributions to the foundation.
(b) Materials.
(1) Items donated for the library collections become the property of the public library and/or the
friends of the public library. Designated library staff will determine the disposition of gift materials.
Gifts accepted by the library will be evaluated, like any potential purchase, according to the stated
selection criteria. In some cases, items may be added to the collection (as space allows), even though
these materials would not ordinarily be purchased due to budget restrictions.
(2) The library will not guarantee that items donated together will be kept together as separate
physical collection and reserves the right to decide the conditions of display, housing, and access to
the materials.
(3) The staff can only evaluate the library's need for the materials and cannot place a monetary
value on such gifts.
(4) The library may or may not accept for deposit those materials that are not outright gifts, with
the exception of exhibits. These special collections, upon approval of the library director, may be set
up by the owner for a limited time and at the owner's risk as outlined in section 50-4(b)(4).
(5) The library will accept gifts of money, real property, and/or stock if conditions of the gift are
acceptable to the city council or its delegated representatives.
(Ordinance 03-06-39, sec. 9, adopted 6/3/03)
Sec. 50-9 Access to ideas and information through technology and digital sources
(a) Mission. It is in the context of its mission to “inspire intellect, curiosity, and imagination” that the library
provides access to the Internet and computer resources.
(b) Definition and purpose of technology access. The Internet is an international network of databases
interlinking an enormous number of local networks operated by research centers, universities, nonprofit and
commercial organizations, individuals and government agencies worldwide. There is no central control,
management or governance over its content. It provides a means of access to information far beyond the library's
own collection. Information on the Internet is not necessarily current, accurate, or complete. While much
valuable information is available on the Internet, some may be considered by our local community standards to
be obscene, patently offensive or harmful, especially to minor children, as defined by applicable state and/or
federal laws. The public library must balance the desire for free unrestricted access to varying informational
sources against the need to avoid material that may be harmful to minors or that violates community standards as
defined by applicable state law and/or is obscene. For purposes of this policy minors are defined to include all
individuals under the age of 18 years.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 367/684
(c) Applicable laws. Certain local, state, or federal legislation may govern or pertain to use of the Internet or
of digital resources. The following are representative, not inclusive, of such regulation:
(1) V.T.C.A., Penal Code sec. 43:24, Sale, Distribution, or Display of Harmful Material to Minor.
(b) A person commits an offense if, knowing that the material is harmful: (2) he displays harmful
material and is reckless about whether a minor is present who will be offended or alarmed by the
display.
(2) U.S. Copyright law (17 USC). Prohibits unauthorized reproduction or distribution of
copyrighted materials, except as permitted by principles of “fair use.” Responsibility for any possible
copyright infringement lies solely with the user. The public library expressly disclaims any liability
or responsibility resulting therefrom.
(d) Disclaimer. In consideration for the privilege of using the library and for having access to the information
contained in it, library customers hereby release and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents, servants, or
employees, the public library, its staff, volunteers, representatives or advisors, from any and all liability or
responsibility for any and all claims or expenses arising either directly or indirectly from the use of the library,
whether or not caused, in whole or in part, by alleged negligence of the city, its officers, agents, servants,
employees, volunteers, representatives or advisors.
(e) Internet access by minors: regulations and restrictions. A minor, a person under the age of 18, must have
written approval by his parent or legal guardian to use library computers. Written approval must be in the form
of approval slips provided by the public library. Approval slips are available at the circulation desk.
(f) General responsibilities of customers. Use of the Internet and library computers is a privilege, not a right.
The public library expects customers, in order to keep their privileges intact, to use the resources in a responsible
manner. Responsible use of the Internet and library computers includes, but is not limited to, the following:
(1) Complying with the library's posted rules of conduct;
(2) Refraining from illegal or unethical use of the Internet;
(3) Using the Internet for cultural, educational and informational purposes. The library does not
provide Internet e-mail accounts; chat rooms are prohibited;
(4) Respecting copyright laws by making only authorized copies of copyrighted materials;
(5) Recognizing that library computers are available for use by many customers and adhering to
library established time limitations;
(6) A customer cannot send, receive or display inappropriate materials; whether text or graphics,
which may reasonably be construed as obscene as determined by local community standards;
(7) Not altering hardware or software;
(8) Not misrepresenting oneself, by access code, password, or signature;
(9) Respecting the privacy of others;
(10) Not violating federal, state, local or library laws or regulations.
Violations may result in loss of library privileges or access. Unlawful activities will be referred to the
appropriate legal authority and will be dealt with in a serious and appropriate manner.
(g) Confidentiality of use. Records of the public library which identify or serve to identify a person who
requests, obtains, or uses library materials or services are confidential and are excepted from required disclosure
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 368/684
under the Texas Open Records Act, with the following exceptions such records may be disclosed only if:
(1) The library determines that disclosure is reasonably necessary to the operation of the library
and the records are not confidential under other state or federal law;
(2) The records are released to the person to whom the information relates; or the person to whom
the information relates has given permission, in wiring, for the information to be released;
(3) The records are required under a valid court order, or subpoena, as provided for under the
provisions of the Texas Open Records Act;
(4) The records are required under a valid search warrant as provided for under the provisions of
the United and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and
Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001 (“USA Patriot Act)” law 50 USC 1862.
In the event that records are released to appropriate law enforcement officials under the USA Patriot Act, the
library is prohibited from disclosing information about a search warrant, subpoena, or court order.
(h) Staff assistance. Due to the various skill levels and time constraints of library scheduling, Internet trained
staff may not always be available for personal assistance. Library staff cannot provide in-depth training on
Internet computer usage or personal computer usage one-on-one. Staff is, however, able to offer professionally
acquired skills to provide suggestions and tips for searching and offer basic computer education courses for
library customers.
(i) Sanctions. Library users who violate this policy, or who refuse to comply with applicable federal, state and
local laws, may be removed from the library and may have their library privileges revoked. The librarian-incharge
has the authority to terminate a user's Internet and/or computer session in accordance with these
sanctions. This decision may be appealed to the director of the public library. Violations of policies described
above regarding legal and ethical use of the library's electronic resources will be dealt with in a serious and
appropriate manner. Illegal acts involving the library's Internet and computer resources may be subject to
prosecution by federal, state, or local authorities.
(j) Responsibility and authority. Final responsibility and authority for Internet and computer access is vested
by the city council in the director of public library, who will operate within a framework of policies and
principles adopted by the city council of the city. The staff will operate under the director's delegated authority.
The public library is authorized to develop such procedures, guidelines, and rules as may be necessary to carry
out these policies. Further, the library is authorized to utilize appropriate technologies to address the
implementation of these policies.
(Ordinance 03-06-39, sec. 10, adopted 6/3/03)
Sec. 50-10 Fees; identification of borrowers; overdue materials
(a) Any person making application to borrow materials from the library will be required to present whatever
documents are deemed necessary by the librarian for adequate identification of the applicant. In addition, the
following library fees for obtaining a library card and interlibrary loans, as well as, access to downloadable
library resources shall apply:
(1) Frisco residents:
a. Library card: No fee.
b. Downloadable library resources: Full access.
c. Interlibrary loans: No fee.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 369/684
(2) Reciprocal city users (this phrase as used in this section shall mean a user who is a resident of a
city with whom the city has a “reciprocal materials lending contract”):
a. Library card: No fee.
b. Downloadable library resources: No access.
c. Interlibrary loans: $2.50.
(3) Nonresident users other than reciprocal city users:
a. Library card: $50.00 annual fee.
b. Downloadable library resources: No access.
c. Interlibrary loans: $2.50.
(b) Any person who has outstanding fines for overdue materials may be disallowed from further borrowing
until the fines have been paid.
(c) The penalty for failure to return library materials, which have been borrowed from the public library
system, within the time allowed, shall be as follows:
(1) Three-week books, per day, $0.25;
(2) Seven-day books, per day, $0.25;
(3) Interlibrary loans/resources sharing, per day, $0.25;
(4) Art prints, per day, $1.00;
(5) Kits/slides/filmstrips/records, per day, $0.25;
(6) Audio cassettes, per day, $0.25;
(7) Videocassettes, and compact discs, per day, $1.00;
(8) Puppets, per day, $0.25;
(9) Cameras, per day, $1.00;
(10) Meeting room keys, per day, $1.00.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person who has borrowed library materials to fail or refuse to return the same
to the public library system within 30 days after written notice has been mailed to him.
(e) Any person committing an unlawful act as set forth above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each offense, and each and every day such
violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 06-11-119, sec. 15, adopted 11/7/06; Ordinance 12-09-63, sec. 2(A), adopted 9/18/12)
Editor's note–Ordinance 06-11-119, secs. 2, 15 adopted Nov. 7, 2006, repealed the sec. 50-10, and enacted a new sec. 50-10 as set out
herein. The former sec. 50-10 pertained to Identification of borrowers; overdue materials and derived from Ordinance 93-12-03, sec. 1,
12-21-1993.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 370/684
CHAPTERS 51–53
RESERVED
CHAPTER 54
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 54-1–54-18 Reserved
ARTICLE II. SMOKING*
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY*
Sec. 54-19 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Building official. The city's building official, or his designee, charged with, among other things, the duties of
enforcing and administering this article.
Cigar. Unless otherwise amended by the Texas Tax Code, chapter 155, a roll of fermented tobacco that is
wrapped in tobacco and the main stream of smoke from which produces an alkaline reaction to litmus paper.
Cigarette. Unless otherwise amended by the Texas Tax Code, Chapter 154, a roll for smoking that is:
(1) Made of tobacco or tobacco mixed with another ingredient and wrapped or covered with a
material other than tobacco; and
(2) Not a cigar.
City. The City of Frisco, Texas.
Electronic cigarette and/or e-cigarette. Any electronic device composed of a mouthpiece, heating element,
battery and electronic circuits that provides, or is manufactured or intended to provide, a vapor of liquid nicotine
and/or other substances mixed with propylene glycol and/or other substances delivered or deliverable to the user
that he/she can inhale in simulation of smoking. This term shall include every version and type of such devices
whether they are manufactured or marketed as electronic cigarettes, e-cigarettes, electronic cigars, e-cigars,
electronic pipes, e-pipes or under any other product name or description.
Employee. Any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages
or profit, and any persons who volunteers his or her services for a nonprofit entity.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 371/684
Employer. Any person, partnership, entity, corporation, including a municipal corporation, or nonprofit entity,
which employs the services of one or more individual persons or entities.
Fraternal organization member space. An enclosed space used by a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic,
political, benevolent, or athletic organization exclusively for organizational purposes at all times, and not for
pecuniary gain, and in which the sale of alcoholic beverages is merely incidental to the operation. The affairs
and management of the organization are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body
chosen by the members at an annual meeting. The organization has established bylaws and/or a constitution to
govern its activities. The organization has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal income tax
under 26 U.S.C. section 501, as amended.
Food products establishment. Any restaurant, coffee shop, cafeteria, luncheonette, tavern, cocktail lounge,
sandwich stand, soda fountain, private and public school cafeteria or eating establishment or any other eating
establishment, organization, club, boardinghouse or guesthouse, which gives or offers for sale food to the public,
guests, patrons or employees as well as kitchens in which food is prepared on the premises for serving
elsewhere, including, but not limited to, catering facilities. Other food product establishments include, but are
not limited to, grocery stores and food markets, not including those outdoors.
Illegal smoking material. Any substance, however marketed, which can reasonably be converted for smoking
purposes whether it is presented as incense, tobacco, herbs, spices or any blend thereof if it includes any of the
following chemicals or a comparable chemical:
(1) Salvia Divinorum or Salvinorin A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as
Salvia Divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant,
and every compound, manufacture, salts, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or
extracts;
(2) 2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl) phenol (also known as CP47,497)
and homologues;
(3) (6aS,10aS)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6, 6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7,10,10atetrahydrobenzo
[c] chromen-1-ol (also known as HU-211 or Dexanabinol);
(4) 1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-018);
(5) 1-butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-073); or
(6) 1-pentyl-3-(4-methoxynaphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-081).
Products containing some or all of the above substances are currently being marketed under the
following commercial names:
“K-2,” “K-2 Summit,” “K-2 Sex,” “Genie,” “Dascents,” “Zohai,” “Sage,” “Spice,” “KO
Knock-out 2,” “Spice Gold,” “Spice Diamond,” “Yucatan Fire,” “Solar Flare,” “Pep
Spice,” “Fire N' Ice,” and “Salvia Divinorum.”
Any product containing any of the chemical compounds set forth above shall be subject to the
provisions of this article, regardless of whether they are marketed under alternative names.
Illegal smoking material paraphernalia. Any paraphernalia, equipment or utensil that is used or intended to be
used in ingesting or inhaling illegal smoking materials and may include, but is not limited to:
(1) A metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipe with or without a screen,
permanent screen, hashish head, or punctured metal bowl;
(2) A water pipe;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 372/684
(3) A carburetion tube or device;
(4) A smoking or carburetion mask;
(5) A chamber pipe;
(6) A carburetor pipe;
(7) An electric pipe;
(8) An air-driven pipe;
(9) A chillum;
(10) A bong; or
(11) An ice pipe or chiller.
Liquid nicotine. Any liquid product composed either in whole or in part of pure nicotine and propylene glycol
and/or any other substance and manufactured for use with electronic cigarettes or e-cigarettes.
Minor. A person younger than eighteen (18) years of age.
Open display unit. In the context of the retail sale of electronic cigarettes or e-cigarettes and/or liquid nicotine,
any device, furniture or furnishing within or upon which electronic cigarettes or e-cigarettes and/or liquid
nicotine are displayed to customers, and includes, but is not limited to, any case, rack, shelf, counter, table, desk,
kiosk, booth, stand, vending machine and other surface.
Person. An individual, a group of two or more individuals, proprietorship, corporation, partnership, wholesaler,
association or other legal entity, or any licensed or unlicensed business.
Physical barrier. A barrier that will form an effective membrane continuous from outside wall to outside wall,
from a smoke barrier to a smoke barrier, from floor to floor or roof above, or a combination thereof, including
continuity through all concealed spaces, such as above suspended ceilings, interstitial structural and mechanical
spaces. Transfer grilles, louvers and similar openings shall not be used in these partitions. Self-closing,
tightfitting doors are permitted in such barriers. Membrane penetrations must be effectively sealed to prevent the
free passage of air.
Place of business.
(1) A commercial business location where cigarettes, tobacco products, electronic cigarettes or ecigarettes
and/or liquid nicotine is/are sold;
(2) A commercial business location where cigarettes, tobacco products, electronic cigarettes or ecigarettes
and/or liquid nicotine are kept for sale of consumption or otherwise stored; or
(3) A vehicle from which cigarettes, tobacco products, electronic cigarettes or e-cigarettes and/or
liquid nicotine is/are sold.
Place of employment. Any enclosed area under the control of public or private employer which employees
normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges
and restrooms, conference and classrooms, employee cafeterias and hallways. A private residence is not a “place
of employment” unless it is used as a licensed child care, adult day care or health care facility.
Possess(es), possessing or possession. Actual care, custody, control or management.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 373/684
Private club. Any building, premises or portion thereof which is permitted by the state and allowed by special
use permit by the city as a private club for the storing, possession and dispensing for on-premises consumption
of alcoholic beverages. Private club does not include a premises operated by an organization which is not
available to and not customarily used by the general public and entry and privileges thereto are established by
regulations of that organization distinct from a Texas Alcohol and Beverage private club membership.
Public area. Any enclosed, indoor area that is open to or is used by the general public and includes, but is not
limited to, retail stores, grocery stores, offices, professional, commercial or financial establishments, restaurants,
public and private institutions of education, health care facilities, nursing and convalescent homes, residential
treatment facilities and buildings owned or occupied by political subdivisions.
Retail electronic cigarette store. A retail store utilized solely for the sale and sampling of electronic cigarettes or
e-cigarettes and/or liquid nicotine and related accessories.
Retail or service establishment. Any establishment which sells goods or services to the general public.
Retail tobacco store. A retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in
which the sale of the other products is merely incidental.
Retailer. A person, place of business or retail and service establishment, who/which engages in the practice of
selling cigarettes, tobacco products, electronic cigarettes or e-cigarettes and/or liquid nicotine to consumers and
includes, without limitation, the owner of an open display unit.
Self-service merchandising. In the context of the retail sale of electronic cigarettes or e-cigarettes and/or liquid
nicotine, the open display, including, without limitation, the use of an open display unit of electronic cigarettes
or e-cigarettes and/or liquid nicotine, whether packaged or otherwise, for direct retail customer access and
handling prior to purchase without the intervention of assistance of the retailer or the retailer's owner, employee
or agent.
Service line. An indoor line or area where persons await service of any kind, regardless of whether or not such
service involves the exchange of money. Such service shall include, but is not limited to, sales, giving of
information, directions or advice and transfers of money or goods.
Smoke or smoking. Includes the carrying, possessing or holding of a pipe, hookah, cigarette, tobacco product,
tobacco substitute, electronic cigarette or e-cigarette or liquid nicotine of any kind which is burning or emitting a
vapor.
Smokeless tobacco.
(1) Chewing tobacco, including Cavendish, Twist, plug scrap and any kind of tobacco suitable for
chewing;
(2) Snuff or other preparations of pulverized tobacco;
(3) An article or product that is made of tobacco or a tobacco substitute and that is not a cigarette
or cigar; or
(4) Weed or other plant product.
Smoking lounge. A room common to, or within, a retail or service establishment that provides patrons an area for
smoking. Other services not directly related to the activity of smoking may be provided by the establishment in a
smoking lounge.
Smoking room. A room within a retail tobacco store that provides patrons an area designated specifically for
smoking products purchased on the premises or elsewhere. Other services not directly related to the activity of
smoking shall not be offered in a smoking room.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 374/684
Sports arena. Sports stadiums, sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller
and ice rinks, bowling alleys and other similar places where members of the general public assemble either to
engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports events.
Tobacco product.
(1) Cigar;
(2) Smoking tobacco, including granulated, plug-cut, crimp-cut, ready-rubbed, and any form of
tobacco suitable for smoking in a pipe or as a cigarette;
(3) Chewing tobacco, including Cavendish, Twist, plug scrap and any kind of tobacco suitable for
chewing;
(4) Snuff or other preparations of pulverized tobacco; or
(5) An article or product that is made of tobacco or a tobacco substitute and that is not a cigarette.
Tobacco substitute. An herbal-based non-tobacco product used for smoking.
Ventilation system. A supply, return, ventilation and circulation system designed by a licensed professional
engineer to meet the requirements of section 54-24 of this article, and meeting all the other requirements of the
city's mechanical code, as amended.
(Ordinance 00-12-12, sec. 3, adopted 12/5/00; Ordinance 06-11-118, sec. 2, adopted 11/7/06; Ordinance 10-07-
33, sec. 2, adopted 7/29/10; Ordinance 14-02-08, sec. 2, adopted 2/18/14; Ordinance 14-08-45, sec. 2, adopted
8/5/14; Ordinance 19-03-14 adopted 3/5/19)
Sec. 54-19.1 Purposes
The purposes of this article are to protect the public's health by eliminating smoking in public places and the
right of nonsmokers to breathe smoke-free air by prohibiting smoking in public places in the city, with certain
exceptions, to reduce detrimental effects on not only smokers, but also others in close proximity to smokers and
to further the health, safety and welfare of the city and its citizens. (Ordinance 19-03-14 adopted 3/5/19)
Sec. 54-20 Smoking and smokeless tobacco prohibited
(a) Smoking prohibited in certain public areas.
(1) A person commits an offense in violation of this article if he smokes or possesses a burning
tobacco, tobacco substitute , weed, other plant product, electronic cigarette or e-cigarette or liquid
nicotine in any of the following indoor and/or enclosed areas:
a. A public or private preschool, primary or secondary school;
b. Elevators, museums, libraries, galleries, public transportation facilities open to the public
and service lines of establishments doing business with the general public;
c. Hearing rooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms or any public service area of any facility
owned, operated or managed by the city in which business is conducted, when the public
business requires and/or provides an opportunity for direct participation and/or observation by
the general public;
d. Any building or indoor or outdoor sports arena which is used for or designated for the
purpose of exhibiting any motion picture, stage drama, lecture, musical recital, athletic event or
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 375/684
any other event whenever open to the public, including all restrooms and any area commonly
referred to as a lobby; however, smoking, which is a part of a stage performance, is permitted;
e. Any retail or service establishment serving the general public, including but not limited to,
any food products establishment, department store, restaurant, grocery store, private club, bingo
parlor, bowling center, drug store, shopping mall, hair styling salons, including service lines;
f. All restrooms open for public use;
g. All areas in a laundromat open to and available to use by the public;
h. Within all areas available to and customarily used by the general public in all businesses
and nonprofit entities patronized by the public, including, but not limited to, commercial,
financial and professional offices, including banks, hotels and motels; or
i. Within 20 linear feet of any entrance of any facility where smoking is prohibited.
(2) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner, operator, manager or other
person who controls any establishment or facility described in this section may declare the entire
establishment or facility as a nonsmoking establishment.
(3) It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that the public place in which the offense
takes place does not have prominently displayed a conspicuous notice that smoking is prohibited and
that an offense is punishable by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00.
(b) Prohibition of smoking in places of employment.
(1) Where smoking is prohibited, it shall be the responsibility of employers to provide a smokefree
workplace for all employees.
(2) Each employer having any enclosed place of employment located within the city shall adopt,
implement, make known and maintain a written smoking policy, which shall contain the following
requirements:
“Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed facilities within a place of employment except
where expressly permitted under city ordinance. This includes common work areas,
auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways,
medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms, vehicles, and all other
enclosed facilities.”
(3) The smoking policy shall be communicated to all employees within four (4) weeks of its
adoption.
(4) All employers shall supply a written copy of the smoking policy upon request to any existing or
prospective employee.
(c) Prohibited in parks. A person commits an offense in violation of this article if, in any park, he smokes or
smokeless tobacco is contained within the person's mouth.
(d) Prohibited on portions of outdoor patios. A person commits an offense in violation of this article if he
smokes or possesses a burning tobacco, tobacco substitute, weed, other plant product, electronic cigarette or ecigarette
or liquid nicotine in an outdoor patio area of a retail or service establishment that is defined fully or
partially by a barrier or that provides seating for patrons where any portion of the outdoor patio is located fewer
than 10 linear feet from public property, an outdoor patio of another establishment or an operable window into a
building.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 376/684
(Ordinance 00-12-12, sec. 4, adopted 12/5/00; Ordinance 06-11-118, secs. 3, 8, adopted 11/7/06; Ordinance 14-
02-08, sec. 2, adopted 2/18/14; Ordinance 14-08-45, sec. 3, adopted 8/5/14; Ordinance 19-03-14 adopted 3/5/19)
Sec. 54-21 Hospitals; health care facilities
A person commits an offense in violation of this article if he smokes or possesses a burning tobacco, weed, other
plant product, electronic cigarette or e-cigarette or liquid nicotine in any public area of a health care facility or
hospital, including, but not limited to, clinics, physical therapy facilities, doctor's offices, nursing and
convalescent homes, residential treatment centers/homes and dentists' offices. In bed space areas of health care
facilities or hospitals, smoking shall be prohibited unless the smoking of a lawful substance is authorized by a
physician as part of a medical directive or procedure. Separate ventilation exhaust may be required by the
building official to accommodate such orders. (Ordinance 00-12-12, sec. 5, adopted 12/5/00; Ordinance 14-02-
08, sec. 2, adopted 2/18/14; Ordinance 19-03-14 adopted 3/5/19)
Sec. 54-22 Posting of signs
The owner, operator or person in charge of an establishment or facility in which smoking is prohibited shall post
signs in one or more conspicuous locations stating that smoking is prohibited and that an offense is punishable
by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00. (Ordinance 00-12-12, sec. 6, adopted 12/5/00; Ordinance 19-03-14 adopted
3/5/19)
Sec. 54-23 Compliance
(a) The building official, code enforcement, or other city official designated by the city manager, shall be
responsible for compliance with this article as to facilities which are owned, operated or leased by the city. The
building official shall provide each applicant applying for a nonresidential certificate of occupancy with a copy
of this article.
(b) The owner, operator, person in charge or manager of any facility regulated by this article shall comply
with the provisions of this article.
(c) The building official, code enforcement, or other city official designated by the city manager, in his sole
discretion, may enforce this article by any of the following actions:
(1) Serving written notice on the owner, operator, person in charge or manager of any facility,
business or agency within the purview of this article, requiring the correction, within a specified
reasonable time frame, of any violation of this article;
(2) Requesting the city attorney to maintain an action for injunction to enforce the provisions of
this article, to cause the correction of any such violation and for assessment and recovery of a civil
penalty of such violation, including attorneys' fees; or
(3) Issuing a municipal court citation to any violator of this article.
The remedies contained herein are cumulative of and in addition to any other remedies that are available to the
city at law or in equity.
(d) Any person may file a complaint with the city to initiate enforcement by the city.
(e) In undertaking the enforcement of this article, the city is assuming an undertaking only to promote the
general health, safety and welfare of its citizens. The city is not assuming any duty or obligation, nor is it
imposing any duty and/or obligation on its officers and/or employees, nor is it liable in money damages or
otherwise to any person who claims that the city and/or one of its officers and/or employees breached any such
obligation, and the breach proximately caused injury.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 377/684
(f) This article shall not be interpreted nor construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by
other applicable laws.
(Ordinance 00-12-12, sec. 7, adopted 12/5/00; Ordinance 06-11-118, sec. 4, adopted 11/7/06)
Sec. 54-24 Where smoking is not prohibited
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, smoking is not prohibited in the following
areas:
(1) Private residences, except when used as a licensed child care, adult day care or health care
facility;
(2) Hotel and motel rooms rented to guests, if permitted by the hotel or motel;
(3) Retail tobacco stores that have an enclosed smoking room provided that the following
requirements are met:
a. Smoking rooms shall have a physical barrier to prevent the escape of visible smoke, vapor
or other objectionable nonvisible products of smoking without any action required of adjacent
tenant spaces.
b. Smoking rooms shall have dedicated ventilation systems separate from all other rooms or
spaces where smoking is prohibited. Ventilation systems shall consist of exhaust, air
purification, filtration, air exchange or a combination of methods to eliminate all visible and
nonvisible products of smoking from the indoor environment.
c. Patrons shall not be required to enter or pass through smoking rooms to access required
public sanitary facilities.
d. No person under 18 years of age shall be allowed entrance into or be required to work in a
smoking room.
e. Entrance doors into a smoking room shall not allow entry into the smoking room directly
from the exterior of the building. Entrance doors must allow entry only from a vestibule or an
interior portion of a retail tobacco store.
(4) Retail and service establishments that have an enclosed smoking lounge provided that the
following requirements are met:
a. Smoking lounges shall have a physical barrier to prevent the escape of visible smoke,
vapor or other objectionable nonvisible products of smoking without any action required of
adjacent tenant spaces.
b. Smoking lounges shall have dedicated ventilation systems separate from all other rooms or
spaces where smoking is prohibited. Ventilation systems shall consist of exhaust, air
purification, filtration, air exchange or a combination of methods to eliminate all visible and
nonvisible products of smoking from the indoor environment.
c. Patrons shall not be required to enter or pass through smoking lounges to access required
public sanitary facilities.
d. No person under 18 years of age shall be allowed entrance into or be required to work in a
smoking lounge.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 378/684
e. The smoking lounge area shall be limited to a maximum of 15 percent of the gross floor
area of the common or associated retail or service establishment.
f. Entrance doors into a smoking lounge shall not allow entry into the smoking lounge
directly from the exterior of the building. Entrance doors must allow entry only from a vestibule
or an interior portion of a retail or service establishment.
(5) Any area of fraternal organization member space not serving the general public.
(6) Any area exterior to the building in which the establishment or facility is located, except as
otherwise regulated under section 54-20 of this article.
(7) In retail electronic cigarette stores provided that only the smoking of e cigarettes may be
permitted and further provided that a physical barrier exists to prevent the escape of visible smoke,
vapor or other objectionable nonvisible products of smoking without any action required of adjacent
tenant spaces.
(Ordinance 00-12-12, sec. 8, adopted 12/5/00; Ordinance 06-11-118, sec. 5, adopted 11/7/06; Ordinance 14-02-
08, sec. 2, adopted 2/18/14; Ordinance 19-03-14 adopted 3/5/19)
Sec. 54-25 Operation of smoking rooms, smoking lounges and retail electronic cigarette stores
(a) The building official may deny or order the cessation of the continued use of a smoking room, smoking
lounge or retail electronic cigarette store if he determines that:
(1) Visible smoke, vapor or other objectionable nonvisible products of smoking is migrating from
the smoking room, smoking lounge or retail electronic cigarette store into a space, establishment,
occupancy or use where smoking is prohibited; or
(2) The smoking room, smoking lounge or retail electronic cigarette store has failed to meet any of
the standards set forth in this article or tests prescribed by the building official.
(b) Upon such a determination, the smoking room, smoking lounge or retail electronic cigarette store shall be
prohibited from further use until compliance has been demonstrated to the building official through testing or
other means.
(Ordinance 00-12-12, sec. 9, adopted 12/5/00; Ordinance 06-11-118, sec. 6, adopted 11/7/06; Ordinance 19-03-
14 adopted 3/5/19)
Sec. 54-26 Violations and penalties
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any
premises subject to regulation under this chapter to fail to comply with all of its provisions, except for violations
noted in paragraph (b) of this section.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of
this article.
(c) Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of an offense punishable by:
(1) A fine not exceeding $100.00 for the first violation;
(2) A fine not exceeding $200.00 for a second violation within a one-year period of the first
violation; or
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 379/684
(3) A fine not exceeding $500.00 for an additional violation within a one-year period of the first
violation.
(Ordinance 00-12-12, sec. 10, adopted 12/5/00; Ordinance 06-11-118, sec. 7, adopted 11/7/06)
Sec. 54-27 Appeal
The owner or operator of a smoking room, smoking lounge or retail electronic cigarette store that has been
denied or ordered to cease the continued use of the smoking room, smoking lounge or retail electronic cigarette
store under section 54-25 may appeal such denial or order as follows:
(1) The owner or operator shall file a written notice of appeal with the building official within five
business days of the date the decision was rendered or the action occurred. The notice must state the
grounds for the appeal. The building official shall provide a written decision on the appeal within five
business days. Failure to render a decision within five business days shall constitute a denial.
(2) If the owner or operator's appeal to the building official is denied, the owner or operator may
file a written notice of appeal to the director of the development services department within five
business days of receipt of the building official's decision. The director of the development services
department shall provide a written decision within five business days of receipt of an appeal in
accordance with this section. Failure to render a decision within five business days shall constitute a
denial.
(3) If the owner or operator's appeal to the director of the development services department is
denied, the owner or operator may file a written notice of appeal to the city manager within five
business days of receipt of the director of the development services department's decision. The city
manager shall provide a written decision within five business days of receipt of an appeal in
accordance with this section. Failure to render a decision within five business days shall constitute a
denial. The city manager's decision shall be final.
(Ordinance 19-03-14 adopted 3/5/19)
DIVISION 2. ILLEGAL SMOKING*
Sec. 54-28 Illegal smoking material; purpose
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the sale or delivery of illegal smoking materials as defined herein within
the city limits of Frisco and to prohibit the possession of illegal smoking materials within the city limits. Any
form of delivery to include a simple gift constitutes a violation of this article. (Ordinance 10-07-33, sec. 3,
adopted 7/29/10)
Sec. 54-29 Sale, delivery, offer, or gift
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer to sell, deliver to or to give any illegal smoking material to any
person. (Ordinance 10-07-33, sec. 3, adopted 7/29/10)
Sec. 54-30 Use or possession of illegal smoking material
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in their possession or to use illegal smoking materials within the
corporate limits of the city. (Ordinance 10-07-33, sec. 3, adopted 7/29/10)
Sec. 54-31 Use or possession of illegal smoking paraphernalia
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in their possession any illegal smoking paraphernalia with the intent
to use it, to ingest, inhale or otherwise consume illegal smoking material. If a person is found in possession of
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 380/684
this type of paraphernalia it will be a violation of this article if appropriate forensic testing is done on the
paraphernalia and traces of illegal smoking material are present on the device. (Ordinance 10-07-33, sec. 3,
adopted 7/29/10)
Sec. 54-32 Defenses to prosecution
(a) It shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this article if the use of the illegal smoking material is
at the direction or under a prescription issued by a licensed physician or dentist authorized to prescribe
controlled substances within the State of Texas.
(b) It shall be a defense to prosecution under the terms of this article if any person charged with a violation
can provide proper and complete historic documentation that the use of such materials is a portion of a religious
undertaking or activity of a religious denomination in which they have long standing historic membership
supported by documentation from clergy or spiritual leader recognized by the State of Texas.
(Ordinance 10-07-33, sec. 3, adopted 7/29/10)
Secs. 54-33–54-40 Reserved
DIVISION 3. ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES AND/OR LIQUID NICOTINE
Sec. 54-41 Purpose and intent
This division is adopted so that the city council may promote, protect and improve the health, safety and general
welfare of the citizens of the city by discouraging the unhealthy practice of using electronic cigarettes or ecigarettes
and liquid nicotine and to help prevent the addiction to nicotine, especially by minors, through
regulation of the sale and merchandising of certain electronic cigarettes or e-cigarettes and liquid nicotine
products, the regulation of which is not preempted to the federal or state government. (Ordinance 14-02-08, sec.
3, adopted 2/18/14)
Sec. 54-42 Possession, purchase, consumption or receipt by minors prohibited
(a) A person who is younger than 18 years of age commits an offense if the individual:
(1) Possesses, purchases, consumes or accepts an electronic cigarette, e-cigarette or liquid
nicotine; or
(2) Falsely represents himself or herself to be 18 years of age or older by displaying proof of age
that is false, fraudulent or not actually proof of the individual's own age in order to obtain possession
of, purchase or receive an electronic cigarette, e-cigarette or liquid nicotine.
(b) It shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this section if the individual younger than 18 years of
age possessed the electronic cigarette, e-cigarette or liquid nicotine in the presence of:
(1) An adult parent, a guardian or a spouse of the individual; or
(2) An employer of the individual, if possession or receipt of the electronic cigarette, e-cigarette or
liquid nicotine is required in the performance of the employee's duties as an employee.
(c) It shall also be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this section that the individual younger than 18
years of age is participating in an inspection or test of compliance in accordance with section 161.088, Health
and Safety Code.
(Ordinance 14-02-08, sec. 3, adopted 2/18/14)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 381/684
Sec. 54-43 Sale to persons younger than 18 years of age prohibited; proof of age required
(a) A person or retailer commits an offense if the person or retailer with criminal negligence:
(1) Sells, gives or causes to be sold or given an electronic cigarette or e-cigarette or liquid nicotine
to someone who is younger than 18 years of age; or
(2) Sells, gives or causes to be sold or given an electronic cigarette or e-cigarette or liquid nicotine
to another person who intends to deliver it to someone who is younger than 18 years of age.
(b) If an offense under this section occurs in connection with a sale by an employee of the owner of a store in
which electronic cigarettes, e-cigarettes and/or liquid nicotine is/are sold at retail, the employee is criminally
responsible for the offense and is subject to prosecution.
(c) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a)(1) that the person to whom the electronic cigarette, ecigarette
or liquid nicotine was sold or given presented to the defendant apparently valid proof of identification,
(d) A proof of identification satisfies the requirements of subsection (c) if it contains a physical description
and photograph consistent with the person's appearance, purports to establish that the person is 18 years of age
or older and was issued by a governmental agency. The proof of identification may include a driver's license
issued by this state or another state, a passport or an identification card issued by a state or the federal
government.
(Ordinance 14-02-08, sec. 3, adopted 2/18/14)
Sec. 54-44 Vendor assisted sales required; self-service merchandising prohibited
(a) Except as provided by subsection (b), a retailer or other person may not:
(1) Offer electronic cigarettes, e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine for sale in a manner that permits a
customer direct access to the electronic cigarettes, e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine;
(2) Offer for sale or display for sale electronic cigarettes, e-cigarettes or liquid nicotine by means
of self-service merchandising; or
(3) Install or maintain an open display unit containing electronic cigarettes, e-cigarettes or liquid
nicotine.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (a) if:
(1) A facility or business is not open to persons younger than 18 years of age at any time;
(2) A facility or business is a premises for which a person holds a package store permit issued
under the Alcoholic Beverage Code; or
(3) An open display unit is located in an area that is inaccessible to customers.
(Ordinance 14-02-08, sec. 3, adopted 2/18/14)
Sec. 54-45 Enforcement
This division shall be enforced by the city's police department. (Ordinance 14-02-08, sec. 3, adopted 2/18/14)
Sec. 54-46 Penalty provision
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 382/684
Any person, firm, corporation, retailer or business entity violating this division shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of five hundred
dollars ($500.00), unless the violation relates to section 54-42, in which case, the fine shall not exceed the sum
of two hundred fifty and no/100 dollars ($250.00). Each continuing day's violation under this division shall
constitute a separate offense. The penal provisions imposed under this division shall not preclude the city from
filing suit to enjoin the violation. The city retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local,
state and federal law. (Ordinance 14-02-08, sec. 4, adopted 2/18/14)
Secs. 54-47–54-55 Reserved
ARTICLE III. FIREARMS
Sec. 54-56 Carrying firearms in city buildings
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to carry a firearm in any city building except a duly licensed person
may carry a handgun on those city premises where allowed by state law and this article.
(b) It is unlawful for any person, except for a licensed handgun holder who has a concealed handgun, to have
any other firearm, including an openly carried handgun, at any governmental meeting that is posted in
accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act.
(c) These restrictions shall not apply to a peace officer or to a city employee who has written authorization
from the city manager or his authorized designee to carry a firearm as part of the city employee's official duties.
(d) The terms “city building” and “city premises,” as used in this section, have the same meaning as the term
“premises,” as that term is defined in section 46.035(f) of the Texas Penal Code, as the same may be amended.
(e) The term “firearm,” as used in this section, has the same meaning as in section 46.01(3) of the Texas Penal
Code, as the same may be amended.
(f) The term “handgun,” as used in this section, has the same meaning as in section 46.01(5) of the Texas
Penal Code, as the same may be amended.
(g) The term “concealed the handgun,” as used in this section, shall mean that its presence is not openly
discernible to the ordinary observation of a reasonable person.
(h) The term “possession,” as used in this section, means on the person or the person has access thereto,
except where storage of a firearm is allowed by law.
(i) Signs shall be posted in accordance with the law notifying persons of the restrictions provided in this
section.
(Ordinance 95-12-14, secs. 1, 2, adopted 12/19/95; Ordinance 16-03-22, sec. 3, adopted 3/1/16)
Sec. 54-57 Discharge of firearms in city limits
(a) (1) It shall be unlawful for a person to discharge a firearm within the city limits except within
a sport shooting range or on property zoned for such use. This provision shall not apply if the
discharge of a firearm is on property that was annexed after September 1, 1981 or is in the city's
extraterritorial jurisdiction and meets the exceptions from regulation contained in section 229.002 of
the Local Government Code, as the same may be amended.
(2) This provision shall not supersede the restrictions on carrying or discharging firearms and other
devices as set out in chapter 58 (Parks and Recreation), section 58-92(17)b of the Code of
Ordinances.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 383/684
(b) This section shall not be construed to prohibit a peace officer from discharging a firearm in the
performance of his duty or to prohibit any citizen from discharging a firearm when lawfully defending himself,
another person, or property, or when he is otherwise allowed by law to discharge a firearm.
(c) The term “firearm,” as used in this section, shall mean all percussion weapons, but shall not include air
guns, air pistols, air rifles, and all other firearms using air pressure, propellant, or a spring to propel a projectile,
(Ordinance 16-03-22, sec. 3, adopted 3/1/16)
Secs. 54-58–54-85 Reserved
ARTICLE IV. NOISE
Sec. 54-86 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to make it unlawful for any person or entity to make, cause to be made, or allow
any unreasonably loud and disturbing noise of such a character, intensity and duration as to be detrimental or
offensive to the ordinary sensibilities of the citizens of the city, and/or which renders the enjoyment of life,
health or property uncomfortable or interferes with the public peace and comfort. (Ordinance 97-04-13, sec. 1,
adopted 4/15/97)
Sec. 54-87 Compliance by contractors and proposed developments
It is the policy of the city that all contractors and subcontractors be required to comply with the provisions and
intent of this article in their operations. (Ordinance 97-04-13, sec. 2, adopted 4/15/97)
Sec. 54-88 City contracts to be conditioned upon compliance
Any written agreement, purchase order, or instrument committing an expenditure of city funds in return for
work, labor, services, supplies, equipment, materials, or any combination of the foregoing, shall be subject to the
provisions of this article, and the person or entity entering into the contract must operate, construct, conduct, or
manufacture its business without violating this article. (Ordinance 97-04-13, sec. 3, adopted 4/15/97)
Sec. 54-89 Definitions
(a) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Construction. Any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, or similar action (excluding
demolition) of public or private right-of-way surfaces, structures, utilities or similar property.
Demolition. Any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of public or private right-of-way surfaces,
structures, utilities or similar property.
Device. Any mechanism which is intended to produce, or which actually produces, noise when operated or
handled.
Emergency vehicle. A motor vehicle used in response to a public calamity or to protect persons or property from
an imminent exposure to danger.
Motor vehicle. Any vehicle propelled by mechanical power, such as, but not limited to, any passenger car, truck,
truck-trailer, semi-trailer, camper, motorcycle, mini-bike, go-cart, dune buggy or racing vehicle.
Noise disturbance. Any sound which disturbs, or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or
physiological effect upon, the sensibilities of a reasonable, prudent, adult person; any unreasonably loud or
disturbing noise which is offensive to the sensibilities of a reasonable, prudent, adult person; and any
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 384/684
unreasonably loud or disturbing noise which renders the enjoyment of life or property uncomfortable or
interferes with public peace and comfort.
Noise disturbance per se. Not requiring extraneous evidence or support to establish the existence of a noise
disturbance.
Nonresidential district. Any district not classified by the city's zoning ordinance as containing residential homes,
apartments or condominiums.
Person. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation or any other entity, public or private.
Power equipment. Any motorized electric or fuel powered equipment, including but not limited to, tractors,
lawnmowers and other similar device or equipment.
Powered model vehicle. Any self-propelled airborne, waterborne, or land borne plane, vessel, or vehicle, which
is not designed to carry persons, including, but not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car or rocket.
Property boundary. An imaginary line exterior to any enclosed structure, at the ground surface and its vertical
extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person.
Quiet zone. Property on which a school, hospital, clinic, library or other noise disturbance sensitive facility is
operated.
Residential district. Any district classified by the city's zoning ordinance as containing residential homes,
apartments or condominiums.
(b) All terminology used in this article and not specifically defined above, shall retain its meaning in
conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor
body and/or the latest volume of Webster's Collegiate Dictionary.
(Ordinance 97-04-13, sec. 4, adopted 4/15/97)
Sec. 54-90 Specific noise disturbance prohibited
(a) No person shall allow, make or cause to be made any unreasonably loud or disturbing noise in the city
which is offensive to the sensibilities of a reasonable, prudent adult person, renders the enjoyment of life or
property uncomfortable, interferes with public peace and comfort, or causes a noise disturbance as defined
herein.
(b) The following list includes, but is not limited to, activities which can create unreasonably loud or
disturbing noises in violation of this article, including activities which are noise disturbances per se, unless an
exemption exists pursuant to section 54-91 or a permit of variance was first obtained as provided in section 54-
92.
(1) Animals. Owning, keeping, possessing, or harboring any animal or animals which, by frequent
or habitual noise making, unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the peace, comfort or repose of the
citizens of the city, or causes a noise disturbance as defined herein. The provisions of this article shall
apply to all private or public facilities including any animal shelter or commercial kennel, which hold
or treat animals.
(2) Radios, television sets, musical instruments, loud speaking amplifiers and similar devices.
a. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any sound production or
reproduction device, radio, receiving set, musical instrument, drums, phonograph, television
set, loudspeakers and sound amplifiers or other machine or device for the producing or
reproducing of sound within a residential district or quiet zone, or within 500 feet of any
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 385/684
residence or quiet zone, in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. Furthermore, any
such activity shall create a noise disturbance per se if conducted between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
b. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any sound production or
reproduction device, radio, receiving set, musical instrument, drums, phonograph, television
set, loudspeakers and sound amplifiers or other machine or device for the producing or
reproducing of sound within a nonresidential area in such a manner as to cause a noise
disturbance.
c. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any sound production or
reproduction device, radio, receiving set, musical instrument, drums, phonograph, television
set, loudspeakers and sound amplifiers or other machine or device that produces or reproduces
sound for the purpose of attracting attention to any cause or demonstration, or to any
performance, show, sale or display of merchandise so as to attract attention to such cause,
demonstration or premises when such use is done in a manner which causes a noise disturbance.
d. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any sound production or
reproduction device, radio, receiving set, musical instrument, drums, phonograph, television
set, loudspeakers and sound amplifiers or other machine or device on trucks or other moving
vehicles for the purpose of attracting attention to any cause or demonstration, or for advertising
any show, sale or display of merchandise when such use is done in a manner which causes a
noise disturbance.
(3) Vehicular sound amplification systems. Operating or controlling a motor vehicle in either a
public or private place within the city and operating any sound device which is part of, or connected
to, any radio, stereo receiver, compact disc player, cassette tape player, or other similar device in the
motor vehicle, in such a manner that, when operated, it is audible at a distance of 30 feet, or when
operated, causes a person to be aware of the vibration accompanying the sound at a distance of 30
feet from the source when such operation is done in a manner which causes a noise disturbance.
(4) Yelling, shouting, etc. The yelling, shouting, crying, hooting, whistling or singing of peddlers,
hawkers or any other person within the city in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance.
(5) Loading operations. The loading or unloading of any vehicle within the city in such a manner
as to cause a noise disturbance.
(6) Construction/maintenance work.
a. Operating or permitting to be operated any equipment used in construction, maintenance,
repair, alteration or demolition work on buildings, structures, streets, alleys, lawns, golf courses
or appurtenances thereto and/or the erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or
repair of any building within a residential district or quiet zone, or within 500 feet of any
residence or quiet zone, in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. Furthermore, any
such activity shall create a noise disturbance per se if conducted between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
b. Operating or permitting to be operated any gravel pit, rock crusher or other machinery for
the separation, gathering, grading, loading or unloading of sand, rock or gravel, within a
residential district or quiet zone, or within 500 feet of any residence or quiet zone, in such a
manner as to cause a noise disturbance. Furthermore, any such activity shall create a noise
disturbance per se if conducted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
c. Operating or permitting to be operated any equipment used in construction, maintenance,
repair, alteration or demolition work on buildings, structures, streets, alleys, lawns, golf courses
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 386/684
or appurtenances thereto within a nonresidential district in such a manner as to cause a noise
disturbance.
d. Operating or permitting to be operated any gravel pit, rock crusher or other machinery for
the separation, gathering, grading, loading or unloading of sand, rock or gravel within a
nonresidential district in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance.
(7) Power equipment.
a. Operating or permitting to be operated any power equipment (as defined herein and
excluding construction equipment which is specifically regulated by subsection (6) above)
within a residential district or quiet zone, or within 500 feet of any residence or quiet zone, in
such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. Furthermore, any such activity shall create a
noise disturbance per se if conducted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
b. Operating or permitting to be operated any power equipment (as defined herein and
excluding construction equipment which is specifically regulated by subsection (6) above)
within a nonresidential district in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance.
(8) Motor vehicles–Repairs or testing.
a. The repairing, rebuilding, modifying or testing of any motor vehicle (including off-road
vehicles) or watercraft within a residential district or quiet zone, or within 500 feet of any
residence or quiet zone, in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. Furthermore, any
such activity shall create a noise disturbance per se if conducted between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
b. The repairing, rebuilding, modifying or testing of any motor vehicle (including off-road
vehicles) or watercraft within a nonresidential district in such a manner as to cause a noise
disturbance.
(9) Same–Running loud or out of repair.
a. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of repair, so modified, or so
loaded, which emits or creates loud or unnecessary grading, grinding or rasping noise, the
excessive spinning of the tires, or the racing of a motor vehicle engine unnecessarily within a
residential district or quiet zone, or within 500 feet of any residence or quiet zone, in such a
manner as to cause a noise disturbance. Furthermore, such activity shall create a noise
disturbance per se if conducted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
b. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of repair, so modified, or so
loaded, which emits or creates loud or unnecessary grading, grinding or rasping noise, the
excessive spinning of the tires, or the racing of a motor vehicle engine unnecessarily within a
nonresidential district in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance.
(10) Same–Exhaust. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any motor vehicle in such a
manner as to cause a noise disturbance, except as discharged through a muffler or other device which
effectively and efficiently prevents loud and unusual noises and annoying smoke.
(11) Impulsive sources. Causing impulsive sound sources including, but not limited to, the use of
fireworks, explosives, the firing of guns or other explosive devices within the city in such a manner
as to cause a noise disturbance. This is not intended to preclude any existing ordinances prohibiting
such acts.
(12) Powered model mechanical devices.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 387/684
a. The flying of model aircraft powered by internal combustion engines, whether tethered or
not, or the firing or operating of model rocket vehicles or other similar noise producing devices,
within a residential district or quiet zone, or within 500 feet of any residence or quiet zone, in
such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance. Furthermore, any such activity shall create a
noise disturbance per se if conducted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
b. The flying of model aircraft powered by internal combustion engines, whether tethered or
not, or the firing or operating of model rocket vehicles or other similar noise producing devices
within a nonresidential district in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance.
(13) Refuse compacting vehicles. Operating or permitting to be operated any refuse compacting,
processing or collection vehicle or parking lot sweeper in any residential district or quiet zone, or
within 500 feet of any residence or quiet zone in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance.
(14) Quiet zone. Creating a noise disturbance on any street adjacent to any school, hospital, clinic,
library or other noise sensitive facility.
(15) Vibration. Using or causing the use of any device that creates any ground vibration which is
perceptible without instruments at any point on or beyond the property boundary of the source.
(16) Stationary nonemergency signaling devices. Sounding or permitting the sounding of any
electronically activated or amplified signal from any stationary bell, chime, siren, whistle, or similar
device, intended primarily for nonemergency purposes, from any place for more than five minutes
during any consecutive 60-minute period which causes a noise disturbance. Except such signaling
device is allowed if used as a danger signal, and/or as required by law if vehicle is backing, starting
or turning in such a way as to likely cause a collision.
(Ordinance 97-04-13, sec. 5, adopted 4/15/97)
Sec. 54-91 Exemptions
(a) The following sources of potential noise disturbances shall be exempt from the regulations of this article:
(1) Safety signals, storm warning sirens or horns and the testing of such equipment, emergency
vehicle sirens or horns used when responding to an emergency, and emergency pressure relief valves;
(2) Sound caused in the performance of emergency or public service work, including police, fire
and public utility operations, acting in the performance of lawful duties to protect the health, safety or
welfare of the community;
(3) Sounds caused by natural phenomena;
(4) Activities conducted on public parks and playgrounds which are approved, sponsored or
sanctioned by the city. Activities conducted on public or private school grounds including, but not
limited to, school athletic and school entertainment events which are approved, sponsored or
sanctioned by the school. Pizza Hut Park shall not be treated as a public park for purposes of gaining
an exemption under this article;
(5) Those activities listed under section 54-90(b)(2) that are conducted within Pizza Hut Park are
exempt so long as they are conducted during the following hours:
Sunday-Thursday: From 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
Friday and Saturday: From 7:00 a.m. to 11:30 p.m.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 388/684
Any activities listed under section 54-90(b)(2) that are conducted within Pizza Hut Park shall
not be exempt and shall create a noise disturbance per se if conducted outside of the times listed
in this subsection. Any person, firm, corporation, or business entity violating this provision and
creating a noise disturbance per se shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined a sum not exceeding $500.00. If there is any form of cessation
in the noise disturbance or if a new person, firm, corporation, or business entity becomes the
originator of the noise disturbance, the noise disturbance that follows such a cessation or
change in the originator shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) Penalty. Any person, firm, corporation or business entity violating this section shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined a sum not exceeding $500.00. Except for per se
violations in Pizza Hut Park, each continuing day's violation under this section shall constitute a separate
offense. Per se violations in Pizza Hut Park, however, will be handled as set forth in subsection (a)(5). The penal
provisions imposed under this section shall not preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin the violation. Frisco
retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law.
(Ordinance 97-04-13, sec. 6, adopted 4/15/97; Ordinance 08-08-73, secs. 2, 3, adopted 8/5/08)
Sec. 54-92 Permits of variance
(a) The city manager, or his designated representative, is authorized to grant permits for relief of any provision
in this article on the basis of undue hardship in cases where:
(1) The sound source will be of short duration and the activity cannot be conducted in a manner as
to comply with this article;
(2) Additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify their activity or operation to
comply with this article; or
(3) No reasonable alternative is available to the applicant.
(b) An automatic variance will be granted without the payment of permit fees for the purpose of conducting
parades or other public events provided that any noise disturbance created by such activity will be abated when
such request is made by the city manager, or his designated representative.
(c) The city manager, or his designated representative, may prescribe any reasonable conditions or
requirements deemed necessary to minimize adverse effects and may suspend any permit issued for violating
any provisions prescribed in the permit of variance.
(d) A fee of $25.00 shall be charged to each applicant for processing permit applications.
(Ordinance 97-04-13, sec. 7, adopted 4/15/97)
Sec. 54-93 Appeals
(a) Any applicant who has been denied a permit of variance or any permittee whose permit has been
suspended, shall have the right to a hearing before the city council.
(b) Requests for a hearing shall be made in writing and received by the city manager, or his designated
representative, within ten days of the date of the denial or the date of the notice of the suspension. The city
manager may review the appeal at a staff level and has the authority to reject the action of his designated
representative and order that a permit be granted or to reinstate a suspended permit. However, should the city
manager uphold the denial or suspension of a permit, he shall, or his designated representative shall, schedule a
hearing before the city council within 30 days of receipt of the request.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 389/684
(c) The city council shall have the authority to review all pertinent files and information regarding the
applicant/permittee which are in the custody of the city manager, or his designated representative. Additionally,
the city council shall have the authority to accept written and verbal testimony from the city manager, his
designated representative, any appropriate city staff member, applicant/permittee and interested citizens. The
city council shall also have the authority to place time restrictions on the testimony to be given at the hearing.
(d) The city council shall have the authority to assess whether the city manager, or his designated
representative, acted properly within the powers granted under this article in the denial or suspension of a
permit. A majority vote of a quorum of the city council shall determine whether to uphold or reject the city
manager's or his designated representative's action. Upholding the action of the city manager, or his designated
representative, shall affirm the denial or suspension. Rejection of the city manager's or his designated
representative's action shall automatically grant a permit or reinstate a suspended permit. The decision of the city
council shall be final.
(e) No person whose permit has been denied or suspended, shall create or allow the creation of the noise
disturbance in dispute prior to final determination by the city council.
(Ordinance 97-04-13, sec. 8, adopted 4/15/97)
Sec. 54-94 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof shall be fined in the sum of not more than $500.00. Each continuing day's violation under this
article shall constitute a separate offense. (Ordinance 97-04-13, sec. 9, adopted 4/15/97)
Sec. 54-95 Injunctive relief
In addition to and accumulative of all other penalties, the city shall have the right to seek injunctive relief for any
and all violations of this article. (Ordinance 97-04-13, sec. 10, adopted 4/15/97)
Secs. 54-96–54-131 Reserved
ARTICLE V. JUVENILE CURFEW
Sec. 54-132 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following words, terms, phrases and their derivations shall have the
meanings set forth below:
Curfew hours. 12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. daily.
Emergency. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action.
The term shall include but is not limited to a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
Establishment. Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited,
including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment.
Guardian. A person to whom custody of a juvenile has been given by a court order.
Juvenile. Any person under seventeen (17) years of age and at least ten (10) years of age.
Operator. Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating, managing or conducting any
establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers and
directors of a corporation.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 390/684
Parent. A person who is:
(1) A natural parent, adoptive parent or stepparent of another person; or
(2) At least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a parent, guardian, court order, or by the
court, or by a court-appointed guardian to have the care and custody of a person.
Public place. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is
not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities and shops.
Remain. To:
(1) Linger, stay, walk, run, stand, drive or ride; or
(2) Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator or
other person in control of the premises.
(Ordinance 07-09-50, sec. 2, adopted 9/18/07; Ordinance 13-09-50 adopted 9/3/13; Ordinance 17-04-24 adopted
4/4/17; Ordinance 2020-03-10 adopted 3/3/20)
Sec. 54-133 Offenses
(a) A juvenile commits an offense if the juvenile remains in any public place or on the premises of any
establishment within the city during curfew hours.
(b) A parent or guardian of a juvenile commits an offense if such person knowingly permits, or by insufficient
control allows, the juvenile to remain about, in or upon any public place or on the premises of any establishment
within the city during curfew hours.
(c) The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if such person knowingly
allows a juvenile to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours.
(Ordinance 07-09-50, sec. 3, adopted 9/18/07; Ordinance 13-09-50 adopted 9/3/13; Ordinance 17-04-24 adopted
4/4/17; Ordinance 2020-03-10 adopted 3/3/20)
Sec. 54-134 Defenses to prosecution
(a) It is a defense to prosecution under section 54-133(a) that the juvenile was:
(1) Accompanied by the juvenile's parent or guardian;
(2) On an errand at the direction of the juvenile's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;
(3) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
(4) Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment
activity, without any detour or stop;
(5) Involved in an emergency;
(6) On the sidewalk abutting the juvenile's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door
neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the juvenile's presence;
(7) Attending an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and
sponsored by the city, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 391/684
juvenile, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious
or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization or
another similar entity that takes responsibility for the juvenile;
(8) Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution; or
(9) Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with
chapter 31 of the Texas Family Code, as amended.
(b) It is a defense to prosecution under section 54-133(c) that the owner, operator or employee of an
establishment promptly notified the police department that a juvenile was present on the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
(Ordinance 07-09-50, sec. 4, adopted 9/18/07; Ordinance 13-09-50 adopted 9/3/13; Ordinance 17-04-24 adopted
4/4/17; Ordinance 2020-03-10 adopted 3/3/20)
Sec. 54-135 Enforcement
Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age
and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this article
unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other
circumstances, no defense in section 54-134 is present. (Ordinance 07-09-50, sec. 5, adopted 9/18/07; Ordinance
13-09-50 adopted 9/3/13; Ordinance 17-04-24 adopted 4/4/17; Ordinance 2020-03-10 adopted 3/3/20)
Sec. 54-136 Penalty provision
(a) A person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction therefor,
shall be fined a sum not exceeding five hundred and no/100 dollars ($500.00). Each and every day that such
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
(b) When required by section 51.08 of the Texas Family Code, as amended, the municipal court shall waive
original jurisdiction over a juvenile who violates section 54-133(a) of this article and shall refer the juvenile to
the appropriate court.
(Ordinance 07-09-50, sec. 8, adopted 9/18/07; Ordinance 13-09-50 adopted 9/3/13; Ordinance 17-04-24 adopted
4/4/17; Ordinance 2020-03-10 adopted 3/3/20)
Sec. 54-137 Review of article
(a) Before the third anniversary of the date of the adoption of this article, and every third year thereafter, the
city council shall:
(1) Review the effects of this article on the community and on problems the article was intended to
remedy;
(2) Conduct at least two public hearings on the need to continue the provisions of this article; and
(3) Abolish, continue or modify the provisions of this article.
(b) The failure of the city council to act in accordance with this section shall cause the provisions of this
article to expire without further action by the city council.
(Ordinance 17-04-24 adopted 4/4/17; Ordinance 2020-03-10 adopted 3/3/20)
Secs. 54-138–54-170 Reserved
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 392/684
ARTICLE VI. RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS FOR CHILD PREDATOR OFFENDERS
Sec. 54-171 Findings incorporated
The findings set forth [in this article] are incorporated into the body of this article as if fully set forth herein.
(Ordinance 08-03-32, sec. 1, adopted 3/4/08)
Sec. 54-172 Definitions
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, words, and the derivations thereof shall have the meaning
given herein.
Day care center. A facility providing care, training, education, custody, treatment, or supervision for 13 or more
children for less than 24 hours a day.
Minor. A person under the age of 17.
Park. Shall have the same meaning as that which is provided for in section 58-91 of this Code, as amended.
Permanent residence. A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for 14 or more consecutive days.
Premises where children commonly gather. All improved and unimproved areas on a lot where a public park
(excluding planted street medians), private or public school (excluding in-home schools), day care center, or
private recreational facility, including a park, pool, playground, skate park, or youth athletic field:
(1) Owned by a residential property owners association; or
(2) For which an entrance, admission, or rental fee is charged;
is located or reasonably anticipated to be located.
Sex offender. A person who is required to register on the Texas Department of Public Safety's Sex Offender
Database (the “database”) because of a conviction(s) involving a minor.
Temporary residence. A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of 14 or more days in the
aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where a person
routinely abides, resides, or lodges for a period of four or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any
month and which is not the person's permanent residence.
(Ordinance 08-03-32, sec. 2, adopted 3/4/08; Ordinance 10-02-12, sec. 2, adopted 2/16/10; Ordinance 15-02-05,
sec. 2, adopted 2/3/15)
Sec. 54-173 Offenses
(a) It is unlawful for a person who meets the definition of a ‘sex offender' to establish a permanent residence
or temporary residence within 1,000 feet of any premises where children commonly gather.
(b) Culpable mental state is not required. Neither allegation nor evidence of a culpable mental state is required
for the proof of an offense defined in this chapter.
(Ordinance 08-03-32, sec. 3, adopted 3/4/08)
Sec. 54-174 Evidentiary matters; measurement
(a) It shall be prima facie evidence that this section applies to a person if that person's record appears on the
database and the database indicates that the victim was less than 17 years of age.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 393/684
(b) For the purpose of determining the minimum distance of separation, the requirements shall be measured
by following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent or temporary residence to the nearest
property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described hereinabove, or, in the case of
multiple residences on one property, measuring from the nearest property line of the premises to the nearest
property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein.
(c) A map depicting the prohibited areas shall be maintained by the city. The city shall review the map
annually for changes. Said map will be available to the public at the Frisco Police Department.
(Ordinance 08-03-32, sec. 4, adopted 3/4/08)
Sec. 54-175 Affirmative defenses
Affirmative defenses. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution that any of the following conditions apply:
(1) The person required to register on the database established the permanent or temporary
residence and has complied with all of the sex offender registration laws of the State of Texas, prior
to the date of the adoption of this article.
(2) The person required to register on the database was a minor when he or she committed the
offense requiring such registration and was not convicted as an adult.
(3) The person required to register on the database is a minor.
(4) The premises where children commonly gather, as specified herein, within 1,000 feet of the
permanent or temporary residence of the person required to register on the database, was designated,
declared and/or determined, within the sole discretion of the property owner, after the person
established the permanent or temporary residence and complied with all sex offender registration
laws of the State of Texas.
(5) The information on the database is incorrect, and, if corrected, this section would not apply to
the person who was erroneously listed on the database.
(6) The person was at the time of the violation subject to community services supervision pursuant
to V.T.C.A., Texas Code of Criminal Procedure sec. 42.12(13B) and the court reduced or waived the
1,000-foot restriction for a child free zone under V.T.C.A., sec. 42.12(13B)(a)(1)(B) as it applies to
the person's residence.
(7) It is not a defense to prosecution under this section that a person was allowed by the city to
register or verify a residence that is within 1,000 feet of premises where children commonly gather.
(Ordinance 08-03-32, sec. 5, adopted 3/4/08; Ordinance 10-02-12, sec. 3, adopted 2/16/10)
Sec. 54-176 Savings/repealing clause
All provisions of any ordinance in conflict with this article are hereby repealed, but such repeal shall not abate
any pending prosecution of violation of the repealed ordinance, nor shall the repeal prevent a prosecution from
being commenced for any violation if occurring prior to the repeal of the ordinance. Any remaining portions of
said ordinance shall remain in full force and effect. (Ordinance 08-03-32, sec. 6, adopted 3/4/08)
Sec. 54-177 Severability
Should any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this article be declared unconstitutional or
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, it is expressly provided that any and all remaining portions of this
article shall remain in full force and effect. Frisco hereby declares that it would have passed this article, and each
section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 394/684
sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional or invalid. (Ordinance 08-03-32, sec. 7, adopted
3/4/08)
Sec. 54-178 Penalty provision
Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employees thereof who violate any of the provisions of this article shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined an amount not to exceed $2,000.00 for
each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. The penal
provisions imposed under this article shall not preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin the violation. The city
retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law. (Ordinance 08-03-32,
sec. 8, adopted 3/4/08)
Secs. 54-179–54-190 Reserved
ARTICLE VII. PUBLIC URINATION AND DEFECATION*
Sec. 54-191 Definitions
For purposes of article, the following terms shall apply:
Public place. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access or view and includes
but is not limited to streets, alleys, highways, common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office
building, transport facilities, shops, yards, parks, sporting facilities plazas, and structures.
Restroom. A location with toilets or urinals for the purpose of urinating or defecating.
(Ordinance 08-07-66, sec. 2(54-139), adopted 7/15/08)
Sec. 54-192 Urinating or defecating prohibited
(a) A person commits an offense if the person urinates and/or defecates:
(1) On public property or in a public place; or
(2) In public view.
(Ordinance 08-07-66, sec. 2(54-140), adopted 7/15/08)
Sec. 54-193 Defense
It is a defense to prosecution under this article if the person was in a restroom. (Ordinance 08-07-66, sec. 2(54-
141), adopted 7/15/08)
Sec. 54-194 Penalty
Any person, firm, corporation or business entity violating this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined a sum not exceeding $500.00. Each continuing day's violation under
this article shall constitute a separate offense. The penal provisions imposed under this article shall not preclude
the city from filing suit to enjoin the violation. Frisco retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant
to local, state and federal law. (Ordinance 08-07-66, sec. 3, adopted 7/15/08)
Secs. 54-195–54-200 Reserved
ARTICLE VIII. SUBPOENA PENALTY
Sec. 54-201 Failure to obey subpoena
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 395/684
Failure to obey a subpoena or produce books, papers, and other evidence as a result of an investigation made by
the city council pursuant to section 3.17, city charter, shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by
a fine not to exceed $200.00. (Ordinance 09-09-52, sec. 2, adopted 9/15/09)
Secs. 54-202–54-210 Reserved
ARTICLE IX. ELECTIONEERING AT POLLING LOCATIONS
Sec. 54-211 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to provide reasonable regulations for electioneering on city-owned or controlled
property when such property is used as an election polling place. The regulations contained herein are intended
to mitigate safety risks, prevent damage to public property and ensure that the public property is sufficiently
available for its patrons and city employees and staff who use the facilities other than for election purposes.
(Ordinance 15-03-14, sec. 3, adopted 3/17/15)
Sec. 54-212 Definitions
The following words and phrases used in this article shall have the meanings as set forth in this section:
Electioneering shall mean the posting, use, or distribution of political signs or literature, including the use of
tents, chairs, booths, tables or other furniture or devices to post, use or distribute political signs or literature.
Voting period shall mean the period beginning the hour the polls open for early voting and ending when the polls
close or the last voter has voted on election day, whichever is later.
(Ordinance 15-03-14, sec. 3, adopted 3/17/15)
Sec. 54-213 Regulations and exceptions
(a) The following regulations apply to electioneering on the premises of city-owned or controlled property
during the voting period.
(1) It is an offense for any person to leave any electioneering sign or literature on city-owned or
controlled property that is used as a polling place other than during the period beginning on 6:00 p.m.
before the voting period begins and ending twenty-four (24) hours after the voting period ends.
(2) It is an offense for any person to engage in electioneering on driveways on the premises of a
polling location or in such areas that the fire chief or his/her designee determines to be unsafe for
electioneering or determines will interfere with patrons or city employees and staff who use the areas
other than for election purposes.
(3) It is an offense for any person to attach, place or otherwise affix any electioneering sign,
literature or material to any building, tree, shrub, pole or other improvement on city-owned or
controlled property used as a polling location.
(4) It is an offense for any person to place any electioneering sign on the premises that exceeds
four (4) square feet and is more than four (4) feet in height, including any supporting poles.
(5) In addition to imposing any criminal penalty, electioneering sign(s) located in violation of this
section may be removed and disposed of by the city.
(6) The authority to conduct electioneering on city-owned or controlled property under this article
is limited to the property on the premises where the voting is conducted and only for the voting
period.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 396/684
(b) The regulations set forth in subsection (a) above shall not apply to any city-authorized signs, materials or
other messages on city-owned or controlled property.
(Ordinance 15-03-14, sec. 3, adopted 3/17/15)
CHAPTER 55
HUMAN RELATIONS
ARTICLE I. FAIR HOUSING
Sec. 55-1 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings
given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words so used in the present tense include the future,
words in the masculine gender include the feminine, words in the plural number include the singular, and words
in the singular include the plural.
Conciliation means the attempted resolution of issues raised by a complaint, or by the investigation of such
complaint, through informal negotiations involving the aggrieved person, the respondent, and the entity with
whom the complaint was filed.
Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under sections 55-2, 55-3 or 55-4 of this article.
Dwelling means any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed and intended for
occupancy as a residence by one or more families, or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease, for the
construction or location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof.
Familial status means one or more individuals (who have not attained the age of 18 years) being domiciled with
a parent or another person having legal custody of such individual or individuals; or the designee of such parent
or other person having such custody, with the written permission of such parent or other person. The protections
afforded against discrimination on the basis of familial status shall apply to any person who is pregnant or is in
the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18 years.
Family includes a single individual.
Handicap means, with respect to a person, a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or
more of such person's major life activities; a record of having such an impairment; or being regarded as having
such an impairment, but such term does not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance
(as defined in Section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802)).
Person includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal
representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees,
fiduciaries, and any other organization or entity of whatever character.
To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let, and to otherwise grant for a consideration, the right to occupy
premises not owned by the occupant.
(Ordinance 11-05-10, sec. 3, ex. A, adopted 5/3/11)
Sec. 55-2 Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 397/684
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Refuse to sell or rent, after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale
or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color,
gender, religion, national origin, familial status, or handicap;
(2) Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a
dwelling, or in the provisions of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color,
gender, religion, national origin, familial status, or handicap;
(3) Make, print, publish, or cause to be made, printed or published any notice, statement or
advertisement regarding the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicated any preference, limitation or
discrimination based on race, color, gender, religion, national origin, familial status or handicap, or an
intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination;
(4) Represent to any person, because of race, color, gender, religion, national origin, familial status
or handicap, that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental, when such dwelling is in
fact so available;
(5) Refuse to receive or transmit a bona fide offer to sell, purchase, rent or lease any housing
accommodation from or to a person because of race, color, gender, religion, national origin, familial
status, or handicap;
(6) Offer, solicit, accept or use a listing of any housing accommodation for sale, purchase, rental or
lease with the understanding that person may be subject to discrimination in connection therewith;
(7) Engage in, or hire to be done, or to conspire with others to commit acts or activities of any
nature, the purpose of which is to coerce, cause panic, incite unrest or create or play upon fear, with
the purpose of either discouraging or inducing, or attempting to induce, the sale, purchase, rental or
lease, or the listing, of any housing accommodations;
(8) Retaliate or discriminate in any manner against a person because he has opposed a practice
declared unlawful by this article, or because he has filed a complaint, testified, assisted or
participated in any manner in any investigation, proceeding, hearing or conference under this article;
(9) Aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce any person to engage in any of the practices prohibited by
this article, or to obstruct or prevent any person from complying with the provisions of this article;
(10) For profit, or with the hope or expectation of profit, induce or attempt to induce any person to
sell or rent any dwelling by representations, regarding the entry or prospective entry into the
neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, gender, religion, national origin,
familial status or handicap; and
(11) For profit, or with the hope or expectation of profit, to influence or attempt to influence, by
any words, acts, or failure to act, any seller, purchase, landlord, or tenant of a dwelling so as to
promote the maintenance of racially segregated housing, or so as to retard, obstruct, or discourage
racially integrated housing.
(Ordinance 11-05-10, sec. 3, ex. A, adopted 5/3/11)
Sec. 55-3 Discrimination in the financing of housing
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, credit union, insurance company or other
corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part of the making or insuring
of commercial or residential real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying
therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling; or to
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 398/684
discriminate against any such person in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, brokerage points, duration, or
other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance, because of:
(1) The race, color, gender, religion, national origin, familial status, or handicap of such person or
any person associated with him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance; or
(2) The race, color, gender, religion, national origin, familial status or handicap of the present or
prospective owners, lessees, tenants, or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings for which such loan or
other financial assistance is to be made or given.
(Ordinance 11-05-10, sec. 3, ex. A, adopted 5/3/11)
Sec. 55-4 Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services
It shall be unlawful for any person to deny access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing
service, real estate broker's organization or other service organization or facility relating to the business of
selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate in terms or conditions of such access, membership or
participation on account of race, color, gender, religion, national origin, familial status, or handicap. (Ordinance
11-05-10, sec. 3, ex. A, adopted 5/3/11)
Sec. 55-5 Exemptions and exclusions
(a) There shall be exempted from the application of section 55-2 hereof, all transactions involving:
(1) The rental of units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied
by no more than four families living independently of each other if the owner actually maintains and
occupies one of such units as his residence;
(2) The rental of a single room in a dwelling containing living quarters occupied or intended to be
occupied by no more than one family if the person offering such room for rental actually maintains
and occupies the remainder of such dwelling as his residence and not more than four such rooms are
offered;
(3) The sale or rental of any single house by a private individual who owns such house, provided
that:
a. The sale or rental is made without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or
the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman, or of such facilities or
services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings or of any employee or
agent of such broker, agent, salesman or person; and
b. The sale is made without the publication, posting or mailing of any advertisement or
written notice in violation of this article (this shall not prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow
agents, abstract, title companies, and other such professional assistance necessary to perfect or
transfer the title); and
c. The owner does not own more than three single-family houses at the time of sale; and
d. The owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf,
under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or any portion of the
proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family homes at any time.
(4) The exemption granted by this section shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any
24-month period.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 399/684
(b) Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society of any nonprofit
institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious association or
society, from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a
commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless
membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, gender, national origin, familial status or
handicap.
(c) Nothing in this article shall prohibit a bona fide private club, not in fact open to the public, which as an
incident to its primary purpose, provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose
from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members.
(d) Nothing in this article shall bar any person from owning and operating a housing accommodation in which
a room or rooms are leased, subleased or rented only to persons of the same gender, when such housing
accommodation contains a common lavatory, kitchen or similar facilities available for the use of all persons
occupying such housing accommodation.
(e) Nothing in this article is intended to prohibit the provision of housing exclusively for persons age 55 or
older. Nothing in this article is intended to limit the applicability of any other ordinance limiting the maximum
number of persons permitted to occupy a dwelling.
(Ordinance 11-05-10, sec. 3, ex. A, adopted 5/3/11)
Sec. 55-6 Complaints and information
(a) The person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who believes he will
be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that has occurred or is occurring, hereafter referred
to as “person aggrieved,” may file a complaint with the Texas Workforce Commission Civil Rights Division
(TWCCRD) or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Office of Fair Housing and Equal
Opportunity (FHEO).
(b) The city shall provide information related the Fair Housing Act and how to file a complaint pursuant to the
Fair Housing Act.
(Ordinance 11-05-10, sec. 3, ex. A, adopted 5/3/11)
Sec. 55-7 Cumulative legal effect
This article is cumulative in its legal effect and is not in lieu of any and all other legal remedies which the person
aggrieved may pursue. (Ordinance 11-05-10, sec. 3, ex. A, adopted 5/3/11)
Sec. 55-8 Unlawful intimidation
It shall be unlawful for any person to harass, threaten, harm, damage or otherwise penalize any individual, group
or business because he or they have exercised his or their right under this article or enjoyed the benefits of this
article or because he or they have made a charge, testified or assisted in any manner in any investigation, or in
any proceeding hereunder, or have made any report pursuant to the Fair Housing Act. (Ordinance 11-05-10, sec.
3, ex. A, adopted 5/3/11)
Sec. 55-9 Cooperation with secretary of housing and urban development
The city manager, or his designated representative, and the city attorney are authorized to cooperate with the
secretary of housing and urban development and the U.S. Attorney General pursuant to the provisions of the
Title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284, and may render such service to the secretary as they
shall deem appropriate to further the policies of the article. (Ordinance 11-05-10, sec. 3, ex. A, adopted 5/3/11)
Secs. 55-10–55-35 Reserved
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 400/684
CHAPTERS 56–57
RESERVED
CHAPTER 58
PARKS AND RECREATION*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 58-1–58-18 Reserved
ARTICLE II. DEDICATION OF LAND FOR PARKS AND RECREATIONAL AREAS AND
ASSESSMENT OF PARK DEVELOPMENT FEES*
Sec. 58-19 Purpose
It is hereby declared by the city council that parks and recreational areas serve the public health and welfare and
improve the quality of life of the city's residents, and that increased residential development in the city impacts
the current standards for park and recreational resources and creates the need for additional parks and recreation
resources as a result of the increased population. In order to offset this impact, the city council finds that is
appropriate to require dedication of parkland or require cash in lieu of dedication, where appropriate, and to
assess fees in order to meet the impact to current park facilities as a result of increased residential development.
(Ordinance 18-06-29 adopted 6/5/18. See end of article for full history of the article.)
Sec. 58-20 Definitions
The following terms, phrases, words and their derivation shall have the meanings as set below. Terms not
defined below shall have the meanings given to them in other portions of the code.
Applicant. The property owner or duly authorized agent of the property owner seeking approval for a residential
development through platting or other development processes.
Community park facilities. Land or capital improvements used as a community park, including but not limited to
recreational facilities, equipment, vegetation, landscaping, pedestrian walkways and bikeways, access
improvements and utilities.
Director. The City of Frisco Parks and Recreation Director or his/her designee.
Dwelling unit or DU. Any building, or portion thereof, designed exclusively for residential living and containing
one or more dwelling units that has within it a kitchen with a stove or cooktop, a permanently installed sink and
bathroom facilities.
Hike and bike master plan. The hike and bike master plan approved by the city council, as it exists or may be
amended.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 401/684
Linear park facilities. Land or capital improvements used or to be used as a linear park to connect to other parks,
neighborhoods and other public areas, including but not limited to recreational facilities, vegetation,
landscaping, equipment, pedestrian walkways and bikeways, access improvements and utilities.
Neighborhood park facilities. Land or capital improvements used as a neighborhood park, including but not
limited to recreational facilities, equipment, vegetation, landscaping, pedestrian walkways and bikeways, access
improvements and utilities.
Park development fee. A fee assessed to an applicant to offset the pro-rata costs of park facilities as a result of
the new residential development.
Park facilities. Community park facilities, neighborhood park facilities and linear park facilities that are
generally shown on the parks and recreation open space master plan or the hike and bike master plan.
Park facilities service area(s). That area shown on the map attached to Ordinance 18-06-29 delineating the park
facilities service areas within the city.
Park improvement plan. The park improvement plan, as it exists or may be amended, that identifies the park
facilities and the average costs of such facilities, whether financed in whole or part through the imposition of a
park development fee.
Parks and recreation open space master plan. The parks and recreation open space master plan approved by the
city council, as it exists or may be amended.
Persons per household or PPH. The average number of persons who live in a dwelling unit as computed by city
staff using data that may include United States Census Data, North Central Texas Council of Governments
population information or records of the city that reasonably demonstrate potential persons per household based
on number and size of sleeping areas within a dwelling unit.
Residential development. A single-family or multifamily residential development. The term residential
development does not include commercial care facilities exclusively used for housing disabled or elderly
persons, motels, hotels or shelters used to temporarily house persons or other similar uses.
Subdivision ordinance. The subdivision ordinance approved by the city council, as it exists or may be amended.
(Ordinance 18-06-29 adopted 6/5/18. See end of article for full history of the article.)
Sec. 58-21 Dedication of parkland
(a) The park types covered by this article are community park facilities, neighborhood park facilities and
linear park facilities. An applicant shall provide for the parkland needs of the residents by the dedication of
suitable land for park and recreational purposes under this article unless the city requires cash in lieu of
dedication under section 58-23. Dedication of parkland shall be in accordance with the process set forth in
section 8-12 of the subdivision ordinance, as it exists or may be amended.
(b) The dedicated area must be shown on the preliminary plat and final plat as “Parkland Dedicated to the City
of Frisco.” The applicant shall dedicate to the city all parkland required by this article at the time of final plat
approval and the property must also be conveyed by a special warranty deed to the city, and be free and clear of
any encumbrances except those allowed under subsections (f) and (g) below. Any open space required to be
included in the development by any other regulation may not be used to satisfy the requirements of this article.
(c) The level of service standard for parkland and recreational areas is 8.5 acres per one thousand (1,000)
residents. Persons per household is 3.11 for each single-family dwelling unit and 1.97 for each multifamily
dwelling unit.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 402/684
(d) The formula to calculate the amount of parkland required to be dedicated is: 8.5 multiplied by the
proposed number of dwelling units, and that sum is multiplied by the applicable PPH rate and divided by one
thousand (1,000).
Example for single-family development
((8.5 x 100 DU = 850) x 3.11 = 2643.5) / 1,000 = 2.6435 acres
Example for multifamily development
((8.5 x 100 DU= 850) x 1.97 = 1674.5) / 1,000 = 1.67 acres
(e) Appraisal and credit.
(1) An applicant shall obtain an appraisal report of the net acreage of the tract(s) of land to be
developed from an independent appraiser approved by the city. Net acreage shall exclude right-ofway
and any other property dedicated for public use. The report shall utilize a comparable sales
method for determining fair market value. The applicant shall bear all costs for the appraisal.
(2) The tract, whether one or more, shall be appraised to determine the proportionate value of the
parkland to be dedicated. The applicant will receive a credit from the city for forty percent (40%) of
the proportionate fair market value for the amount of dedicated parkland.
(3) The applicant may elect to receive cash for the credit at the time of final plat approval and
dedication or apply the credit toward park development fees assessed on the development.
(f) Suitability of land.
(1) Any land dedicated to the city under this article must be suitable and needed for park and
recreation purposes, as determined by the city. At a minimum, the dedicated parkland must be
accessible to public streets and conform to the requirements in the subdivision ordinance and parks
and recreation open space master plan. Drainage areas may be considered as part of a park if part of
approved trail connections or linear parks. Parkland proposed to be dedicated with a drainage channel
must be reviewed and approved by the director.
(2) If the proposed dedication of parkland is not entirely suitable for park and recreation purposes,
the applicant is required to dedicate that portion that is suitable, as determined by the city, and pay to
the city the appraised value for the remaining portion that is not dedicated. The applicant will receive
the forty percent (40%) credit on the appraised value that is dedicated. If all of the land required to be
dedicated is not acceptable, the applicant shall pay cash in lieu of the value of land not dedicated in
accordance with section 58-23.
(g) Parkland to be dedicated must not be encumbered by any lien or easement, must be kept in its natural state
and must not be compromised from its original integrity prior to dedication to the city unless approved by the
director. The following characteristics are generally unsuitable:
(1) Neighborhood parks shall not be located in the one hundred (100) year floodplain except that
linear park facilities may be acceptable after review and approval by the director.
(2) Any areas of unusual topography or slope over three percent (3%) which renders the property
unsuitable for organized recreation activities unless approved by the director.
(3) Property encumbered by easements, utilities or utility appurtenances that restrict the use of the
intended park unless approved by the director.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 403/684
(h) Payment of costs. The applicant shall pay all costs for transferring the property to the city, including the
costs of:
(1) A phase I environmental assessment study without any further recommendations for cleanup,
and the certification of the assessment must be provided to the city one hundred twenty (120) days
before the closing date;
(2) An ALTA land title survey, certified to the city and the title company one hundred twenty (120)
days before the closing date;
(3) A title commitment from a title company acceptable to the city along with copies of all
exception documents;
(4) Owner's title policy in a form acceptable to the city;
(5) A special warranty deed in a form acceptable to the city;
(6) Taxes prorated to date of closing;
(7) Recording fees;
(8) Charges or fees collected by the title company; and
(9) Fees for any other service in connection with the transfer of the property to the city.
(i) (1) If the actual number of completed dwelling units exceeds the figure on which the
dedication was based, additional dedication of parklands shall be required or cash in lieu of
dedication will be implemented, such decision is at the sole discretion of the city.
(2) If a replat is filed, the dedication requirement shall be controlled by the ordinance in effect at
the time of the filing of the replat. Additional dedication or cash in lieu of dedication shall be
required if the actual density (number of dwelling units and/or persons per household) has increased
from the density that was applied at the time of the calculation of the original parkland dedication or
payment of fee in lieu of dedication.
(j) Upon receipt of a recommendation by the city's parks and recreation board, the planning and zoning
commission may approve and accept the dedication of parkland as part of the platting process.
(Ordinance 18-06-29 adopted 6/5/18. See end of article for full history of the article.)
Sec. 58-22 Prior dedication
(a) At the discretion of the planning and zoning commission, any former gift of land by a donor to the city
may be credited on a per-acre basis toward parkland dedication requirements imposed on the same donor for this
development if the donor is the applicant.
(b) Donations required as part of a prior development approval shall not qualify for credit.
(Ordinance 18-06-29 adopted 6/5/18. See end of article for full history of the article.)
Sec. 58-23 Cash in lieu of dedication
(a) An applicant is required to dedicate parkland unless the city determines the land is not suitable or needed
for park facilities in which case the applicant shall pay cash in lieu of dedication. The decision shall take into
consideration the parks and recreation open space master plan locations for current and proposed parks, and any
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 404/684
other relevant factors. The decision to receive cash in lieu of dedication shall be made prior to the approval of
the preliminary plat.
The amount of cash in lieu of dedication to be paid shall be sixty percent (60%) of the appraised fair market
value of the net acreage of the tract(s) of land to be developed and proportionately applied to the amount of land
that would otherwise be required to be dedicated under the formula set out in section 58-21. The appraisal report
must be from an independent appraiser approved by the city utilizing a comparable sales method to value the fair
market value of the net acreage of the tract(s). The applicant shall bear all costs of the appraisal.
(b) Payment shall be made prior to recordation of the final plat by cashier's check or other acceptable cash
equivalent, as determined by the city.
(c) Cash in lieu of dedication that is received by the city shall be expended only for the costs to acquire
parkland or recreational easements within the park facilities service area of the applicant's development, except
as provided in subsection (d).
(d) If, within one year from the date the monies received as cash in lieu of dedication are appropriated for
expenditure, the director determines that land which meets the requirements of sections 58-21(f)–(g) is
unavailable for purchase within the park facilities service area of the applicant's development, then the monies
received as cash in lieu of dedication may be used for the purposes described in section 58-26.
(Ordinance 18-06-29 adopted 6/5/18. See end of article for full history of the article.)
Sec. 58-24 Park facilities service areas
There are hereby established four (4) park facilities service areas that generally serve the residents within that
area and are shown hereon the attached exhibit A to Ordinance 18-06-29. (Ordinance 18-06-29 adopted 6/5/18.
See end of article for full history of the article.)
Sec. 58-25 Park development fee
(a) A park development fee is hereby imposed on residential development for the purposes of assuring that
park facilities are available and adequate to meet the needs created by such development while maintaining
current and proposed level of park and recreation standards. It is intended to be consistent with and to further the
objectives and policies of the parks and recreation open space master plan and to be coordinated with other city
policies, ordinances and resolutions by which the city seeks to ensure the provision of adequate park facilities in
conjunction with the development of land.
(b) The park development fee applies to all residential development and shall be used for the development of
park facilities. The fee shall not be applied to any renovation or rehabilitation of an existing residential
development unless the rehabilitation or renovation creates additional dwelling unit(s).
(c) The park development fee is in addition to and not in substitution of any other requirements or fees
imposed by the city on the development of the land. Pursuant to other city regulations, an applicant may also be
required to provide open land, setbacks, buffers and other non-buildable areas on site in addition to meeting the
park development fee requirement. This fee is in addition to any cash in lieu of dedication that is required to be
paid.
(d) The park development fee formula uses the number of community park facilities, neighborhood park
facilities and current miles of trails in linear park facilities. The formula for community park facilities is the
population of the city (the city shall use the current United States Census Bureau five (5) year estimate) divided
by the current number of developed community parks, divided by the average construction cost for community
park facilities. The formula for neighborhood park facilities is the population of the city divided by the current
number of developed neighborhood parks, divided by the average construction cost for neighborhood park
facilities. The formula for linear park facilities is the average cost to develop linear park facilities divided by the
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 405/684
current miles of trails in existence at the time the park development fee is due from the applicant. The total sum
of each of those calculations is multiplied by the PPH for the type of development to determine the park
development fee that is assessed to each DU proposed. The applicant shall be required to pay sixty percent
(60%) of the amount calculated for each DU under the formula set forth below:
Example:
Community parks: 145,646/3 = 48,548.66
Average construction costs = $22,971,286.28/48,548.66 = $473.16
Neighborhood parks: 145,646/33 = 4414
Average construction costs= $1,574,374.70/4414 = $356.68
Linear parks:
Average construction costs = $979,896.99/16,183 = $60.55
TOTAL = $890.39
Single-family: $890.39 x 3.11 (PPH) = $2,769.11 per DU
Multifamily: $890.39 x 1.97 (PPH) = $1,754.06 per DU
The final figure is reduced to sixty percent (60%) of the amount owed.
Single-family: $1,661.46 per DU
Multifamily: $1,052.44 per DU
(Ordinance 18-06-29 adopted 6/5/18. See end of article for full history of the article.)
Sec. 58-26 Use of park development fees
(a) Except as provided in subsection (b), park development fees collected for each park facilities service area
pursuant to this article, and interest thereon, shall be used solely for the purpose of funding the acquisition or
improvement of park facilities for such park facilities service area in accordance with the parks and recreation
and open space master plan, park improvement plan or for reimbursement to the city for such acquisition or
improvement.
Eligible costs include, but are not limited to, land acquisition, including costs of eminent domain, recreational
equipment purchase and installation of improvements and amenities, utility installation and relocation, vehicular
and pedestrian access, and the planning, engineering and design of the park and its improvements. Park
development fees may also be used to pay the principal sum and interest and other finance costs on bonds, notes
or other obligations issued by or on behalf of the city to finance such park facilities. Fees may be used to pay
eligible refunds.
(b) The city may transfer park development fees from the accounts of other park facilities service areas,
provided that the park facilities service area from which the funds were transferred are adequately served at the
time of the transfer and the transferred fees are repaid to the park facilities service area account from which
funds are borrowed, within five (5) years from the date of the transfer.
(Ordinance 18-06-29 adopted 6/5/18. See end of article for full history of the article.)
Sec. 58-27 Processing and collecting park development fees
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 406/684
(a) Applicants for a site plan or plat for residential development must submit, on a form provided by the city,
the proposed number of dwelling units in the development.
(b) Upon receipt of an application for a site plan or plat, the city shall calculate the applicable park
development fee due. If the number of dwelling units increases after the original calculation, the city shall
recalculate the park development fee.
(c) If a the site plan or plat has expired and a new application is filed, the park development fee shall be
calculated on the basis of the park development fee in effect at the time of the new application.
(Ordinance 18-06-29 adopted 6/5/18. See end of article for full history of the article.)
Sec. 58-28 Accounting procedures
(a) The city shall establish separate, interest-bearing accounts into which all park development fees and all
monies received as cash in lieu of dedication under section 58-23, respectively, shall be deposited, segregated by
park facilities service area.
(b) Disbursement of funds shall be authorized by the city at such times as are reasonably necessary to carry
out the purposes and intent of this article; provided, however, that funds shall be expended within a reasonable
period of time, but not to exceed ten (10) years from the date the fees are collected.
(c) The city shall maintain and keep financial records which show the source and disbursement of all fees
collected in or expended from each park facilities service area.
(Ordinance 18-06-29 adopted 6/5/18. See end of article for full history of the article.)
Sec. 58-29 Refunds
(a) The applicant may apply for a refund if the property on which a park development fee or cash in lieu of
dedication has been paid and the funds have not been spent for park facilities identified in the parks and
recreation open space master plan, parks improvement plan or other city plan for that park facilities service area
within ten (10) years from the date of payment.
(b) Only the applicant may petition for a refund. A petition for refund must be filed within one (1) year
following the expiration of ten (10) years from the date of payment. An incomplete or untimely petition will not
be considered and any right to a refund shall be forfeited. If no petition is filed within the one (1) year period,
the city may apply the excess amount to any park facilities service area.
(c) A refund petition must be submitted to the director and contain: a certified copy of the latest recorded deed
for the subject property; current legal description; and a statement of the reasons and explanations for which a
refund is sought.
(d) In determining whether a refund is due, the director shall compare the total park development fees
collected for the park facilities service area for a period of ten (10) years from the date the fee was collected with
the total expenditures from the park development fee account for the park facilities service area for the same
period. If collections exceed all expenditures implementing the park improvement plan for that park facilities
service area, a refund is due. The refund amount shall be the development's pro-rata share of the excess of fees
collected over expenditures, together with interest earned on such amount for the period.
(e) Within one (1) month of the date of receipt of a petition for refund, the director must provide the petitioner,
in writing, with a decision on the refund request. The decision must include the reasons for the decision. If a
refund is due petitioner, the director shall notify the city's finance department and request that a refund payment
be made to petitioner.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 407/684
(f) If the applicant disagrees with the decision of the director, the applicant shall first meet with the director
and provide a written explanation why the director's decision was in error. Within fourteen (14) days of that
meeting, if the applicant is not satisfied, the applicant may appeal the director's decision to the city manager.
(Ordinance 18-06-29 adopted 6/5/18. See end of article for full history of the article.)
Sec. 58-30 Procedures for updating park development fees
(a) At least once every three (3) years, the director shall prepare a report to the city council recommending
whether the park development fee rate should be updated. In the preparation of such report, the following
information shall be included:
(1) A statement summarizing development fees collected and disbursed;
(2) A statement summarizing the status of park facilities acquisition and development;
(3) A statement summarizing the administration and enforcement of the park development fee; and
(4) A statement and recommendation from the parks and recreation board on any aspects of the
park development fee and city park needs.
(b) The report shall make recommendations, if appropriate, on amendments to this article; changes in the
administration or enforcement of this article; changes in the park development fee rates; changes in the park
improvement plan; and changes in the parks and recreation open space master plan.
(Ordinance 18-06-29 adopted 6/5/18. See end of article for full history of the article.)
Sec. 58-31 Appeals
(a) The applicant may appeal the following decisions of the director to the city manager:
(1) Any decision requiring cash in lieu of dedication;
(2) The applicability of the cash in lieu of dedication or park development fee requirement;
(3) The amount of the cash in lieu of dedication or park development fee due; or
(4) The amount of refund of the cash in lieu of dedication or park development fee due, if any.
(b) The applicant has the burden of proof that the director's decision was incorrect.
(c) The applicant must file a written appeal with the city manager within fourteen (14) days following the
director's decision. The appeal shall set forth in detail the reasons for the appeal. An appeal shall not stay the
collection of the cash in lieu of dedication or park development fee due. If the notice of appeal under subsection
(a) above is accompanied by a payment in an amount equal to cash in lieu of dedication or park development fee
due, as applicable, the building permit application shall be processed.
(d) An appeal from any decision requiring dedication of parkland by plat or replat shall be in accordance with
subsection 9.01(j)(3) (appeal to city council) of the subdivision ordinance, as it exists or may be amended.
(Ordinance 18-06-29 adopted 6/5/18; Ordinance 18-09-47 adopted 9/4/18. See end of article for full history of
the article.)
(Ordinance 93-04-04, sec. 1, adopted 4/6/93; Ordinance 01-08-53, sec. 2, adopted 8/6/01; Ordinance 02-09-97,
sec. 3, adopted 8/3/02; Ordinance 04-12-79, sec. 2, adopted 12/7/04)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 408/684
Secs. 58-32–58-53 Reserved
ARTICLE III. ROGERS LAKE
Secs. 58-54–58-89 Reserved
ARTICLE IV. RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR PARKS AND RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES
Sec. 58-90 Establishment of comprehensive rules and regulations for parks and recreational activities
The city hereby adopts the comprehensive rules and regulations governing parks and recreational activities in the
city as set forth in this article. (Ordinance 03-06-44, sec. 3, adopted 6/3/03; Ordinance 14-10-60 adopted
10/21/14)
Sec. 58-91 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivation shall have the meaning
given below:
Aircraft. Includes, but is not limited to, hot air balloons, remote control airplanes, paraplanes, ultralights,
helicopters, hovercrafts, rockets and gliders.
Alcoholic beverage(s). Has the same meaning prescribed by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as it exists or
may be amended, and includes but is not limited to, beer, wine, ale, vinous liquor, mixed beverages and/or
liquor.
Amusement apparatus. Any product, device and/or apparatus, fixed, portable or inflatable, intended for
recreational use, including, but not limited to, bounce houses, climbing walls, catapults, dunking booths,
obstacle courses, petting zoos, trackless trains, etc.
Athletic field. A field or combination of fields owned or leased by the city to facilitate games and/or practice
activities.
Board. The Frisco Parks and Recreation Advisory Board.
City. The City of Frisco, Texas.
City manager. The city manager, or his/her authorized designee(s).
Closed field. An athletic field owned or leased by the city that has been closed for any use due to inclement
weather, maintenance requirements or by order of the director.
Community park. A park owned by the city that is typically between twenty-five (25) to two hundred (200) acres
in size and that provides recreational opportunities primarily for residents.
Department. The city parks and recreation department.
Department-sponsored activity. An activity which is authorized, organized or scheduled in whole or in part by
the department.
Director. The director of the city parks and recreation department or his/her authorized designee(s).
Game field. A field that has been designated by the director to be used only for the purpose of conducting league
play, tournament play, and director-approved activities.
Neighborhood park. A park owned by the city that is typically between five (5) to twenty-five (25) acres in size
and that provides recreational opportunities primarily for residents within one-fourth (1/4) to one-half (1/2) of a
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 409/684
mile of their residence.
Park. A parcel of land, community park, neighborhood park, playground, swimming pool, indoor facility,
outdoor facility, recreation center, field, athletic field, hike and bike trails, greenbelt areas and any other area in
the city owned, leased and/or used by the city, and devoted to active or passive recreation, including any related
facilities, parking lots and/or amenities, save and except any of the foregoing that has a stadium, arena and/or
permanent seating and primarily used for sporting events, special events and/or other entertainment any of which
is not managed by the department.
Person. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, company or organization of any kind.
Playground. The entire safety surface area around and under playground equipment.
Public property. Any property held for public use by any department or branch of an independent school district,
community college district or municipal government within the city or the city government.
Recreational riding devices. Including, but not limited to, bicycles, scooters, razors, skateboards, skates,
rollerblades, inline skates, or any recreational products.
Special event. Any event, activity or program that operates wholly or partially within the city, which may require
the use of or assistance from the department, police department, fire department, or any other public service
department.
Vehicle. Every device, in, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a public
highway, except devices moved only by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Ordinance 03-06-44, sec. 5, adopted 6/3/03; Ordinance 05-07-51, sec. 2, adopted 7/5/05; Ordinance 14-10-60
adopted 10/21/14)
Sec. 58-92 General provisions
The city hereby adopts the following general provisions:
(1) Establishment of department. There is hereby created for the city the department of parks and
recreation.
(2) Director of department. The city manager shall appoint the parks and recreation director to
serve at the pleasure of the city manager, and the director shall have such duties and responsibilities
as may, from time to time, be delegated to him by the city manager.
(3) Park names. It is appropriate to name or rename certain city parks in honor and recognition of
outstanding individuals who served the community well, and it is further appropriate to name other
city parks with a geographical name, park names should be familiar to the majority of citizens, easy
to recall, unique and lasting.
a. Parks shall be named by outstanding and/or predominate physical characteristics of the
land such as, among other characteristics:
1. Streams, rivers, lakes and creeks;
2. Landmark significance;
3. Historic significance; and/or
4. Street name identity.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 410/684
b. If a name is applied to park facilities such as recreational buildings, swimming pools,
sports fields or play structures, those shall be named either:
1. By identification with the park in which it lies;
2. In honor of an individual or group when total contributions of fifty percent (50%) or
more of the total cost of acquisition and development of facilities are donated to the city;
or
3. When considering the naming of a park or park facilities in honor of a person, the
person should have made a major contribution to the city and/or the parks and recreation
system, or the person should be known for some other significant accomplishment.
(4) Park hours. Parks shall be open for the public every day of the year during designated hours,
except for maintenance or unusual and unforeseen emergencies. A variation in park hours may be
permitted by the director.
a. Hours of neighborhood park use shall normally be from thirty (30) minutes before sunrise
to thirty (30) minutes after sunset.
b. Hours of community park or game field or playing field use shall normally be from thirty
(30) minutes before sunrise to 12:00 midnight.
c. Except as authorized by the parks and recreation director, it shall be unlawful for any
person(s) to be or remain upon and/or in any park after park closing times, as such times are
posted on a sign located on park property. If no sign with listed closing times is posted on park
property, it shall be unlawful for any person(s) to be or remain upon and/or in that park during a
period beginning at 12:00 midnight and ending thirty (30) minutes before sunrise, except as
authorized in writing by the parks and recreation director.
(5) Indoor facility and outdoor facility hours. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than city
authorized personnel, to enter upon the premises of any city indoor facility and outdoor facility other
than during the hours the facility is officially open.
(6) Swimming, boating and fishing in parks.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to utilize any fountain, creek, pond, lake, stream or any
other body of water in any park in the city to, among other things, swim in, boat in, wade in, or
pollute any fountain, creek, pond, lake, stream or any other body of water in any park in the city
unless such activity(ies) is/are specifically authorized and permitted by the director in writing
and/or any other regulation and policy.
b. Electric or gas powered radio controlled watercraft are allowed in bodies of water located
within city parks, RC controlled watercraft operators are prohibited from disturbing or
becoming a nuisance to any other park patrons or wildlife.
c. Fishing shall be permitted only from the banks of any creek, pond, lake or other body of
water in any park. No trotlines, throw lines, fish traps or nets shall be permitted. Fish may not
be cleaned in any park. Other fishing regulations apply as outlined by the Texas Parks and
Wildlife Department.
d. This subsection shall not apply to any municipally owned or operated swimming pools or
boat rental operations, as applicable.
(7) Disrupting any department-sponsored events or any special events or programs. It shall be
unlawful for any person to do any of the following acts:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 411/684
a. To willfully interfere with, disrupt or prevent the orderly conduct of any supervised play,
amusement program, fully or in part sponsored events or any special events conducted by the
department or the city in any park or other location in or on any public property within the city.
b. To participate in any activity which will create a danger to the public or which may be
considered a public nuisance or to engage in physical violence.
c. To remain in any building, swimming pool, playground or park in or on any public
property within the city after being advised by the supervisor of the department to leave such
building, swimming pool, playground or park located in or on any public property within the
city.
d. To disturb in any manner any legitimate facility uses including, but not limited to, rentals,
picnics, meetings, classes, games, practices, meets, tournaments, exhibitions, camps, special
events or other such uses.
(8) Recreational riding devices in parks. Recreational riding devices shall be governed by safe
riding practices and consideration for use of parks by others. Where special parking provisions have
been made for bicycles, parking shall be limited to that area. Recreational riding devices shall be
prohibited in playgrounds, flowerbeds, pedestrian-only sidewalks, tennis courts, athletic courts,
picnic pavilions, stairs, guard and hand rails, benches, picnic tables, elevated surfaces, painted
concrete, laminated surfaces and/or any other areas designated by the city.
(9) Overnight camping or parking of vehicles. Overnight camping shall be allowed for one (1)
night only in Warren Park and Frisco Commons for up to thirty (30) individuals, with written
permission from the director. No individual, organization or individual representing or a party to an
organization shall be allowed to overnight camp for more than one (1) night. Each person shall
observe and obey all park rules and regulations and restore their campsite area to its original
condition. It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle overnight on any park property.
(10) Fires. Fires shall be permitted only in enclosed fireplaces or grills provided for this purpose. It
shall be unlawful to leave a park area without extinguishing a fire. After use, coals shall be
thoroughly extinguished with water and cooled and disposed of in a trash receptacle. Privately owned
grills are only permitted on concrete surfaces located in parks. During city directed burn bans, the use
of fire is not permitted.
(11) Plants and shrubs. It shall be unlawful to damage, cut, carve, mark, remove, transplant, break,
pick, or in any way injure, damage, or deface any plants, trees, shrubs, turf and/or other personal
property within or upon any park. It shall further be unlawful to plant into the ground any type of
plant, tree, shrub and/or turf in any park, without prior written approval of the director.
(12) Property damage. It shall be unlawful to damage, deface or remove personal property within
or upon any park.
(13) Glass at parks. It shall be unlawful to possess on the premises of any park area any glass
beverage containers. It shall also be unlawful to willfully break any glass container in any park area.
(14) Animals at athletic fields. It shall be unlawful for a person to allow any animal, for which they
are solely or jointly responsible for controlling, on any athletic field, concession/restroom area,
and/or plaza or playground areas within any park, with the exception of licensed or authorized
service animals.
a It shall also be unlawful for a person to allow any animal, with the exception of authorized
service animals, for which they are solely or jointly responsible for controlling, within seventyfive
feet (75') of any athletic field, concession, restroom, playground or plaza areas within any
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 412/684
park unless the animal is located completely on a paved walking trail that is not more than ten
feet (10') wide and remains on the walking trail while within seventy-five feet (75') of any
athletic field, concession or plaza areas within any park.
b. For purposes of this subsection, “plaza” shall mean the entire paved portion in the center
of a 4-plex or 5-plex of any athletic field/facility. A plaza shall not be considered to be a
walking trail. “Playground” shall mean the entire safety surface area around and under
playground equipment.
(15) Charging of fees. It shall be unlawful for a person, on behalf of themself/itself and/or any
other person, excluding city departments, to:
a. Charge admission(s) or any type of fee(s) to attend an activity at a park or city controlled
facility without the prior written permission from the director;
b. Seek on-site donation(s) to attend an activity at a park or city controlled facility without
the prior written permission from the director; and/or
c. Promote, advertise, solicit and/or, in any other way, encourage another to, among other
things, participate in, engage in, purchase and/or join in, among other things, a cause, service,
business, event, function, activity and/or product, for or not-for-profit, at a park or city
controlled facility without the prior written permission from the director.
(16) Sale of goods. It shall be unlawful to offer any goods, food, drinks, confections, merchandise
or services for sale within parks, parkways, or other recreational facilities, or on public streets and
rights-of-way within three hundred feet (300') of the boundary of the same, except in commercial
areas where property zoned for retail and commercial building has a certificate of occupancy for such
business purposes or unless specifically authorized by the director in writing.
(17) Firearms, fireworks, etc.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry a handgun in a park, except those persons who
are duly licensed by the State of Texas to carry a handgun in accordance with the provisions of
chapter 411, Texas Government Code, as it currently exists or may be amended.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or discharge firearms (unless permitted under
subsection a. of this section), fireworks (unless permitted under subsection c. of this section),
air guns, bows and arrows, slingshots or any device which would or could project any object
which would create a fire hazard or any danger to the public in a park, except with joint written
approval of the director and the city's fire chief or police chief.
c. A third-party tenant or licensee of a stadium facility located in a park that is used as the
home field for a professional sports team is exempt from the requirements of subsection a. of
this section in regards to fireworks only, provided all other applicable laws, ordinances and
regulations are complied with.
(18) Authority to prescribe additional rules and regulations. The city council shall have the right,
power and authority by resolution, ordinance or otherwise to prescribe additional reasonable rules
and regulations or repeal regulations for the maintenance and operation of parks. To carry out the
intent of this article, the city council hereby authorizes the department to establish additional,
reasonable rules, regulations, policies and/or guidelines for the maintenance, use and operation of
parks, and in doing so, the department may, among other things, erect signs and/or notices, as the
department deems necessary, in order to inform the public of such rules, regulations, policies and/or
guidelines. All rules, regulations, policies and/or guidelines established by the department, as
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 413/684
authorized by this subsection, shall be subject to the same enforcement provisions of this article as
though they were set forth verbatim herein.
(19) Liability of city. The city shall not be held liable or bound for any loss or damage claimed by
reason of a loss or damage to personal property taken or in any way by reason of any personal injury
or death of any person or animal entering a park.
(20) Aircraft on park property. It shall be unlawful for any person to ascend, descend, operate, or
launch any aircraft, except in areas or at times specifically designated for this purpose, which must be
evidenced by a special permit, issued by the director, or a facilities use agreement. Electric or gas
powered radio controlled aircraft may be operated only in designated areas of designated parks.
(21) Metal detectors. It shall be prohibited for any person to use or operate metal detectors in any
park.
(22) Alcoholic beverages and illegal narcotics.
a. The consumption or possession of illegal narcotics is prohibited in each and every park
located within the city.
b. The consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverage is prohibited in each and every
park located within the city, unless authorized in accordance with this subsection.
c. The city may authorize, at Mike Simpson Plaza or Frisco Heritage Center, the sale (for
consumption on the premises), consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages within Mike
Simpson Plaza or Frisco Heritage Center if the city enters into a written lease or license
agreement for specific park property with a third party specifying and regulating the uses of
alcoholic beverages authorized in Mike Simpson Plaza or Frisco Heritage Center by the city,
provided that:
1. The third-party tenant/licensee obtains all the city and Texas Alcoholic Beverage
Commission licenses and permits required by local or state law to carry on such
authorized activity;
2. The third-party tenant/licensee, in writing, fully indemnifies and holds the city
harmless for all activities, occurrences or omissions arising out of or related to the
alcoholic beverage; and
3. The third-party tenant/licensee executes an agreement with the city, which includes
naming the city as an additional insured or any required insurance policy(ies).
(23) Park general restrictions. It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the acts specified
below, except as otherwise provided, in all indoor facilities owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by
city:
a. To enter any unauthorized portion of any facility, except with permission of the facility
supervisor.
b. To fraudulently use a swimming pool pass or recreation center identification card.
c. To violate Ordinance No. 95-04-11, as it currently exists or may be amended, prohibiting
the use of in-line skates, skates, skateboards, bicycles, motorized or nonmotorized vehicles and
any other type of recreational or nonrecreational product that may destroy the surfaces of tennis
courts or any other type of painted concrete or laminate surfaces.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 414/684
d. To loiter within twenty-five feet (25') of a public restroom and for any person over the age
of eight (8) years to use the restrooms and washrooms designated for the opposite gender.
e. To hit golf balls, except in areas specifically designated for this purpose.
f. To use loudspeakers, amplifiers, or microphones, except with written approval of the parks
and recreation director.
g. To the use of in-line skates, skates, skateboards, bicycles, motorized or nonmotorized
vehicles and any other type of recreational or nonrecreational product that may destroy the
surfaces of tennis courts or any other type of painted concrete or laminate surfaces.
(24) Amusement apparatus. The use of any amusement apparatus on the premises of any park is
subject to the prior written approval of the director. Additionally, the director may, in his/her sole
discretion, impose additional conditions for the use of amusement apparatus on any premises of any
park including, but not limited to, liability insurance in amounts to be determined by the director.
(25) Dog park. The parks and recreation board has established dog park rules, which may be
amended at any time. A current list of rules are posted at the dog park and at the city's website. The
rules are enforceable by the police department.
(Ordinance 03-06-44, sec. 6, adopted 6/3/03; Ordinance 05-07-51, secs. 3–6, adopted 7/5/05; Ordinance 06-06-
55, sec. 2, adopted 6/6/06; Ordinance 14-10-60 adopted 10/21/14; Ordinance 16-03-21, sec. 2, adopted 3/1/16)
Sec. 58-93 Rental and usage fees
The city hereby adopts the following rental and usage fees:
(1) Fees generally. The following schedule of fees shall be paid before use of any of the following
city parks shall be permitted. The city reserves the right to require provisions for security or waiver
of fees, as may be determined by the director.
(2) Dates and times. The department shall identify when and what, if any park and facility, can be
utilized for the purposes of rentals during the year.
(3) City-sponsored league athletic event. The fee for a city-sponsored league athletic event shall be
calculated for the event based on the estimated cost of conducting the event (including, but not
limited to, such items as materials, light use, preparation of fields, instructors, umpires, scorekeepers,
trophies and other direct costs). Participants may be charged an additional facilities maintenance fee
as determined by the director.
(4) Athletic field rental (per field).
a. Practice rental.
1. General field use for individuals or teams conducting a practice.
A. Ninety (90) minute rental (resident): $30.00.
B. Lighting fee: $15.00.
C. Nonresident fees are doubled.
2. Practice rentals shall be reserved no more than one (1) time per week based on one
and one-half (1-1/2) hour blocks of time. City reserves the right to request documentation
of team roster. If majority of players are nonresidents, the nonresident fee may apply.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 415/684
b. Camp rental. A rental in which an instructor or organization is compensated for knowledge
and/or instruction.
1. Four (4) hour minimum rental period (resident): $120.00.
2. Each additional hour (resident): $30.00.
3. Lighting fee: $15.00.
4. Nonresident fees are doubled.
c. Tournament rental. Rental fee per field per day: $250.00.
d. Nonsponsored league play rental. A rental by an organization conducting a league which is
not sponsored by the department.
1. Four (4) hour minimum rental period (resident): $120.00.
2. Each additional hour (resident): $30.00.
3. Lighting fee: $15.00.
e. The city shall be responsible for utilities only, and no field maintenance will be performed
except as provided in a facilities use agreement executed between the participant and the city.
f. The department reserves the right to require that those parties reserving athletic fields
provide proof of insurance which meet the minimum requirements as outlined by the city.
(5) Park pavilion reservation fee (per pavilion). Fees listed are for resident use. Nonresident fees
are double that of the resident fee.
a. Half (1/2) day reservation times: 8:00 a.m.–1:00 p.m. or 2:00 p.m.–7:00 p.m.
1. Commons pavilion 1W (resident rate): $50.00.
2. Commons pavilion 1E (resident rate): $50.00.
3. Commons pavilion 1W-1E combined (resident rate): $100.00.
4. Commons pavilion 2 (resident rate): $50.00.
5. Warren Sports Complex (resident rate): $50.00.
6. Shawnee Trail Sports Complex (resident rate): $50.00.
b. Full day reservation times: 8:00 a.m.–7:00 p.m.
1. Commons pavilion 1W (resident rate): $100.00.
2. Commons pavilion 1E (resident rate): $100.00.
3. Commons pavilion 1W-1E combined (resident rate): $200.00.
4. Commons pavilion 2 (resident rate): $100.00.
5. Warren Sports Complex (resident rate): $100.00.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 416/684
6. Shawnee Trail Sports Complex (resident rate): $100.00.
c. Those individuals desiring to ensure the availability of these pavilions must reserve the
facilities through the parks and recreation department. Reservation of park pavilions shall not
be official until the reservation application has been completed and approved, and the rental fee
paid.
d. Reservations can be made six (6) months in advance of the proposed date.
e. When not specifically reserved by patrons, park pavilions may be utilized by residents on a
first-come, first-served basis.
(6) Senior Center at Frisco Square.
a. Multipurpose room.
1. Rental period up to two (2) hours (resident): $225.00.
2. Each additional hour (resident): $100.00.
3. Rental period up to two (2) hours (nonresident): $275.00.
4. Each additional hour (nonresident): $150.00.
5. Rental period up to two (2) hours (nonprofit): $180.00.
6. Each additional hour (nonprofit): $80.00.
b. Kitchen.
1. Rental period up to two (2) hours (resident): $50.00.
2. Each additional hour (resident): $25.00.
3. Rental period up to two (2) hours (nonresident): $100.00.
4. Each additional hour (nonresident): $75.00.
5. Rental period up to two (2) hours (nonprofit): $40.00.
6. Each additional hour (nonresident): $20.00.
c. Participation fee.
1. Annual fee (resident): No fee.
2. Annual fee (nonresident): $24.00.
(7) Clean up. All persons shall be responsible for the care and upkeep of the reserved area or
facility during the time identified in the reservation and shall clean up the area or facility after the use
of same. These groups and individuals shall be responsible for any damages or costs associated with
the repair and/or cleanup of a reserved facility or area.
(Ordinance 03-06-44, sec. 8, adopted 6/3/03; Ordinance 03-12-102, sec. 2, adopted 12/16/03; Ordinance 05-07-
51, sec. 7, adopted 7/5/05; Ordinance 14-10-60 adopted 10/21/14)
Sec. 58-94 Athletic fields/facility
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 417/684
Every association and/or organization desiring to use any city athletic facility shall be required to sign a use
agreement, in the form provided by the city, outlining, among other things, the duties and responsibilities of both
the person and the city. The following rules and regulations regarding the athletic facilities usage shall also
apply:
(1) It shall be unlawful to be on a game field except for the purpose of participating in league play
or tournament play in a city-sponsored or co-sponsored league athletic event being conducted in
accordance with a duly executed use agreement as set forth in this section.
(2) The director is authorized to declare a closed field. Such fields shall have a sign posted stating
“closed field - no trespassing - up to five hundred dollars and no/100 ($500.00) maximum fine for
each violation,” and it shall be unlawful to violate this section unless the purpose for going upon the
field is to maintain said field.
(3) The director is authorized to designate game fields. Such fields shall have a sign posted stating
“game field restricted to city-sponsored league play or city co-sponsored athletic events only - up to
five hundred dollars and no/100 ($500.00) maximum for each violation,” and it shall be unlawful to
violate this section unless the purpose for participating in league play or tournament play in a citysponsored
or co-sponsored league athletic event.
(Ordinance 03-06-44, sec. 9, adopted 6/3/03; Ordinance 14-10-60 adopted 10/21/14)
Sec. 58-95 Traffic generally
The city hereby adopts the following general traffic provisions:
(1) Use of vehicles.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate Ordinance No. 95-04-11, as it currently exists
or may be amended.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle on park roads at a rate of speed in
excess of that which is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and circumstances then
prevailing, taking into account the conditions of the roadways and other motor and pedestrian
traffic therein, and in no event shall any person drive in or through any park property at a rate of
speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour unless otherwise posted.
c. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, use or operate any horse, motorcycle, motor
scooter or any other vehicle in or upon any park, except on the designated roadway, parking
areas or equestrian trail.
d. No person is allowed to drive within a park or unauthorized areas, or without written
approval of the director. Parking on any grass areas is prohibited unless designated as an
overflow parking area. Vehicles in violation may be towed at the owner's expense.
e. No person shall drive within a park or on park fields, trails and unauthorized roadways. No
person shall park a vehicle in unauthorized areas.
(2) Traffic signs. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the directions of any
sign. The existence of any sign purporting to direct or regulate vehicular or pedestrian traffic shall be
prima facie evidence that the same was posted by or at the direction of the director.
(3) Traffic control. Traffic pattern, parking, no-parking zones and no-loitering areas, among any
other areas, may be designated in the vicinity of special civic, recreational and sporting events for
safety and crowd control in coordination with the city's police and fire departments.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 418/684
(Ordinance 03-06-44, sec. 10, adopted 6/3/03; Ordinance 14-10-60 adopted 10/21/14)
Sec. 58-96 Enforcement
The city hereby adopts the following rules and regulations regarding the enforcement of this article:
(1) Enforcement.
a. The director and/or the city's police department shall, in connection with their duties,
diligently enforce the provisions of this article, as it exists or may be amended, or any other
ordinances applicable to parks and recreation usage, as it/they exist or may be amended.
b. The director and/or the police department shall have the authority to eject from areas or
facilities any person acting in violation of this article, as it exists or may be amended, or any
other ordinances applicable to parks and recreation usage, as it/they exist or may be amended.
(2) Expulsion from parks.
a. Any person charged with violating any rule or regulation of the department, this article, as
it exists or may be amended, any other ordinances applicable to parks and recreation usage, as
it/they exist or may be amended, and/or any other state, local or federal law, may be expelled
from any park, provided a hearing is conducted before the director, allowing the person charged
to be given the opportunity to present his/her response to such charge(s). Upon a finding of
grounds for expulsion, any person, who is expelled from any park by the director and who
thereafter comes onto any park property, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
shall be fined as hereinafter provided. The expulsion shall be for a length of time as the director
shall dictate, but the expulsion shall not exceed ninety (90) days. If the expulsion is determined
to exceed ninety (90) days, the board must approve the expulsion at its next regularly scheduled
meeting.
b. The person expelled from a park may appeal, in writing, the decision of the director to the
board provided the appeal is made within ten (10) days of the decision of the director. The
board shall hear the appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting, if reasonably possible. The
board's ruling shall be final.
c. Any person may be immediately expelled from any park should he/she violate any rule or
regulation of the department, this article, as it exists or may be amended, any other ordinances
applicable to parks and recreation usage, as it/they exist or may be amended, and/or any other
state, local or federal law, and such violation is deemed by the person charged with enforcing
ordinances and/or laws. In his/her reasonable discretion, to be an immediate threat to the health,
safety and/or welfare of any other person utilizing any park and/or an immediate threat to the
integrity of any park. Such person shall not be allowed to return to any park unless and until the
threat(s), described in the previous sentence, have been totally eliminated, as reasonably
determined by the person charged with enforcing ordinances and/or laws.
(Ordinance 03-06-44, sec. 12, adopted 6/3/03; Ordinance 14-10-60 adopted 10/21/14)
Sec. 58-97 Penalty provision
Any person violating this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00), unless the violation relates to fire
safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, including dumping and refuse, in which the fine shall not exceed
the sum of two thousand and no/100 dollars ($2,000.00). Each continuing day's violation under this article shall
constitute a separate offense. The penal provisions imposed under this article shall not preclude the city from
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 419/684
filing suit to enjoin the violation. The city retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local,
state and federal law. (Ordinance 03-06-44, sec. 13, adopted 6/3/03; Ordinance 14-10-60 adopted 10/21/14)
Secs. 58-98–58-122 Reserved
ARTICLE V. RESERVED*
CHAPTERS 59–61
RESERVED
CHAPTER 62
PLANNING
Sec. 62-1 Adoption of the comprehensive plan
The city council hereby approves and adopts the 2015 comprehensive plan in its entirety, including the future
land use plan, thoroughfare use plan, parks and open space plan and all the maps and elements contained therein.
A true and correct copy of the 2015 comprehensive plan is attached to Ordinance 15-08-53 as exhibit A and
incorporated herein by reference for all purposes. The 2015 comprehensive plan supersedes and replaces the
2006 comprehensive plan, adopted on April 18, 2006. (Ordinance 06-04-38, sec. 3, adopted 4/18/06; Ordinance
15-08-53, sec. 3, adopted 8/4/15)
CHAPTERS 63–65
RESERVED
CHAPTER 66
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS REGULATIONS*
Sec. 66-1 Purpose and findings
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 420/684
(a) Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the
health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city; to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city;
and to minimize the deleterious secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses both inside such businesses
and outside in the surrounding communities. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of
imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials or performances, including
sexually oriented materials or performances. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict
or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials or performances protected by the First Amendment, or to
deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market.
Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material.
(b) Findings. Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult uses on the community
presented in hearings and in reports made available to the council, and on findings incorporated in the cases of
City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50
(1976), Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., TDA “Kandyland”, 529
U.S. 277 (2000), and City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc. 121 S. Ct. 1223 (2001) and on studies in other
communities including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston, Texas;
Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier, California;
Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio; and Beaumont, Texas; and
also on findings from the Texas City Attorneys Association's 2008 commissioned study and the report of the
Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses, (June 6, 1989, State of
Minnesota), the council finds:
(1) Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that
are generally uncontrolled by the operators of the establishments. Further, mechanisms are needed to
make the owners of these establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their premises.
(2) Certain employees of some sexually oriented businesses defined in this chapter engage in
higher incidence of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of other establishments.
(3) Sexual acts, including, but not limited to, masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at sexually
oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or semi-private booths or cubicles for
viewing films, videos, or live sex shows.
(4) Offering and providing such space encourages such activities, which creates unhealthy
conditions, undesirable incidental effects and increases the possibility of the spread of communicable
diseases.
(5) Persons often frequent certain sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in
sexual activity within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses.
(6) Engaging in physical contact at a sexually oriented business is not a form of expression
protected by the First Amendment.
(7) At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities that occur in sexually oriented
businesses, including, but not limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus
infection (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, non A and non B amebiasis, salmonella infections
and shigella infections.
(8) From 1999 to 2002 there has been an increasing cumulative number of reported cases of AIDS
caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in the United States - 25,174 in 1999, 25,522 in
2000, 25,643 in 2001, and 26,464 in 2002, compared to 1982 when only 600 cases were reported.
(9) The number of cases of early (less than one year) syphilis in the United States reported
annually has risen, with 33,613 cases reported in 1982 and 45,200 through November of 1990.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 421/684
(10) The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported annually remains at a high
level, with over one-half million cases being reported in 1990.
(11) The surgeon general of the United States in his report of October 22, 1986, has advised the
American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be transmitted through sexual contact,
intravenous drug abuse, exposure to infected blood and blood components, and from an infected
mother to her newborn.
(12) According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection, as well as syphilis and
gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts.
(13) Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the
activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the
activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those
activities and maintain those facilities.
(14) Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in the areas of sexually
oriented businesses where persons view “adult” oriented films.
(15) Numerous studies and reports have determined that areas around sexually oriented businesses
experience increased criminal activity, including increased property crimes, violent crimes and sex
crimes.
(16) Numerous studies and reports have determined that retail-only sexually oriented business
(business that sell or rent goods that can be viewed or consumed offsite such as adult video stores,
adult book stores, and adult novelty stores) create a negative secondary effect of reducing
surrounding property values as well as increasing crime in the surrounding area;
(17) The findings noted in subsections (1)-(16) above raise substantial governmental concerns.
(18) Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics that should be reasonably
regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns.
(19) A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that
reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of the sexually oriented businesses. Further,
such a licensing procedure will place an incentive on the operators to see that the sexually oriented
business is operated in a manner consistent with the health, safety and welfare of its patrons and
employees, as well as the citizens of the city. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that
the licensee is the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and control of
the premises and activities occurring therein.
(20) Removal of doors on adult booths and requiring sufficient lighting and visibility by a manager
or third party on premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental interest in curbing
the illegal and/or unsanitary sexual activity occurring therein.
(21) Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep information regarding current
employees and certain past employees will help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal
behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors
from working in such establishments.
(22) The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day-today
operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented business, where such information is
substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid
with the prevention of the spread of sexually transmitted diseases.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 422/684
(23) It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases to obtain a limited
amount of information regarding certain employees who may engage in the conduct that this chapter
is designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to such activity.
(24) The fact that an applicant for an adult use license has been convicted of a sexually related
crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention
of this chapter.
(25) The barring of such individuals from the management of adult uses for a period of years
serves as a deterrent to and prevents conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted
diseases and sexually related crimes.
(26) There is an increasing commercial exploitation of human sexuality by owners and operators of
sexually oriented businesses where alcoholic beverages are served or offered for sale for
consumption on the premises, or where alcoholic beverages are permitted to be consumed.
(27) That such exploitation takes place in the form of employing or permitting persons to perform
or exhibit their nude or semi-nude bodies to other person as an inducement to such other persons to
purchase alcoholic beverages or to consume alcoholic beverages while on the premises.
(28) Such exploitation is further often accompanied by serious and dangerous criminal activity,
such as prostitution, disorderly conduct, assaults, and the like.
(29) That the direct result of such exploitation in the context of the location where it is permitted
(i.e. where alcohol is serve or consumed in a sexually oriented business) threatens the preservation of
property values of adjoining and adjacent properties and neighborhoods.
(30) The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of the city will be promoted by
the enactment of this chapter.
(Ordinance 08-12-107, secs. 1-4, ex. A, I, adopted 12/16/08)
Sec. 66-2 Definitions
Achromatic means colorless or lacking in saturation or hue. The term includes, but is not limited to, grays, tans,
and light earth tones. The term does not include white, black, or any bold coloration that attracts attention.
Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated, slug-operated,
or for any form of consideration, or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture
machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show
images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are
distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
Adult audio or video center means any place at which any of the following activities occurs:
(1) Inbound or outbound telephone or other audio communications in which a topic or purpose of
the communication between an occupant of the premises and a third party is the discussion or
description of specified sexual activities, specified anatomical areas or is otherwise pornographic in
nature for consideration;
(2) Video or audio broadcasting, whether live, delayed, by film, by tape recording or otherwise, of
specified sexual activities, specified anatomical areas or pornographic material for consideration; or
(3) Filming, taping or otherwise creating video or audio recordings, including but not limited to,
films, movies, video tapes, DVD's, audio tapes or compact discs, that are broadcast, sold,
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 423/684
manufactured or distributed for consideration.
Adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store means a commercial establishment which, as one of its
principal purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
(1) Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures,
video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations that depict or describe
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas;” or
(2) Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with “specified
sexual activities” or designed to depict “specified anatomical areas.”
Adult cabaret means a commercial establishment that regularly features the offering to customers of adult
cabaret entertainment.
Adult cabaret entertainer means an employee of a sexually oriented business who engages in or performs adult
cabaret entertainment.
Adult cabaret entertainment means live entertainment that:
(1) Is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification; and
(2) Is distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, simulating, describing,
or relating to “specified anatomical areas” or “specified sexual activities.”
Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that:
(1) Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with
closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas;” and has a sign visible from the public right of way
which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or
(2) Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or
(3) Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is
less than ten hours.
Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are
characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
Applicant means:
(1) A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business will be issued;
(2) Each individual who signs an application for a sexually oriented business license as required by
section 66-4;
(3) Each individual who is an officer of a sexually oriented business for which a license application
is made under section 66-4, regardless of whether the individual's name or signature appears on the
application;
(4) Each individual who has a 20 percent or greater ownership interest in a sexually oriented
business for which a license application is made under section 66-4, regardless of whether the
individual's name or signature appears on the application; and
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 424/684
(5) Each individual who exercises substantial de facto control over a sexually oriented business for
which a license application is made under section 66-4, regardless of whether the individual's name
or signature appears on the application.
Conviction means a conviction in a federal court or a court of any state or foreign nation or political subdivision
of a state or foreign nation that has not been reversed, vacated, or pardoned. “Conviction” includes disposition of
charges against a person by probation or deferred adjudication.
Designated operator means the person or persons identified in the license application, or in any supplement or
amendment to the license application, as being a designated operator of the sexually oriented business.
Employee means a person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a
fulltime, parttime or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent
contractor, agent or otherwise, and whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by
the operator of said business. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or
maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another
person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease or “specified
sexual activities” for another person.
Escort agency means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish
escorts as one of its business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
Establishment, when used as a verb, means and includes any of the following:
(1) The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business;
(2) The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any
sexually oriented business;
(3) The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business;
or
(4) The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
License refers to both a sexually oriented business license and a sexually oriented business employee license,
unless otherwise specified.
Licensee means:
(1) A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued;
(2) Each individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license;
(3) Each individual who is an officer of a sexually oriented business for which a license has been
issued under this chapter, regardless of whether the individual's name or signature appears on the
license application;
(4) Each individual who has a 20 percent or greater ownership interest in a sexually oriented
business for which a license has been issued under this chapter, regardless of whether the individual's
name or signature appears on the license application;
(5) Each individual who exercises substantial de facto control over a sexually oriented business for
which a license has been issued under this chapter, regardless of whether the individual's name or
signature appears on the license application; and
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 425/684
(6) In the case of an employee license, a person in whose name a license has been issued
authorizing employment in a sexually oriented business.
Minor means a person under the age of 18 years.
Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears nude, in a state of nudity, or who displays
“specified anatomical areas” and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured,
photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. Nude model
studio shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the State of Texas or a college, junior college or
university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or university which maintains and
operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure:
(1) That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates
a nude or semi-nude person is available for viewing; and
(2) Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of
the class; and
(3) Where no more than one nude or semi-nude model is on the premises at any one time.
Nudity, state of nudity, semi-nude, or semi-nude condition means:
(1) The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, female breast, or
pubic area; or
(2) A state of dress that fails to completely and opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male
genitals, female genitals, or any part of the female breast or breasts that is situated below a point
immediately above the top of the areola, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly
aroused state.
Operates or causes to be operated means to cause to function or to put or keep in operation. A person may be
found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an
owner, part owner, or licensee of the business.
Operator means any person who has managerial control of the onsite, day-to-day operations of a sexually
oriented business, regardless of whether that person is a designated operator of the sexually oriented business.
Person means an individual, a group of two or more individuals, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited
liability company, association, or other legal entity.
Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult audio or video center, adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, escort agency, nude model
studio, or other commercial enterprise the primary business of which is the offering of a service or the selling,
renting, or exhibiting of devices or any other items intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification
to the customer.
A commercial establishment may have other business purposes that are not a sexually oriented business or
related to a sexually oriented business. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial
establishments from being categorized as a sexually oriented business so long as one of its business purposes is a
sexually oriented business.
Specified anatomical areas means:
(1) Any of the following, or any combination of the following, when less than completely and
opaquely covered:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 426/684
a. Any human genitals, pubic region, or public hair;
b. Any buttock; or
c. Any portion of the female breast or breasts that is situated below a point immediately
above the top of the areola; or
(2) The human male genitals in a discernibly aroused state, even if completely and opaquely
covered.
Specified criminal activity means any of the following offenses as described in the Texas Penal Code:
(1) Prostitution, including promotion of, aggravated promotion of, and compelling prostitution;
(2) Obscenity;
(3) Sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to a minor;
(4) Sexual performance by a child;
(5) Possession or distribution of child pornography;
(6) Public lewdness;
(7) Indecent exposure;
(8) Indecency with a child;
(9) Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault;
(10) Incest, solicitation of a child, or harboring a runaway child;
(11) Engaging in organized criminal activity;
(12) Gambling;
(13) Offenses involving necrophilia or bestiality;
(14) Distribution of a controlled substance;
(15) Criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses; or
(16) Any similar offenses to those described above under the criminal or penal statutes of the
states, country, county or city; for which:
a. Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from
confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a
misdemeanor offense;
b. Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from
confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony
offense; or
c. Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release
from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of
two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within
any 24-month period.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 427/684
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or a
person residing with the applicant.
Specified sexual activities means any of the following:
(1) The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female
breasts;
(2) Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including but not limited to, intercourse, oral
copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or
(3) Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections
(1) and (2) above.
Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business means the increase in floor areas occupied by the
business by more than ten percent, as the floor areas exist on:
(1) The date this chapter takes effect; or
(2) For any premises not used as a sexually oriented business when this chapter takes effect, the
date an application for a license to use the premises as a sexually oriented business is received by the
city designating the floor area of the structure or proposed structure in which the sexually oriented
business will be conducted, regardless of any subsequent changes in applicants, licensees, owners, or
operators of the premises or the sexually oriented business.
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means and includes any of the following:
(1) The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
(2) The transfer of securities or ownership interests which constitute a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
(3) The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device that transfers the ownership or
control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the
person possessing the ownership or control.
VIP room means any separate area, room, booth, cubicle, or other portion of the interior of an adult cabaret
(excluding a restroom and excluding an area of which the entire interior is clearly and completely visible from
the exterior of the area) to which one or more customers are allowed access or occupancy and other customers
are excluded.
(Ordinance 08-12-107, secs. 1-4, ex. A, II, adopted 12/16/08)
Sec. 66-3 Classification
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
(1) Adult arcades;
(2) Adult audio or video center;
(3) Adult bookstores, adult novelty stores, or adult video stores;
(4) Adult cabarets;
(5) Adult motels;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 428/684
(6) Adult motion picture theaters;
(7) Escort agencies; and
(8) Nude model studios.
(Ordinance 08-12-107, secs. 1-4, ex. A, III, adopted 12/16/08)
Sec. 66-4 License and designated operator required
(a) It is unlawful and shall be a misdemeanor:
(1) For any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually oriented
business license issued by the city pursuant to this chapter for the premises at which the sexually
oriented business is operating.
(2) For any person who operates a sexually oriented business to have an employee or employ a
person, regardless of the nature of the employment relationship, who works for the sexually oriented
business who is not licensed as a sexually oriented business employee by the city pursuant to this
chapter.
(3) For any person to obtain employment, regardless of the nature of the employment relationship,
with a sexually oriented business without having secured a sexually oriented business employee
license pursuant to this chapter.
(4) For any person to fail to have a designated operator, having a sexually oriented business
employee license, and who is responsible for ensuring compliance with this chapter, onduty and
working at any time the sexually oriented business is open for business.
(b) Time for submission of application for sexually oriented business license and regulations related to the
requirement of posting notice of intent to locate a sexually oriented business include the following:
(1) Whenever a sign is posted at an intended location of a sexually oriented business in compliance
with this chapter, and the intended location of the sexually oriented business is not in violation of the
locational restrictions of this chapter at the time the sign is posted, the sexually oriented business will
not be rendered nonconforming by any location or designation, subsequent to the posting of the sign,
of a use listed in sections 66-15(b)(1)-(8) within 1,000 feet of the posted location of the sexually
oriented business.
(2) The operator of a proposed sexually oriented business shall notify the city secretary's office
(“city secretary”), by either certified mail or hand delivery, whenever a sign is posted at the intended
location of the business in compliance with this chapter. The notification must be in the form of a
sworn statement indicating the location of the sign and the date it was posted and must be received by
the city secretary within five days after the date of the sign's posting.
(3) Subsection [(b)(1)] of this section does not apply if:
a. A complete sexually oriented business license application for the proposed sexually
oriented business is not filed with the city within 15 days after the expiration of the 60-day
posting requirement of this chapter; or
b. The notification requirements of subsection (b)(2) of this section are not met.
(4) An applicant for a sexually oriented business license shall, not later than the 60th day before
the date the application is filed, prominently post an outdoor sign at the location for which the license
is sought stating the following:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 429/684
a. “Potential Site for Sexually Oriented Business”;
b. Name of the applicant;
c. Applicant's business mailing address; and
d. “Contact City of Frisco Planning and Development Services.”
(5) The sign shall also meet the following specifications:
a. The notice sign shall be 16 square feet;
b. The width of the notice sign shall be four feet;
c. The notice sign shall be constructed in accordance with the city's design standards for
zoning signs as set forth in the city Sign Regulation Ordinance No. 04-01-03, as it exists or may
be amended;
d. The notice sign(s) shall be placed in a location visible from all streets adjacent to the
property (more than one sign is required if the property is adjacent to more than one street);
e. The notice sign(s) shall be located no greater than 20 feet from the property line adjacent
to the street, unless otherwise directed in writing by the city for safety or visibility reasons; and
f. The lettering on the notice sign(s) shall be of sufficient size to be legible by passers-by on
the street that the sign is facing.
The posting of a sign is not required prior to submitting an application for renewal of a valid sexually oriented
business license when the sexually oriented business is presently operating at the location.
(c) An application for a sexually oriented business license or a sexually oriented business employee license
must be made on a form provided by the city and shall be sworn to as true and correct by the applicant.
(d) All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter. The application may request
and the applicant shall provide such information (including fingerprints) as to enable the city to determine
whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this chapter.
(e) Only a person who is an officer of or who has an ownership interest in a sexually oriented business may
apply for a sexually oriented business license. An individual wishing to operate a sexually oriented business
must sign the application as the applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other
than an individual, each individual having the power to control or direct its operations, each individual who is an
officer and/or each individual having a 20 percent or greater ownership interest in the sexually oriented business
must sign the application for a license as an applicant. Such persons include, but are not limited to, general
partners, officers, directors, and controlling shareholder(s) or owners. Each applicant must be qualified under
this chapter and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted.
(f) The completed application for a sexually oriented business license shall be on a form to be provided by the
city, contain the following information and be accompanied by the following documents:
(1) If the applicant is:
a. An individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and any aliases and submit
proof that he/she is 18 years of age;
b. A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, the date of its formation,
evidence that the partnership is in good standing under the laws of the State of Texas and if not
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 430/684
a state partnership, its state of formation and the names and capacity of all partners and officers,
whether the partnership is general, limited or otherwise, a copy of the partnership agreement or
certificate of partnership, if any, and the official name and address to be used for process of
service on the partnership; and/or
c. A corporation, limited liability company or other legal entity, the entity shall state its
complete name, the date of its incorporation or formation, evidence that the entity is in good
standing under the laws of the State of Texas and if not a state entity, its state of incorporation
or formation, the names and capacity of all officers, directors and controlling stockholders or
owners, and the name of the registered agent and the address of the registered office for service
of process.
(2) If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name other than that
of the applicant; he or she must state:
a. The sexually oriented business's fictitious name; and
b. Submit the required registration and assumed name documents.
(3) Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has been convicted of a
“specified criminal activity” as defined in this chapter, and, if so, the specified criminal activity
involved, the date, place, and jurisdiction of each conviction, and the date of release from
confinement, if applicable.
(4) Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has had a previous license under
this chapter or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another city or county denied,
suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which
the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or
revocation, and whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant has been a partner in a
partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder or owner of a corporation or other legal
entity that is licensed under this chapter whose license has previously been denied, suspended or
revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was
denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation.
(5) Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant holds any other licenses under
this chapter or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another city or county and, if
so, the names and locations of such other licensed businesses.
(6) The classification of the sexually oriented business for which the applicant is seeking the
license. A sexually oriented business may only have one classification to be eligible for a license.
(7) The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal description of the
property, street address, telephone number(s), if any, and the dates a notice sign was posted as
required by this chapter.
(8) The applicant's mailing address and residential address.
(9) For each applicant(s): a copy of (i) a valid state driver's license with photo, or a valid state
identification card with photo for any applicant who does not drive, plus (ii) an additional form of
identification with a photo. The originals of the required forms of identification shall be presented to
the city secretary or his/her designee, for inspection prior to the issuance of a license.
(10) The applicant's driver's license number and state of issuance.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 431/684
(11) The application must also include the name, address, and telephone number of one or more
designated operators who will be present on the premises of the sexually oriented business during all
hours of operation. The applicant or licensee shall maintain a current list of designated operators with
the city. Before a person may serve as a designated operator of the sexually oriented business, the
person must be named in the license application, or a supplement or amendment to the license
application, and not be disqualified to operate a sexually oriented business under this chapter.
(12) The application must include a current official Texas criminal history report with a fingerprint
card (issued within the preceding 12 months) for the applicant, the applicant's spouse, and each
designated operator showing that they are not disqualified to operate a sexually oriented business
under this chapter.
(13) A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total
floor space occupied by the business, prepared and sealed by an architect or engineer, drawn to a
designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of
plus or minus six inches.
(14) A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within 30 days prior to application by
a registered land surveyor depicting the property lines and the structures containing any existing
sexually oriented businesses within 1,000 feet of the property to be certified; the property lines of any
established religious institution/synagogue, school, or public park or recreation area within 1,000 feet
of the property to be certified. For purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing or
established if it is in existence or owned by such type of user at the time an application is submitted.
(15) If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel,
which shall exhibit on the premises, in a viewing room or booth of less than 150 square feet of floor
space, films, video cassettes, other video reproductions, or live entertainment which depict “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas,” then the applicant shall comply with the additional
application requirements set forth in section 66-17.
(16) A statement whether the applicant or a person with whom applicant is residing remains
delinquent in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties, after notice of amount due has
been sent.
(g) The completed application for a sexually oriented business employee license shall be on a form to be
provided by the city, contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents:
(1) The applicant's name or any other name (including “stage” names) or aliases used by the
individual;
(2) Age, date, and place of birth;
(3) Height, weight, hair and eye color;
(4) Present residence address and telephone number;
(5) Present business address and telephone number;
(6) A copy of (i) a valid state driver's license with photo, or a valid state identification card with
photo for any applicant who does not drive, plus (ii) an additional form of identification with a photo.
The originals of the required forms of identification shall be presented to the city secretary, or his/her
designee, for inspection prior to the issuance of a license; and
(7) Proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 432/684
(8) A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's face, and the applicant's
fingerprints on a form provided by the city. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be
paid by the applicant.
(9) A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the five years immediately
preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant previously
operated or is seeking to operate, in this or any other county, city, state, or country has ever had a
license, permit, or authorization to do business denied, revoked, or suspended, or had any
professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked, or suspended. In the event of any such
denial, revocation, or suspension, state the name, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and
describe in full the reason for the denial, revocation, or suspension. A copy of any order of denial,
revocation, or suspension shall be attached to the application.
(10) A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of a “specified criminal activity” as
defined in this chapter and, if so, the “specified criminal activity” involved, the date, place and
jurisdiction of each conviction, and the date of release from confinement, if applicable.
(11) A statement whether the applicant or a person with whom applicant is residing remains
delinquent in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties, after notice of amount due has
been sent.
(h) All employees of a sexually oriented business must obtain a sexually oriented business employee license
as required by this chapter. Any person who fails to timely submit an application for a license, as required by
this subsection or any person operating sexually oriented business who allows an employee to continue working
who is not in compliance with this subsection or who fails to receive a license shall be considered to be in
violation of subsections (a)(1), (2) and/or (3).
(Ordinance 08-12-107, secs. 1-4, ex. A, IV, adopted 12/16/08)
Sec. 66-5 Issuance of license
(a) Upon the filing of said complete application for a sexually oriented business employee license, the city
shall issue a temporary license, valid for 30 days, to said applicant. The application shall then be referred to the
appropriate city departments for an investigation to be made on such information as is contained on the
application. The investigation shall be completed within 25 days from the date the completed application was
filed. Upon completion of the investigation, the city shall issue a license, not later than 30 days from the date the
completed application was filed, unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more of
the following findings is true:
(1) The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license
or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form;
(2) The applicant is a minor;
(3) The applicant, applicant's spouse, or designated operator has been convicted of a “specified
criminal activity” as defined in this chapter;
(4) The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for employment in a business
prohibited or unlicensed by local or state law, statute, rule or regulation, or prohibited by a particular
provision of this chapter;
(5) The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license revoked by the city within
two years of the date of the current application;
(6) The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid; or
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 433/684
(7) The applicant or a person with whom applicant is residing remains delinquent in payment to the
city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties, after notice of amount due has been sent.
(b) If the sexually oriented business employee license is denied, the temporary license previously issued is
immediately deemed null and void. Denial, suspension, or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this
subsection shall be subject to appeal as set forth in section 66-13.
(c) Sexually oriented business license and sexually oriented business employee licenses granted pursuant to
this section shall be subject to annual renewal upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the
city that the applicant has not been convicted of any specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter or
committed any act during the existence of the previous license, which would be grounds to deny the initial
license application. The renewal of the license shall be subject to the payment of the fee as set forth in section
66-6.
(d) Upon the filing of said complete application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall
be referred to the appropriate city departments for an investigation to be made on such information as is
contained on the application. The investigation shall be completed within 25 days from the date the completed
application was filed. Upon completion of the investigation, the city shall issue a license not later than 30 days
from the date the completed application was filed, unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence
that one or more of the following findings is true:
(1) An applicant is a minor;
(2) An applicant or a person with whom applicant is residing remains delinquent in payment to the
city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties, including but not limited to those related to the sexually oriented
business or the property on which the sexually oriented business is located, after notice of amount
due has been sent;
(3) An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license
or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form;
(4) An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been denied a license by the
city to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding 12 months or whose license to
operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding 12 months;
(5) An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been convicted of a “specified
criminal activity” as defined in this chapter;
(6) The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been approved by the
police department, fire department, planning and development services, health and food safety
department; or other city department or applicable governmental agency as being in compliance with
applicable laws and ordinances;
(7) The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid; or
(8) An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with any
of the provisions of this chapter, the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance (CZO), as defined herein, or
any other applicable city ordinance, as each is existing or may be amended.
(e) The sexually oriented business license, if granted, shall state on its face, the name of the person or persons
to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the sexually oriented business and the classification for
which the license is issued pursuant to section 66-3. All sexually oriented business licenses shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that they may be easily read at any
time the establishment is occupied or open for business. A sexually oriented business license is only valid on the
premises for which it was issued. The sexually oriented business employee license, if granted, shall state on its
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 434/684
face the name of the person to whom it is granted, the expiration date and the address of the applicant. The
holder of a sexually oriented business employee license shall have the license available for inspection at the
premises where they are working pursuant to the authority granted under the license. The holder of a sexually
oriented business license shall be responsible for verifying that each employee holds a valid sexually oriented
business employee license and for maintaining copies of such employee licenses on the premises. Licenses are
not transferable.
(f) A sexually oriented business license shall issue for only one classification as found in section 66-3.
(Ordinance 08-12-107, secs. 1-4, ex. A, V, adopted 12/16/08)
Sec. 66-6 Fees
(a) Every application for a sexually oriented business license shall be accompanied by a $700.00
nonrefundable application and investigation fee. An application shall not be considered complete until the fee is
paid.
(b) In addition to the application and investigation fee required above, every application for renewal of a valid
sexually oriented business license shall pay to the city an annual nonrefundable renewal fee of $350.00. An
application for renewal shall not be considered complete until the fee is paid.
(c) Every application for a sexually oriented business employee license (whether for a new license or for
renewal of an existing license) shall be accompanied by an annual $75.00 nonrefundable application,
investigation, and license fee. An application shall not be considered complete until the fee is paid.
(d) All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the city secretary, or its designee.
(Ordinance 08-12-107, secs. 1-4, ex. A, VI, adopted 12/16/08)
Sec. 66-7 Inspection
(a) As a condition of licensing, an applicant, licensee, operator, employee, or any person in control of the
premises shall permit representatives of the police department, health and food safety department, fire
department, planning and development services, or other city departments or agencies to inspect the premises of
a sexually oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or
open for business and at other reasonable times upon request.
(b) A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits a misdemeanor if he
refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises.
(Ordinance 08-12-107, secs. 1-4, ex. A, VII, adopted 12/16/08)
Sec. 66-8 Identification records
(a) A person commits an offense if he operates a sexually oriented business without maintaining on the
premises a current registration card or file that clearly and completely identifies all employees of the sexually
oriented business as required by this section.
(b) The registration card or file must contain the following information for each employee:
(1) Full legal name.
(2) All aliases or stage names.
(3) Date of birth.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 435/684
(4) Race and gender.
(5) Hair color, eye color, height, and weight.
(6) Current residence address and telephone number, and, for designated operators and adult
cabaret entertainers, all residence addresses during the 12-month period preceding commencement of
an employment or contractual relationship with the sexually oriented business.
(7) Legible copy of a valid driver's license or other government-issued personal identification card
containing the employee's photograph and date of birth.
(8) Date of commencement of employment or contractual relationship with the sexually oriented
business.
(9) Original color photograph with a full face view that accurately depicts the employee's
appearance at the time the employee commenced an employment or contractual relationship with the
sexually oriented business.
(c) The licensee shall maintain a separate file on each designated operator (other than the licensee or the
licensee's spouse) and on each adult cabaret entertainer, which contains, in addition to the information and
documentation required in subsection (b) of this section, the person's current official state criminal history report
with a fingerprint card issued within the preceding 12 months.
(d) Not later than 90 days after employing or contracting with a designated operator or an adult cabaret
entertain, the licensee shall include in the file a current official criminal history report from any state other than
Texas in which the designated operator or adult cabaret entertainer resided during the 12-month period preceding
commencement of the employment or contractual relationship with the sexually oriented business.
(e) A licensee commits an offense if he allows a designated operator to operate a sexually oriented business
without having on file, and available for inspection by representatives of the police department, all records and
information required by this section for the designated operator.
(f) A licensee or an operator commits an offense if he allows an adult cabaret entertainer to perform adult
cabaret entertainment at a sexually oriented business without having on file, and available for inspection by
representatives of the police department, all records and information required by this section for the adult cabaret
entertainer.
(g) All records maintained on an employee in compliance with this section must be retained at the sexually
oriented business for at least 90 days following the date of any voluntary or involuntary termination of the
employee's employment or contract with the sexually oriented business.
(h) A person who operates a sexually oriented business or the person's agent or employee shall allow
immediate access to these records by representatives of the police department.
(Ordinance 08-12-107, secs. 1-4, ex. A, VIII, adopted 12/16/08)
Sec. 66-9 Expiration of license
(a) Each sexually oriented business license and each sexually oriented business employee license shall expire
one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 66-4.
Application for renewal shall be made at least 30 days before the expiration date, and when made less than 30
days before the expiration date, the license will still expire on its expiration date.
(b) When the city denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the
date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the city finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 436/684
corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the
denial became final.
(Ordinance 08-12-107, secs. 1-4, ex. A, IX, adopted 12/16/08)
Sec. 66-10 Suspension
The city shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if it determines that a licensee, an operator, or
an employee has:
(1) Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter;
(2) Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this
chapter; or
(3) Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises.
A sexually oriented business may not operate while the sexually oriented business license issued for that
business is suspended and the holder of a sexually oriented business employee license may not work on the
premises of a sexually oriented business while that employee's license is suspended, except as allowed by
section 66-13.
(Ordinance 08-12-107, secs. 1-4, ex. A, X, adopted 12/16/08)
Sec. 66-11 Revocation
(a) The city shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in section 66-10 occurs and the license has been
suspended within the preceding 12 months.
(b) The city shall revoke a license if it determines that one or more of the following is true:
(1) A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during the
application process;
(2) A licensee or an operator has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled
substances on the premises or failed to report such activities to the police;
(3) A licensee or an operator has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises or failed to report
such activities to the police;
(4) A licensee or an operator knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of
time when the licensee's license was suspended;
(5) A licensee or a designated operator has been convicted of an offense listed in section 66-2
“specified criminal activity” definition, subsections (1)-(16) for which the time period required in
section 66-2 “specified criminal activity” definition, subsection (16)a.-c. has not elapsed;
(6) A licensee or an operator has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral
copulation, masturbation, or other sex act to occur in or on the licensed premises;
(7) A licensee remains delinquent in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines or penalties, including
but not limited to those related to the sexually oriented business or the property on which the sexually
oriented business is located, after notice of amount due has been sent;
(8) A designated operator, having a sexually oriented business employee license, responsible for
ensuring compliance with this chapter is not on duty and working at any time the premises is open for
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 437/684
business; or
(9) A licensee or operator has violated section 66-24 of this chapter.
(c) The fact that a conviction is being appealed has no effect on the revocation of the license.
(d) Subsection (b)(6) of this section does not apply to adult motels as a ground for revoking the license unless
the licensee or employee knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation,
masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public view.
(e) When the city revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year, and the licensee shall not be
issued a license for one year from the date the revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the city
finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at
least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective.
(f) After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application, or suspension or revocation of any
license, the applicant or licensee may seek judicial review of such administrative action in any court of
competent jurisdiction. The administrative action shall be promptly reviewed by the court.
(Ordinance 08-12-107, secs. 1-4, ex. A, XI, adopted 12/16/08)
Sec. 66-12 Notice of denial of issuance or renewal of license or suspension or revocation of license;
surrender of license
(a) If the city denies the issuance or renewal of a sexually oriented business license or sexually oriented
business employee license, or suspends or revokes a sexually oriented business license or sexually oriented
business employee license, the city shall deliver to the applicant or licensee, either by hand delivery or by
certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the action, the basis of the action, and the right to an
appeal.
(b) If the city suspends or revokes a license or denies renewal of a license that was valid on the date the
application for renewal was submitted, the city may not enforce such action before the 11th day after the date the
written notice, required by subsection (a) of this section, is delivered to the applicant or licensee.
(c) After suspension or revocation of a license or denial of renewal of a license that was valid on the date the
application for renewal was submitted, the applicant or licensee shall discontinue operating the sexually oriented
business and surrender the license to the city by 11:59 p.m. of the 10th day after the date:
(1) Notice required by subsection (a) of this section is delivered to the applicant or licensee, if no
appeal is filed under section 66-13 of this chapter; or
(2) A final decision is issued by the city manager upholding the action by the city, if an appeal is
filed under section 66-13 of this chapter.
(d) For purposes of this chapter, written notice is deemed to be delivered:
(1) On the date the notice is hand delivered to the applicant or licensee; or
(2) Three days after the date the notice is placed in the United States mail with proper postage and
properly addressed to the applicant or licensee at the address provided for the applicant or licensee in
the most recent license application.
(Ordinance 08-12-107, secs. 1-4, ex. A, XII, adopted 12/16/08)
Sec. 66-13 Appeal procedure
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 438/684
(a) Any applicant for a license who is denied a license or the holder of any license that is suspended or
revoked shall have the right to appeal such decision to the city manager or his/her designee. The appeal may be
made by filing with the city manager or his/her designee within ten days after notice of the denial, suspension or
revocation has been received, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal and the name,
mailing address, facsimile number and telephone number to be used by the city to provide notice of the hearing
as required by subsection (b) of this section.
(b) The city manager or his/her designee shall provide for a hearing on such appeal and shall notify, in
writing, the appellant and city official who denied, suspended or revoked the license of the date and time of such
hearing at least seven days prior to the hearing, unless appellant agrees in writing to a shorter notice. Disputes of
fact shall be decided on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence. For purposes of this section, notice by
facsimile or hand delivery shall be considered delivered on the date of fax or delivery if faxed or delivered prior
to 5:00 p.m., and if after 5:00 p.m. it shall be considered delivered on the next day; and notice by mail shall be
deemed delivered on the second day following deposit in the United States mail.
(c) The decision of the city manager or his/her designee shall be made no later than 30 days after receipt of
notice of the appeal. The decision of the city manager or his/her designee is final.
(d) If the appellant being denied a license renewal holds an unrevoked, unsuspended license for the preceding
year, he/she shall be permitted to continue to operate under the existing license until a final decision is made by
the city manager or his/her designee under this section, unless the city determines from evidence or information
presented to it that continued operation or work by the appellant would constitute a continuing and imminent
threat to the public welfare; however, if said license expired under section 66-9 of this chapter prior to the denial
of the renewal, the license shall be considered expired and the appellant may not use the expired license.
(e) An appellant appealing the suspension or revocation of a license may continue to use such license until a
final decision is made by the city manager or his/her designee, unless the city determines from evidence or
information presented to it that continued operation or work by the appellant would constitute a continuing and
imminent threat to the public welfare.
(Ordinance 08-12-107, secs. 1-4, ex. A, XIII, adopted 12/16/08)
Sec. 66-14 Transfer of license
A licensee commits a misdemeanor if the licensee transfers his/her license to another or operates a sexually
oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the
application. (Ordinance 08-12-107, secs. 1-4, ex. A, XIV, adopted 12/16/08)
Sec. 66-15 Location of sexually oriented businesses
(a) A person commits a misdemeanor if that person operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business in any zoning district other than as allowed by the city's Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance No. 00-01-
11, as it exists or may be amended (“CZO”).
(b) A person commits a misdemeanor if the person operates or causes to be operated, within the city limits, a
sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of any of the following located within the city limits or its
extraterritorial jurisdiction:
(1) A church, synagogue, mosque, temple or structure that is used primarily for religious worship
and related religious activities or real property owned by, or for the benefit of, a religious
organization that intends to use the property for such purposes if such ownership has been registered
with the city;
(2) A public or private educational facility, including but not limited to, child day care facilities,
nursery schools, preschools, kindergartens, elementary schools, private schools, intermediate schools,
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 439/684
junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools,
continuation schools, special education schools, junior colleges, colleges and universities; school
includes the school grounds and related athletic or other facilities regularly visited by students;
(3) A boundary of a residential district as defined in the CZO or an area designated as residential
on the city's future land use plan;
(4) A public park or recreational area which has been designated for park or recreational activities,
including but not limited to, a park, playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic
field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness areas, or other similar public
land within the city which is under the control, operation, or management of a governmental entity;
(5) The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use as defined in the CZO;
(6) An entertainment business which is oriented primarily towards children or family
entertainment;
(7) A licensed premises, licensed pursuant to the state alcoholic beverage code; or
(8) A road designated as a major thoroughfare on the city's thoroughfare plan.
(c) A person commits a misdemeanor if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial
enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of another
sexually oriented business.
(d) A person commits a misdemeanor if that person causes or permits the operation, establishment, or
maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or
the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof
containing another sexually oriented business.
(e) For the purpose of subsection (b) of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without
regard to the intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure that is part of
the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a
use or edge of a district listed in subsection (b) [of this section], as determined by the city building official or
his/her designee. Presence of a city, county or other political subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for
purposes of calculating and applying the distance requirements of this section.
(f) For purposes of subsection (c) of this section, the distance between any two sexually oriented businesses
shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or objects or political
boundaries, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located, as determined by the
city building official or his/her designee.
(g) Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating prior to the effective date of this chapter that is in
violation of one or more of subsections (a)-(f) of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The
nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed one year, unless sooner terminated
for any reason, including but not limited to, suspension or revocation of license, or voluntarily discontinued for a
period of 30 days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended, or altered
except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within
1,000 feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first
lawfully established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later
established business(es) is/are nonconforming.
(h) A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use
by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a use listed in
subsection (b) of this section within 1,000 feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 440/684
the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after a license
has expired or been revoked.
(Ordinance 08-12-107, secs. 1-4, ex. A, XV, adopted 12/16/08)
Sec. 66-16 Additional regulations for adult motels
(a) Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial establishment has been rented and
vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the
establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this chapter.
(b) A person commits a misdemeanor if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or
similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented business license, he rents or subrents a
sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or subrents the same
sleeping room again.
(c) For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the terms “rent” or “subrent” mean the act of permitting a
room to be occupied for any form of consideration.
(Ordinance 08-12-107, secs. 1-4, ex. A, XVI, adopted 12/16/08)
Sec. 66-17 Additional regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films, videos or live
entertainment in viewing rooms
(a) A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel,
which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room, booth, stall or partitioned portion of a room having less than
150 square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, live entertainment, or other video reproduction which
depicts “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas,” (herein referred to as “viewing area”) shall
comply with the following requirements:
(1) Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied
by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's
stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises
in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor
area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if
granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall
not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street
or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the
various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus
six inches. The city may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts
a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not
been altered since it was prepared.
(2) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the
prior written approval of the city.
(3) It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least one licensed employee is on
duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall
be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to
which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The
view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station.
(4) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 441/684
for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. No
viewing area shall have a door, half-door, curtain, portal partition or other divider unless at least one
side is completely open to an adjacent public room and a manager's station so that the area inside is
visible to persons in the adjacent public room and a manager's station.
(5) It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the view area specified herein remains
unobstructed by any doors, curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials
and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has
been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to
subsection [(a)](1) of this section.
(6) No viewing area may be occupied by more than one person at any time.
(7) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to
illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five
foot candles as measured at the floor level.
(8) It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained
at all times that any patron is present in the premises.
(9) No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between viewing areas.
(10) No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between viewing areas. A
solid metal barrier in which an opening cannot be easily made shall be used in the wall construction
between viewing areas within 48 inches of the floor.
(11) The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the walls between the viewing
areas to determine if any openings or holes exist.
(12) The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing areas to be nonporous, easily cleanable
surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.
(13) The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing areas to be
constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood,
composition board or other porous material shall be used within 48 inches of the floor.
(b) A person having a duty under subsections (a)(1)-(13) above commits a misdemeanor if he knowingly fails
to fulfill that duty.
(Ordinance 08-12-107, secs. 1-4, ex. A, XVII, adopted 12/16/08)
Sec. 66-18 Additional regulations for escort agencies
(a) A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for a minor.
(Ordinance 08-12-107, secs. 1-4, ex. A, XVIII, adopted 12/16/08)
Sec. 66-19 Additional regulations for nude model studios
(a) Reserved.
(b) A minor commits an offense if the minor appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model
studio.
(c) A person commits an offense if the person appears in a state of nudity, or knowingly allows another to
appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public
right-of-way.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 442/684
(d) A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises, except
that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public.
(e) An employee of a nude model studio, while exposing any specified anatomical areas, commits an offense
if the employee touches a patron or clothing of a patron.
(f) A patron at a nude model studio commits an offense if the patron touches an employee who is exposing
any specified anatomical areas or touches the clothing of the employee.
(g) A licensee, an operator, or an employee of a nude model studio commits an offense if he permits any
customer access to an area of the premises not visible from the manager's station or not visible by a walk
through of the premises without entering a closed area, excluding a restroom.
(Ordinance 08-12-107, secs. 1-4, ex. A, XIX, adopted 12/16/08)
Sec. 66-20 Additional regulations concerning adult motion picture theaters
(a) A person commits an offense if he knowingly allows a minor to appear in a state of nudity in or on the
premises of an adult motion picture theater.
(b) A minor commits an offense if the minor knowingly appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an
adult motion picture theater.
(Ordinance 08-12-107, secs. 1-4, ex. A, XX, adopted 12/16/08)
Sec. 66-21 Additional regulations for adult cabarets
(a) A licensee or an operator of an adult cabaret commits an offense if he employs, contracts with, or
otherwise allows a person to act as an adult cabaret entertainer if the person has been convicted of an offense
listed in section 66-2 “specified criminal activity” definition, subsections (1)-(16) for which the time period
required in section 66-2 “specified criminal activity” definition, subsections (16)a-c. has not elapsed.
(b) An employee of an adult cabaret, while exposing any specified anatomical areas, commits an offense if the
employee touches a customer or the clothing of a customer.
(c) A customer at an adult cabaret commits an offense if the customer touches an employee who is exposing
any specified anatomical areas or touches the clothing of the employee.
(d) An adult cabaret may not contain any VIP rooms, except that any VIP room contained in a lawfully
operating adult cabaret on the effective date of this chapter may continue in existence for one year from the
effective date of this chapter provided that no adult cabaret entertainment occurs in the VIP room.
(e) Except for a restroom or an area of which the entire interior is clearly and completely visible from the
exterior of the area, no area of an adult cabaret that is accessible to a customer may be separated from any other
customer-accessible area by a door, wall, curtain, drape, partition, or room divider of any kind. Nothing in this
subsection precludes the installation or maintenance of any wall or column that is essential to the structural
integrity of the building. Any adult cabaret lawfully operating on the effective date of this chapter must comply
with the requirement of this subsection not later than one year from the effective date of this chapter.
(Ordinance 08-12-107, secs. 1-4, ex. A, XXI, adopted 12/16/08)
Sec. 66-22 Additional regulations concerning public nudity
(a) It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who knowingly and intentionally, in a sexually oriented business,
appears in a state of nudity or depicts specified “sexual activities.”
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 443/684
(b) It shall be a misdemeanor for a person who knowingly or intentionally in a sexually oriented business
appears in a state of nudity unless the person is an employee who, while in a state of nudity, shall be at least ten
feet from any patron or customer and on a stage at least two feet from the floor level used by patrons.
(c) It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while in a state of nudity in a sexually oriented business, to
solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron or for any patron to pay or give any gratuity to any employee, while
said employee is in a state of nudity in a sexually oriented business.
(d) It shall be a misdemeanor for an employee, while in a state of nudity, to touch a patron or the clothing of a
patron.
(e) It shall be a misdemeanor for a patron to touch an employee in a state of nudity, or to touch the clothing of
an employee in a state of nudity.
(Ordinance 08-12-107, secs. 1-4, ex. A, XXII, adopted 12/16/08)
Sec. 66-23 Prohibition against minors in a sexually oriented business
(a) A licensee or an operator commits an offense if he knowingly:
(1) Allows a minor to enter the interior premises of a sexually oriented business;
(2) Employs, contracts with, or otherwise engages or allows a minor to perform adult cabaret
entertainment; or
(3) Employs a minor in a sexually oriented business.
(b) Knowledge on the part of the licensee or operator is presumed under subsection (a)(2) or (3) of this section
if identification records were not kept in accordance with the requirements of section 66-8, and properly kept
records would have informed the licensee or operator of the minor's age.
(c) An employee commits an offense if the employee knowingly:
(1) Allows a minor to enter the interior premises of a sexually oriented business;
(2) Employs, contracts with, or otherwise engages or allows a minor to perform adult cabaret
entertainment; or
(3) Employs a minor in a sexually oriented business.
(d) A minor commits an offense if the minor knowingly enters the interior premises of a sexually oriented
business.
(Ordinance 08-12-107, secs. 1-4, ex. A, XXIII, adopted 12/16/08)
Sec. 66-24 Hours of operation
No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at any time between the hours of
midnight (12:00 a.m.) and 10:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays, and midnight (12:00 a.m.) and noon (12:00
p.m.) on Sundays. (Ordinance 08-12-107, secs. 1-4, ex. A, XXIV, adopted 12/16/08)
Sec. 66-25 Alcoholic beverage sales and consumption prohibited
(a) It shall be an offense for any person to maintain, own, or operate a sexually oriented business if they also
serve or offer for sale or consumption on or off the premises, alcoholic beverages.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 444/684
(b) It shall be an offense for any person including employees and patrons, while on the premises of a sexually
oriented business, to possess, serve, offer for sale or consume alcoholic beverages.
(Ordinance 08-12-107, secs. 1-4, ex. A, XXV, adopted 12/16/08)
Sec. 66-26 Signs and exterior portions
(a) A person commits an offense if the person allows:
(1) The merchandise or activities of the sexually oriented business to be visible from any point
outside the premises;
(2) Any exterior portion of the premises of a sexually oriented business to have flashing lights, or
any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings, graphics or pictorial representations of any
manner except for the words or letters allowed by subsection (b) of this section.
(3) Any sign to exist that does not comply with city's Sign Regulations Ordinance No. 04-01-03, as
it exists or may be amended; or
(4) Any exterior portion of the premises of a sexually oriented business to be any color other than a
single achromatic color, unless the following conditions are met:
a. The premises is part of a commercial multi-unit development; and
b. The exterior portions of each premises or unit in the commercial multi-unit development,
including the exterior of the sexually oriented business, are the same color as one another or are
colored in such a way as to be a component of the overall architectural style or pattern of the
commercial multi-unit development.
(b) Notwithstanding any provision of the city's Sign Regulations Ordinance No. 04-01-03, as it exists or may
be amended, a sexually oriented business is limited to one primary sign and one secondary sign and no sign
visible from any point outside the premises shall contain photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial
representations of any manner, and may contain only:
(1) The name of the establishment; and/or
(2) One of the following phrases:
a. “Adult arcade”
b. “Adult audio center” or “adult video center”
c. “Adult bookstore”
d. “Adult novelty store”
e. “Adult video stores”
f. “Adult cabaret”
g. “Adult motel”
h. “Adult motion picture theater”
i. “Escort agency”
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 445/684
j. “Nude modeling studio”
A person commits an offense by installing or causing to be installed any sign in violation of this subsection or by
allowing the continued display of an unlawful sign.
(Ordinance 08-12-107, secs. 1-4, ex. A, XXVI, adopted 12/16/08)
Sec. 66-27 Injunction
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license or who
violates this chapter is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. (Ordinance
08-12-107, secs. 1-4, ex. A, XXVII, adopted 12/16/08)
Sec. 66-28 Enforcement
(a) Whenever a person does an act that is prohibited, fails to perform an act that is required, or commits an act
that is made an offense by any provision of this chapter or any other ordinance regulating sexually oriented
businesses, the violation is punishable as provided by V.T.C.A., Texas Local Government Code, sec. 243.010(b)
as amended, or other applicable law. A person violating a provision of this chapter is guilty of a separate offense
for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted.
(b) Except where otherwise specified, a culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense
under this chapter.
(c) It is a defense to prosecution under section 66-19 that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a
modeling class operated:
(1) By a proprietary school, licensed by the State of Texas; or a college, a junior college, or a
university supported entirely or partly by governmental taxation;
(2) By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which
credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation; or
(3) In a structure:
a. Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that
indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and
b. Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance
of the class; and
c. Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time.
(Ordinance 08-12-107, secs. 1-4, ex. A, XXVIII, adopted 12/16/08)
CHAPTERS 67–69
RESERVED
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 446/684
CHAPTER 70
SIGNS*
Sec. 70-1 Purpose
This chapter provides uniform standards for the erection and maintenance of signs. All signs in this chapter shall
be erected and maintained in accordance with these standards. The general objectives of these standards are to
promote health, safety, welfare, convenience and enjoyment of the public, and in part to achieve the following:
(1) Safety. To promote the safety of persons and property by providing that signs do not:
a. Create a hazard due to collapse, fire, decay or abandonment;
b. Obstruct firefighting or police observation ability;
c. Create traffic hazards by confusing or distracting pedestrians or motorists;
d. Become obstacles that hinder the ability of pedestrians, bicyclists or motorists to read
traffic signs; or
e. Become obstacles that hinder free passage to pedestrians, bicyclists or motorists.
(2) Communications efficiency. To promote the efficient transfer of information in sign messages
provided that:
a. Those signs which provide public safety messages and information are given priority;
b. Businesses and services can identify themselves;
c. Customers and other persons can locate a business or service;
d. No person or group is arbitrarily denied the use of the sight lines from the public rights-ofway
for communication purposes;
e. Persons exposed to signs are not overwhelmed by the number of messages presented and
are able to exercise freedom of choice to observe or pay no attention to such messages,
according to the observer's purpose; and
f. The right of free speech is preserved and exercised through the use of signs.
(3) Landscape quality and preservation. To protect the public welfare and to enhance the
appearance and economic value of the landscape, by providing that signs:
a. Do not interfere with scenic views;
b. Do not create a nuisance to persons using the public rights-of-way;
c. Do not create a nuisance to occupants of adjacent and contiguous property by their
brightness, size, height, or movement;
d. Are not detrimental to land or property values;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 447/684
e. Do not contribute to visual blight or clutter; and
f. Are similar in construction materials and style as that of the structure or tract of land to
which they pertain and to neighboring structures, as well as the city at large.
(Ordinance 11-01-04, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 1/4/11; Ordinance 16-03-25, ex. A, adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 70-2 Jurisdiction
The provisions of this section shall apply within the city limits, and within the extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ)
of the city as defined by the Texas Local Government Code, chapters 9, 26, and 42, and pursuant to the express
authority and limitations provided in chapter 216. For the purposes of these sign regulations, all signs erected
within the ETJ of the city shall be erected in accordance with the standards imposed for property inside the city
limits. (Ordinance 11-01-04, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 1/4/11; Ordinance 16-03-25, ex. A, adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 70-3 Compliance required; exceptions
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this chapter, except as permitted by
subsection (b), below.
(b) This chapter shall not apply to:
(1) The old town center (OTC) zoning district or a planned development district if the ordinance
establishing or amending the same has specific sign regulations.
(2) Signs erected by or on behalf of the city in the operation of its services that include but are not
limited to public safety, health and the general welfare.
(3) Signs required by federal, state or local law.
(4) Signs containing government messages that are approved by the city on any sign, both on and
off city property.
(5) Signs related to city activities and/or sponsorship. These include but are not limited to
municipal banners, special event signs, kiosks, monument signs, government awareness signs, etc.
(6) Any sign specifically authorized by the city council as a result of a compromise of litigation or
other lawful disputed claim.
(7) A sign required to be located by federal, state or local law in order to enforce a property
owner's rights.
(Ordinance 11-01-04, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 1/4/11; Ordinance 16-03-25, ex. A, adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 70-4 Sign contractor and registration
(a) A contractor who is registered with the city is the only person who can install or erect a sign, except
banners, A-frame signs, window signs, grand opening balloon arrangements, and all signs for which a permit is
not required. To register with the city, a contractor must apply with the chief building official for a registration to
install or erect signs within the city. The chief building official or his/her designee shall approve or deny an
application for a registration within thirty (30) days of the city's receipt of the application. A registration number
will be issued if all requirements of city ordinances are met and the insurance requirements are met below. The
fees for such a registration shall be in accordance with the city's current consolidated fee schedule as approved
by the city council. Registration is valid twelve (12) months from the date of issuance.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 448/684
(b) No registration number for the installation, erection and/or maintenance of signs shall be issued to any
person nor shall any person install, erect or maintain any sign, except banners, A-frame signs, window signs,
and/or grand opening balloon arrangements, and all signs for which a permit is not required, or medium of
display or advertising, electric or otherwise, until such person has provided proof of general liability insurance in
the amount of one hundred thousand and no/100 dollars ($100,000.00) to the chief building official or filed with
the city secretary a surety bond in the sum of five thousand and no/100 dollars ($5,000.00). Such bond shall be
approved by the director of finance and shall be conditioned for the installation and erection of signs in
accordance with the ordinances of the city and laws of the state, and shall provide for the indemnification of the
city for any and all damages or liability, which may accrue against it by reason of faulty installation, erections,
demolition, repair, removal, or defects in, or collapse of, any sign for a period of one (1) year after erection or
for such period of time that such sign is maintained or serviced by or under the direction of the maker of such
bond, whichever is longer. Such bond shall further provide for the indemnification of any person who shall while
upon public property or in any public place, incur damage for which the principle name in the bond is legally
liable.
(c) The registration of a contractor may be revoked by the chief building official when such sign contractor
repeatedly violates the requirements of this chapter. Conviction in court, whether appealed or not, on two (2)
violations over a period of twelve (12) consecutive months, shall constitute evidence of repeated violation.
(d) A registration, which has been revoked, may be reinstated only if the contractor corrects all violations and
furnishes to the chief building official a compliance bond in the amount of five thousand and no/100 dollars
($5,000.00), which guarantees compliance with all applicable laws, in the form approved by the city attorney.
(e) Any person whose registration has been reinstated under this section shall renew his or her compliance
bond for at least two (2) years following the date the registration was reinstated.
(f) Any person aggrieved by this section shall have the right to make an appeal according to section 70-8 of
this chapter.
(Ordinance 11-01-04, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 1/4/11; Ordinance 16-03-25, ex. A, adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 70-5 Permit required
(a) Sign permit required. No sign, other than those signs allowed without a permit by section 70-17 of this
chapter, shall be erected, placed, attached, secured, altered or displayed to/on the ground, any building, or any
structure, until a permit for such sign has been issued by the chief building official. An application for a sign
permit may be obtained from the building inspection division. The chief building official shall approve or deny
an application for a sign permit within thirty (30) days of the building inspection division's receipt of the
application. A sign permit will be issued if a proposed sign conforms to all city ordinances. Upon request by the
city, a diagram (an example is provided in figure 8) shall be provided by the applicant, showing the location of
all signs on the property and/or adjacent properties. Incorrect or false information on an application shall be
grounds for denial or revocation of a sign permit.
(b) To whom issued. No sign permit for the installation or erection of any sign, with the exception of banners,
A-frame signs, window signs, and grand opening balloon arrangements, shall be issued to any person other than
a contractor registered and bonded in the city in accordance with this chapter.
(c) Not to issue for prohibited locations. No sign permit shall be issued under this chapter for any sign in a
district where signs are prohibited by the city's zoning ordinance, as it currently exists or may be amended. A
sexually oriented business seeking a sign permit must also comply with all city ordinances regulating such
businesses to include the current sexually oriented business ordinance as currently written or amended in the
future, zoning ordinance as currently written or amended in the future, and this chapter as currently written or as
amended in the future.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 449/684
(d) Interpretation and administration. The chief building official shall be responsible for interpreting and
administering this chapter. The chief building official may revoke any permit for a sign issued in error. The chief
building official may revoke a registration issued in error or for those reasons stated herein.
(e) Temporary exemptions. The chief building official shall have the authority to approve temporary
exceptions to the sign ordinance as set forth in this chapter in emergency circumstances and/or in relation to
public works projects. Public works projects would include, but is not limited to, periods where road
construction interferes with the normal course of business or other similar circumstances.
(f) Interpretations. The chief building official shall have the authority to issue written sign ordinance
interpretations. Any person aggrieved by an interpretation shall have the right to make an appeal according to
section 70-8 of this chapter.
(Ordinance 11-01-04, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 1/4/11; Ordinance 16-03-25, ex. A, adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 70-6 Inspection
The chief building official is authorized to perform an inspection of all signs. The purpose of the inspection is to
ensure that the sign has been constructed in accordance with this chapter, other applicable ordinances, and the
applicable permits. The chief building official shall solely determine the method and time of such inspections.
(Ordinance 11-01-04, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 1/4/11; Ordinance 16-03-25, ex. A, adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 70-7 Permit fee
(a) Every application for a permit fee shall be submitted along with a nonrefundable fee in an amount
determined by the city's current consolidated fee schedule as approved by the city council. An application will
not be accepted unless the permit fee is paid in full.
(b) The permit fee for a sign permit shall be doubled when the installation or alteration of a sign is
commenced or completed before the necessary permit is obtained.
(Ordinance 11-01-04, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 1/4/11; Ordinance 16-03-25, ex. A, adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 70-8 Variances and appeals
(a) Variances.
(1) Requests for variances to sign regulations shall be made in writing and heard by the planning
and zoning commission at a public hearing. An application requesting a variance to the sign
regulations may be obtained from development services. The planning and zoning commission shall
hear the request for a variance within thirty (30) calendar days after receipt of a completed
application and applicable application fees. The application requires written authorization from the
property owner before being filed.
(2) Before the tenth (10th) calendar day of the date of the public hearing conducted by the planning
and zoning commission, written notice of the public hearing shall be sent by its deposit in the United
States mail to each owner, as indicated by the most recently approved municipal tax roll of property
within two hundred (200') feet of the property on which the variance is proposed. The notice shall
include a description of the time and place of such hearing, a description of the location of the subject
property, and a description of the requested variance. In addition, the notice shall be published in the
official newspaper of the city stating the time and place of such hearing, a minimum of ten (10)
calendar days prior to the date of the public hearing.
(3) In order to approve a request for a variance, the planning and zoning commission shall
determine that the request meets three (3) of the following four (4) criteria:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 450/684
a. The proposed sign shall not adversely impact the adjacent property (visibility, size and the
like);
b. The proposed sign shall be of a unique design or configuration;
c. The variance is needed due to restricted area, shape, topography, or physical features that
are unique to the property or structure on which the proposed sign would be erected; or
d. The variance will substantially improve the public convenience and welfare and does not
violate the intent of this chapter.
(4) The applicant, the director of development services, or four (4) voting members of city council
may appeal the commission's decision to deny or grant the variance by submitting a written notice of
appeal to the director of development services. Any appeal of a decision made on a variance by the
planning and zoning commission must be submitted within fourteen (14) calendar days from the date
that the planning and zoning commission's decided to grant or deny the variance. The written notice
of appeal shall be submitted to the city manager or his designee.
(5) A vote of three-fourths (3/4th) of the councilmembers present, or four (4) votes, whichever is
greater, is required to overturn the planning and zoning commission's decision. The city council's
decision is final. The appeal will require re-notification of the surrounding property owners and
publication in the newspaper in the same manner described in subsection (2), above.
(6) A variance shall not be approved for a sign that is prohibited by this chapter.
(b) Appeals of building official's interpretation/decision.
(1) Appeal process. The construction board of appeals (“board”) may hear and decide appeals
where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the
chief building official in the enforcement of this chapter or of any amendments adopted pursuant
thereto. All questions of interpretations and enforcement shall be first presented to the chief building
official. Any person aggrieved by an interpretation or decision of the chief building official made in
the enforcement of this chapter by the chief building official shall have the right to appeal the chief
building official's interpretation and/or decision to the board. This request for an appeal shall be in
writing and must be filed with the director of development services within seven (7) calendar days
after the chief building official issues his final decision and/or interpretation for which the appeal is
filed. A fee as established in the city's current consolidated fee schedule shall accompany such notice
of appeal.
(2) Construction board of appeals. Upon receipt of a timely, written appeal and the required fee,
the director of development services shall schedule an appeal hearing before the board to be heard
within thirty (30) calendar days after the filing of the appeal. The board shall hear the appeal,
together with testimony of all parties concerned. In exercising its authority herein, the board may
reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the building officials interpretation and/or order from
which an appeal is taken and make the correct and/or order, and for that purpose, the board has the
same authority as the building official. (In case of alternate signage, shall determine whether such
alternate signage is in fact equal to the standards of the sign ordinance, considering adequacy,
stability, strength and safety to the public health and welfare.)
(3) Appeal of board's decision to city council. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board
may appeal the boards' decision to city council. Such appeals shall be made in writing within ten (10)
calendar days from the date of the board's decision and shall be submitted to the city manager, or his
designee. The director of development services or four (4) voting members of city council may
likewise appeal the boards' decision following the same appeal process. The city council's decision is
final.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 451/684
(Ordinance 11-01-04, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 1/4/11; Ordinance 11-06-21, sec. 2, adopted 6/7/11; Ordinance 16-
03-25, ex. A, adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 70-9 Precedent of regulations
Where the rules and regulations of any other ordinance conflicts with this sign chapter, the regulations contained
herein shall prevail and take precedence over any other regulation, including provisions as recorded in any
zoning overlay district; but shall not take precedence over those exceptions listed in section 70-3 or 70-15(c) of
this chapter. (Ordinance 11-01-04, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 1/4/11; Ordinance 16-03-25, ex. A, adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 70-10 Revocation of permit
The chief building official may suspend or revoke any sign permit whenever it is determined that the permit has
been issued in error or on the basis of incorrect or false information supplied, or whenever such permit was
issued in violation of any provision of this chapter, any other ordinance of the city, the laws of the state or the
federal government. Such revocation shall be effective when communicated in writing to the person to whom the
permit is issued, the owner of the sign, or the owner of the premises on which the sign is located. Any sign that
is the subject of a revoked permit shall be immediately removed by the person in control of the sign or premises
upon which the sign is located, or within a reasonable time as determined by the chief building official, but not
to exceed fifteen (15) calendar days of written notice of revocation.
(1) A person may appeal the revocation of the sign permit in accordance to section 70-8 of this
chapter.
(2) Notice of revocation shall be deemed to have been received when deposited in the mail,
postage prepaid, addressed to the owner of the premises, the owner of the sign, and the tenant for
whose benefit the sign is erected as listed in the permit application.
(Ordinance 11-01-04, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 1/4/11; Ordinance 16-03-25, ex. A, adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 70-11 Changes
After a sign permit has been issued by the chief building official, it shall be unlawful to change, modify, alter, or
otherwise deviate from the terms and conditions of said sign permit without prior approval by the chief building
official. (Ordinance 11-01-04, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 1/4/11; Ordinance 16-03-25, ex. A, adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 70-12 Removal of signs in violation
(a) Removal/impoundment of prohibited signs.
(1) All prohibited signs or noncompliant signs shall be considered a public nuisance and are
prohibited by this chapter in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. Upon identification of any
prohibited sign, the chief building official or his/her designee shall provide written notification of the
violation to the owner of the property on which the prohibited sign is located and/or the installer of
the sign. The notification shall state that the offending sign shall be removed by the owner, agent or
person having beneficial use of the land, building or structure upon which such sign is located within
the time period prescribed after written notification to do so by the chief building official. The
notification shall further state that if the prohibited sign is not removed within a specific time frame
(not to exceed ten (10) calendar days) a citation may be issued and the city may resort to any civil
remedy available up to and including impoundment. If any sign is determined to present an
immediate danger to public health, safety, or welfare, the city shall remove it immediately upon
receiving a written court order for such removal. Within ten (10) calendar days of the removal of the
sign, the chief building official shall notify the owner of the property on which the sign was located
of the reason(s) for the removal of the sign. Signs authorized by a sign permit number with an
expiration date shall be removed promptly upon the date of expiration. Signs remaining after the date
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 452/684
of expiration shall be deemed prohibited. The sign permit that provides the expiration date shall be
considered adequate notice of violation.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, entity or corporation receiving such written
notification or having an expired sign permit to fail to comply with the direction of the notification.
In the event failure to comply with such notice provided, the chief building official is hereby
authorized to cause the removal and impoundment of such sign. Any expenses incident thereto shall
be the responsibility of the owner, agent or person having beneficial use of the land, building or
structure upon which such sign was located.
(b) Impounded signs and recovery.
(1) Impounded signs may be recovered by the owner within seven (7) calendar days from the date
of the written notification of impoundment by paying a fee determined by the city's current
consolidated fee schedule as approved by the city council.
(2) Impounded signs not recovered within seven (7) calendar days from the date written
notification of impoundment is sent, may be disposed of by the city in any manner the city so elects.
(c) Temporary nuisance sign.
(1) Violation and removal. Temporary nuisance signs are prohibited. A temporary nuisance sign
may be immediately removed and impounded by any city employee, or any person or organization
authorized by the city to remove such temporary nuisance signs.
(2) Disposal of temporary nuisance signs. Temporary nuisance signs may be disposed of as
follows:
a. Signs made of paper, cardboard, plastic, or other similar materials and their supports may
be place in the trash or destroyed immediately.
b. Signs made of materials other than paper, cardboard, plastic, or other similar materials
shall be stored for seven (7) calendar days from the day the city sent notice to a responsible
party, as that term is defined within this subsection. The responsible party may reclaim the signs
upon payment of fees as established in the consolidated fee schedule. If the sign and/or supports
have not been claimed by the expiration of the seven (7) calendar day storage period, the city
may discard them or dispose of them at the sole discretion of the director.
c. Responsible person. The person(s) physically placing the temporary nuisance sign and/or
the owner of the temporary nuisance sign are both individually and severally responsible for the
posting and removal of said sign. It is also prima facie evidence that the person and/or entity
whose address or telephone number is on a temporary nuisance sign, or is otherwise named,
described, or identified on the sign is the person and/or entity who owns the temporary nuisance
sign.
d. Obligation to remove. The city, at the director's sole discretion, may remove the temporary
nuisance sign on its own or may require the person and/or entity whose address or telephone
number is on a temporary nuisance sign, or is otherwise named, described, or identified on the
sign to remove the temporary nuisance sign. A person and/or entity whose address or telephone
number is on a temporary nuisance sign, or is otherwise named, described, or identified on the
sign has an absolute duty to remove the temporary nuisance sign at their own cost, within
twenty-four (24) hours of the city sending notice to remove such sign. The city may notify an
individual and/or entity under this section in person, by email, by mail, or by telephone. An
individual and/or entity's failure to remove a temporary nuisance sign after receiving such
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 453/684
notice from the city shall constitute an offense separate from that of the violation of posting the
temporary nuisance sign.
(d) Maintenance of signs and neglected and abandoned signs.
(1) All signs, including but not limited to nonconforming signs shall be maintained to consistently
have a neat appearance. Sign panels and/or sign graphics shall be secured and maintained so that they
do not separate from, hang from, or fall from a sign. Sign panels and sign graphics shall not be faded,
ripped, or have any other damage. A sign panel or sign graphic that advertises a specific event and/or
business shall be removed from a sign within seventy-two (72) hours after the event has taken place
or within seventy-two (72) hours after the business has closed and ceased operations (unless a
temporary permit is applied for and issued under section 70-16(22)(f) of this chapter).
(2) Abandoned signs and neglected signs shall be considered a public nuisance and are prohibited
by this chapter. Upon written notification by the chief building official or his/her designee, such
abandoned signs shall be removed from the premises and neglected signs shall be repaired or
removed from the premises by the owner, agent or person having beneficial use of the land, building
or structure upon which such sign is located. The notification shall state that the offending sign shall
be repaired or removed by the owner, agent or person having beneficial use of the land, building or
structure upon which such sign is located within ten (10) calendar days after written notification to do
so by the chief building official or his/her representative. The notification shall further state that if the
sign is not removed or repaired, a citation may be issued and the city may resort to any civil remedy
available to remove or repair the sign, up to and including impoundment. If any sign is determined to
present an immediate danger to public health, safety or welfare, the city shall remove it immediately
upon obtaining a written court order for such removal. Within ten (10) calendar days of the removal
of the sign, the chief building official shall notify the owner of the property on which the sign was
located of the reason(s) for the removal of such sign.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, entity or corporation receiving such written
notification to fail to comply with the direction of the notice. In the event failure to comply with such
notice provided under this section, the chief building official is hereby authorized to cause the
removal and impoundment of such sign upon the issuance of a written court order authorizing the
removal and impoundment of such sign. Any expenses incident thereto shall be the responsibility of
the owner, agent, or person having beneficial use of the land, building or structure upon which such
sign was located. The city shall invoice the owner, agent, or person having beneficial use of the land
for such expenses incurred by the city associated with the removal and impoundment of such sign.
(Ordinance 11-01-04, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 1/4/11; Ordinance 16-03-25, ex. A, adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 70-13 Nonconforming signs
(a) Nonconforming signs.
(1) Notwithstanding any timing to the contrary a nonconforming sign may not be:
a. Changed to another nonconforming sign;
b. Structurally altered so as to prolong the life of the sign;
c. Expanded to increase the size;
d. Re-established after its removal for a period of more than thirty (30) calendar days;
e. Moved in whole or in part to any other location on the same or any other premises unless
every portion of such sign is made to conform to all of the regulations of this sign code;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 454/684
f. If the property where the nonconforming sign is sold with full ownership being transferred,
the nonconforming sign shall be brought into conformance with this code at the time of transfer
unless the buyer continues to operate the business under the same name that was on the
nonconforming sign at the time of transfer;
g. Re-established after damage or destruction if the estimated expense of reconstruction
exceeds fifty (50) percent of its fair cash value prior to the time of destruction;
h. A sign which has fallen to the ground; or
i. A sign which leans such that an angle between the sign and the ground is 70° or less.
(b) Maintenance. A nonconforming sign may be maintained as follows:
(1) Maintenance operations may be performed on the sign. For purposes of this section,
“maintenance operations” means the process of keeping a sign in good repair. Maintenance
operations include:
a. Cleaning;
b. Painting;
c. Repair of parts with like materials in a manner that does not alter the basic design or
structure of the sign, provided that the cost of all repairs performed during any consecutive
three hundred sixty-five (365) calendar day period is not more than sixty (60) percent of the
cost of erecting a new sign of the same type at the same location; and
d. Replacement of parts with like materials in a manner that does not alter the basic design or
structure of the sign, provided that the cost of all replacement of parts performed during any
consecutive three hundred sixty-five (365) calendar day period is not more than sixty (60)
percent of the cost of erecting a new sign of the same type at the same location. The three
hundred sixty-five (365) calendar day period limitation shall not apply to a sign that has been
blown down or otherwise destroyed as described in subsection (a) above. Examples of actions
that are not maintenance operations and are therefore prohibited include, without limitation:
i. Converting a sign from a multiple pole structure to a monopole structure;
ii. Replacing wooden components with metal components;
iii. Increasing the area or height of a sign;
iv. Adding illumination to a nonilluminated sign;
v. Adding additional display faces;
vi. Converting a sign to utilize animated display or moveable copy technology,
including but not limited to signs featuring Tri-Vision technology; and
vii. Updating the technology in an already existing animated display or moveable copy
signs. If a sign is dismantled for any purpose other than an alteration or maintenance
operation permitted hereunder, the sign may not be altered, reconstructed, repaired or
replaced, and the owner shall remove the sign or bring it into compliance with this chapter
and all other applicable ordinances.
(2) Ordinary repairs and maintenance, including the removing and replacing of the outer panels are
permitted, provided, the panels are replaced with identical panels and that no structural alterations or
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 455/684
other work which extends the normal life of the nonconforming sign shall be permitted.
(3) Single panels on multi-panel monument signs for multi-tenant shopping centers may be
changed to reflect tenant changes.
(4) A nonconforming sign or sign structure may be removed temporarily to perform sign
maintenance or sign repair. In order to preserve the nonconforming sign status, the person removing
the sign must inform the chief building official, in writing, before the sign is removed. If the
responsible party fails to inform the chief building official, any re-erected sign will be considered a
new sign.
(5) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any sign that is a legally existing
nonconforming sign hereunder may be relocated on the same lot or tract of land, if the sign is
required to be removed from its present location because the property upon which the sign is located
is acquired by any governmental agency or other entity which has or could have acquired the
property through the exercise of its power of eminent domain. But such relocated sign shall be placed
to comply with all setbacks and other locational requirements as set forth in this chapter.
(6) Change to a conforming sign. A nonconforming sign may be altered to become or be replaced
with a conforming sign by right. Once a sign is altered to conform or is replaced with a conforming
sign, the nonconforming rights for that sign are lost and a nonconforming sign may not be reestablished.
Unless prohibited, proposed changes that are not in conformance are subject to the
variance process.
(7) If there is no sign in place on a sign structure or building wall for six (6) continuous months,
the nonconforming rights are lost and a nonconforming sign may not be re-established. If the sign
structure is unused for less than six (6) continuous months, a nonconforming sign may be reestablished.
(c) Nonconforming sign registration and amortization.
(1) Registration. The operator and/or owner of any nonconforming sign shall register such
nonconforming sign and obtain from the city manager and/or his designee a certificate of
nonconforming rights, within twelve (12) months after the sign becomes nonconforming or twelve
(12) months after the date of publication of the 2010 version of this sign chapter, whichever occurs
later. If a sign qualifies as a nonconforming sign and the operator and/or owner registers the sign with
the city, the city manager shall issue a certificate of nonconforming rights. Failure to obtain this
certificate of nonconforming rights within the requisite time shall terminate the sign's status as a
nonconforming sign and such sign shall be considered an illegal sign, which must come into
compliance with all current ordinances.
(2) Amortization. Any nonconforming sign may be amortized and removed by the city in
accordance with the procedural and compensation requirements specified in chapter 216 of the Tex.
Loc. Gov't Code.
(Ordinance 11-01-04, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 1/4/11; Ordinance 16-03-25, ex. A, adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 70-14 Sign coordination plan
(a) A sign coordination plan is required prior to the issuance of a sign permit for signs specified in section 70-
16 of this chapter, or as otherwise required herein to determine overall sign locations on a property, the
relationship of the signs to surrounding existing, proposed, and proposed future improvements, and to determine
consistency and uniformity among buildings and signs within a unified development zone or residential
development. The sign coordination plan shall be submitted to the development services department.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 456/684
(b) A sign coordination plan shall contain the following information:
(1) Elevations of the signs illustrating the materials of construction, colors, lighting, fonts of letters
and dimensions of the signs. If the sign is to be attached to a building, the elevation shall be a
composite of the sign and the building;
(2) Elevations depicting the size of the signs in relation to the size of the buildings within the
development;
(3) A plan drawn to preliminary site plan, or site plan specifications, as detailed in the zoning
ordinance, as it currently exists or may be amended, of the site illustrating the location of existing and
proposed signs on the property and, if required by city staff, on adjacent properties;
(4) Other information to illustrate the consistency and uniformity of the signs; and
(5) For unified development signs, the sign coordination plan shall identify a unified development
zone. Only those properties and businesses included within the unified development zone shall be
included/identified on the unified development signs erected within the unified development zone.
Prior to city consideration of a unified development zone, all property owners located within a
proposed unified development zone must submit notarized letters to the city authorizing the creation
of the unified development zone. A lot shall only be included in one unified development zone.
(c) For nonresidential and multifamily developments, the sign coordination plan shall be submitted to the city
for review with a concept plan, preliminary site plan, or site plan of the property. For single-family and twofamily
developments, the sign coordination plan shall be submitted to the city for review with a preliminary plat,
or final plat of the property.
(d) A sign coordination plan required of signs specified in section 70-16 of this chapter, or as otherwise
required herein shall be submitted to the development services department. The sign coordination plan will be
reviewed in accordance with the city's development review schedule and considered for approval by city staff.
City staff may approve or deny a sign coordination plan. Should city staff deny a sign coordination plan; the sign
coordination plan will be forwarded to the planning and zoning commission for their review and consideration.
The planning and zoning commission may approve or deny the sign coordination plan. Should the planning and
zoning commission deny a sign coordination plan, the sign coordination plan will be forwarded to the city
council for their review and consideration. The city council may approve or deny the sign coordination plan. The
decision of city staff, the planning and zoning commission, and city council is discretionary. The city council's
decision is final.
(Ordinance 11-01-04, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 1/4/11; Ordinance 16-03-25, ex. A, adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 70-15 Special event signage
(a) Special events are generally defined as a festival, fair, tournament, or other similar happening. Should city
staff question a proposed activity or celebration as a valid special event, a description of the proposed activity or
celebration will be prepared by the applicant and forwarded to the city's special event coordinator. Once the city
adopts a special events ordinance, whether an event qualifies as a special event, shall be determined by such
ordinance, as amended. Business promotions, such as grand openings and sales events, shall not be classified as
a special event.
(b) Banners, stake signs, inflatable device signs, or other apparatuses may not be erected to advertise a special
event until a special event sign coordination plan has been approved by the city. The special event sign
coordination plan will be required to illustrate the location of banners, stake signs, inflatable device signs, or
other apparatuses to be used for a special event. The chief building official or designated representative shall
have final approval for special event sign coordination plan.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 457/684
(c) Temporary signs advertising special events, which signs are approved through this process, shall be
exempt from other sign regulations of the city code. A decision to allow a special event sign in the public rightof-
way is within the exclusive control of the city, including the size, number, information contained on the sign,
and location. The placement of any sign in the public right-of-way shall occur only when necessary for traffic
control and safety related to the special event, signs shall be limited to directional information only with the
name of the event.
(d) Signage associated with a special event shall be erected no earlier than seven (7) calendar days prior to the
event and removed no later than twenty-four (24) hours after the conclusion of the event.
(e) City-sponsored special events are events conducted on city property that have city sponsorship. These
include major regional sporting and entertainment events, and those that promote city places, activities and
events.
(1) Time. Written permission from the city manager or his/her designee is required. No time
restriction.
(2) Place. May be erected on any city-owned property including but not limited to pavilions,
parking structure, fences, walls, vehicles, poles and light poles, and/or any other structure or
apparatus approved by the city manager or his/her designee.
(3) Manner.
a. Any sign having characters, letters or illustrations applied to plastic, cloth, canvas, or other
light fabric or similar material, with the only purpose of such nonrigid material being used for a
background.
b. All special event signage shall be maintained and shall not be faded, tattered, or torn.
(Ordinance 11-01-04, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 1/4/11; Ordinance 16-03-25, ex. A, adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 70-16 Signs allowed; permit required
For the purpose of this chapter, the words below shall have definitions as defined in this chapter, whether or not
capitalized unless the context clearly requires another meaning, ascribed to them and the requirements and
regulations set forth for each shall apply in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction:
(1) A-frame sign.
a. Time. A sign permit is required.
i. The sign permit number, in numerals not less than one (1") inch in height shall be
permanently affixed on the sign for the purpose of inspection. A sign permit shall not be
issued to install or display an A-frame sign until a certificate of occupancy has been
issued for the place of business that elects to display the sign.
ii. After the issuance of a sign permit, an A-frame sign may be displayed only during
the business hours of the permit holder.
b. Place.
i. A-frame signs are permitted in old town commercial (OTC), and within
nonresidential areas or planned developments used to incorporate the neighborhood center
concept as described in the comprehensive plan as it currently exists or may be amended.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 458/684
ii. A-frame signs must be located a minimum of three (3') feet from any curb of any
adjacent street. A-frame signs must be placed on a sidewalk or adjacent to a sidewalk.
iii. A-frame signs must provide an unobstructed pedestrian clearance of at least four (4')
feet in width.
iv. An A-frame sign shall not be placed in any manner to interfere with vehicular traffic
or cause a hazard.
v. An A-frame sign shall not be placed in any median.
vi. An A-frame sign shall not be placed within a utility or right-of-way easement, or
other city property.
c. Manner.
i. The maximum area of an A-frame sign is twelve (12) square feet.
ii. The maximum height of an A-frame sign shall be four (4') feet.
iii. The maximum width of an A-frame sign is three (3) feet.
iv. An A-frame sign shall not be closer than twenty (20') feet to another A-frame sign.
v. A maximum of one (1) A-frame sign may be placed per business or tenant on the
property where the A-frame sign is located.
vi. Within the specified maximum dimensions, creative shapes that reflect the theme of
the business is encouraged (i.e. ice cream shops may display a sign in the shape of an ice
cream cone).
vii. The sign must be constructed of materials that present a finished appearance
(rough-cut plywood is not acceptable. The sign lettering should be professionally painted
or applied; a “yard sales” or “graffiti” look with hand painted or paint stenciled letters is
not acceptable). The written message of the sign should be kept to the minimum necessary
to communicate the name of the business or a special message of the business.
(2) Awning sign.
a. Time. A sign permit is required. A sign permit shall not be issued to erect or place an
awning sign onto an awning at a property until a site plan is approved by the planning and
zoning commission for development of the property and after the issuance of building permit or
certificate of occupancy.
b. Place. In no case shall the supporting structure of an awning sign extend into or over the
right-of-way. The supporting structure of an awning sign may extend over the right-of-way in
the original town commercial (OTC) district, but shall not extend closer than four (4') feet from
back of curb. An awning sign may be allowed in a planned development. No building shall
have both a wall sign and an awning sign on the same building face.
c. Manner. The maximum height of an awning sign shall not exceed four (4') feet. The width
of an awning sign shall not exceed seventy-five percent (75%) in length of any side of an
awning. An awning sign shall only be permitted in conjunction with a nonresidential use or in a
nonresidential zoning district. An awning sign shall be secure and may not swing, sway, or
move in any manner. An awning sign shall not contain any moving devices.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 459/684
(3) Awning sign attachments.
a. Time. A sign permit is required. Structural drawing(s), as required by the chief building
official, sealed by a licensed engineered must be submitted with the permit application.
b. Place. Awning sign attachments shall only suspend from or extend above the edge of a
pedestrian awning. Awning sign attachments installed for pedestrian display located and
attached on the underside of a pedestrian awning shall be centered.
c. Manner. Awning sign attachments shall have a maximum height of twelve (12") inches.
Suspended or extended awning sign attachments shall not alternate up-and-down at a business'
storefront. Suspended awning sign attachments suspended over a pedestrian awning shall
maintain a nine (9') foot clearance from pedestrian grade measured from the lowest hanging
portion of the attachment. Awning sign attachments shall not swing, sway, or move in any
manner. The structural engineering of awning sign attachment must be approved by the city
before a sign permit can be granted. Awning sign attachments shall not be used in conjunction
with an awning sign. Only one type of awning sign attachment shall be used per storefront.
(4) Banner signs.
a. Time.
i. A sign permit is required for each fourteen (14) calendar day display period as
described below. The sign permit placard must be displayed in a conspicuous place visible
from the street for the purpose of walk-up inspection. A sign permit shall not be issued to
display a banner at a property until a site plan is approved by the planning and zoning
commission for development of the property and a building permit is issued.
ii. One (1) banner sign may be placed on a building for four (4) fourteen (14) calendar
day periods per calendar year. The periods may be combined. Each suite within a retail
development shall be considered a building and, therefore, shall be allowed to erect a
banner accordingly.
iii. New businesses shall be permitted to place a banner on their building prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy with the issuance of a sign permit from the chief
building official. A new business shall be permitted to place one (1) banner on their
building storefront up to six (6) weeks after the date of a certificate of occupancy with the
issuance of a sign permit. Banner(s) displayed before and immediately following the date
of the certificate of occupancy shall not count against the allowances for the four (4)
fourteen (14) calendar day periods within a calendar year.
iv. No building may have more than one (1) banner sign at any time, whether
commercial or noncommercial. Noncommercial banner signs do not require a permit.
b. Place. A banner shall be securely attached to the front, side or rear face of a building
(securely attached is defined as a minimum of four (4) corners attached to the surface of the
building). A banner shall not face a residential neighborhood, unless separated by a major
thoroughfare. However, banners are permitted only in conjunction with a nonresidential use,
multifamily, or mixed use zoning district.
c. Manner. A banner shall not exceed forty-eight (48) square feet in area, except that at an
individual business with a floor area of contiguous fifty thousand (50,000) square feet or
greater, a banner shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in area. A banner shall not be
placed where it blocks or impedes use of any pedestrian traveled way.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 460/684
(5) Canopy sign.
a. Time. A sign permit is required. A sign permit shall not be issued to erect, install or place a
canopy sign on a property until a site plan has been approved by the planning and zoning
commission for development of the property and after the issuance of a building permit for a
building on the property.
b. Place. Canopy signs may only be erected on the two (2) sides of the canopy band that face
a public street.
c. Manner. Canopy signs may not exceed fifteen (15) square feet in size. Canopy signs must
be attached directly to or painted on the exterior face of the canopy band and shall not project
more than eighteen (18) inches from the canopy band. Only the canopy band may be
illuminated, not the entire canopy. Canopy signs attached or applied to a canopy shall not
extend above or below the canopy band. Canopy signs shall only contain the name and/or logo
of the company. Canopy signs cannot display pricing or sales specials.
(6) Commercial real estate sign (CRES).
a. Time. A sign permit is required. The sign permit number, date installed, and sign
contractor's name shall be placed on the CRES in characters no less than one (1") inch in height
in a conspicuous place for the purpose of walk-up inspection. A CRES requires removal within
ten (10) calendar days after the sale or lease of a property or business.
b. Place. A CRES shall be located no closer than fifteen (15') feet to any property line. A
maximum of one (1) CRES per property shall be placed on a lot. V-shape sign shall be
considered as two (2) signs. For a property with more than five hundred (500') feet of single
street frontage, more than one CRES is allowed, provided, that each CRES is spaced a
minimum of two-hundred (200') feet from other signs. For a property with frontage on more
than one street, a CRES is allowed on each frontage. A CRES shall not face a residential
neighborhood, unless separated by a major thoroughfare.
c. Manner. A CRES shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area. A ground mounted
CRES shall not exceed eight (8') feet in height. Wall mounted CRES can be of any material. All
CRES signs shall be painted with earth tones or neutral color backgrounds. A CRES shall not
be used to advertise the lease of multifamily-dwelling units.
(7) Grand opening balloon(s) and/or balloon arrangement.
a. Time. A sign permit is required. grand opening balloon(s) and/or a balloon arrangements
shall only be displayed during a grand opening of a business. Grand opening balloon(s) and/or a
balloon arrangement shall be removed within two (2) hours after the conclusion of the grand
opening.
b. Place. Grand opening balloon(s) or a balloon arrangement shall only be displayed within
twenty (20) feet of the business' public entrance and shall not be placed or displayed in front of
(or at) other businesses. Grand opening balloons and/or balloon arrangements shall not be
attached to parking signs, bicycle stands, benches, trees, fences, poles, railings, vehicles,
existing signage, display items, other structures, or placed in required parking spaces. Grand
opening balloons and/or balloon arrangements shall not block pedestrian or vehicular visibility
or cause a safety hazard.
c. Manner. Grand opening balloon(s) and/or a balloon arrangement may not exceed twenty
(20) feet in height, and must be secured to the ground.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 461/684
(8) Inflatable device signs (IDS).
a. Time. A sign permit is required. The sign permit must be displayed in a conspicuous place
visible from the street for the purpose of walk-up inspection. A sign permit shall not be issued
until the city has issued a certificate of occupancy for the business that elects to display an IDS.
One (1) IDS may be erected on a lot for no more than three (3) fourteen (14) calendar day
periods per calendar year. A business can only display one (1) IDS at a time. In the case of
multiple businesses or tenants located on a single lot, each business is allowed to erect an IDS
on the lot for three (3), fourteen (14) calendar day periods, provided that not more than one (1)
IDS is installed along any street frontage at the same time. One (1) IDS per street frontage may
be installed each time.
b. Place. An IDS shall not be located in required parking places, or driveways that provide
access to parking spaces or fire lanes, nor shall any IDS or its securing devices encroach into a
right-of-way. IDSs are only permitted within a nonresidential zoning district.
c. Manner. An IDS shall be secured directly to, and not suspended or floating from, the
ground. An IDS shall not be placed on a roof, canopy, parking garage, or awning, or suspended
or floating from any building or garage. The maximum height of an IDS shall not exceed thirty
(30) feet. One (1) banner may be applied to an IDS. A banner applied to an IDS shall not count
toward the allotted number of banners during a calendar year. The maximum area of a banner
applied to an IDS shall not exceed forty-eight (48) square feet. An IDS shall not be installed
within two hundred (200) feet from another IDS measured in a straight line in any direction.
Cloud buster balloons, blimps, wind devices or any similar type of apparatuses are not an IDS.
Location of power source must be identified in the sign permit application.
(9) Kiosk (panel) sign 1 (KPS1).
a. Time for KPS-1. On properties located at the intersection of two (2) major thoroughfares,
kiosk (panel) signs are permissible subject to the following conditions and upon the issuance of
a sign permit.
b. Place for KPS-1. Kiosk (panel) signs shall be placed on a property located at the
intersection of two (2) major thoroughfares as defined and illustrated on the city's thoroughfare
plan as it currently exists or may be amended. Kiosk (panel) signs shall be placed a minimum of
two hundred (200) feet and a maximum of four hundred fifty (450) feet from the intersecting
right-of-way line. Kiosk (panel) signs may be placed in the right-of-way.
c. Manner for KPS-1. Kiosk (panel) signs shall be designed in accordance with the following
design standards:
i. A maximum of four (4) kiosk (panel) signs are permitted at an intersection. One (1)
kiosk (panel) sign is permitted on each street corner.
ii. The kiosk (panel) sign and its panels shall be of steel construction or wood
construction painted with exterior oil-based paint.
iii. The cost of production, installation, maintenance, and relocation or removal of the
kiosk (panel) sign shall be the responsibility of the permittee, or, if located on private
property, the permittee and the property owner shall have joint and several liability.
iv. The maximum height shall not exceed ten (10) feet.
v. The maximum width shall not exceed six (6) feet.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 462/684
vi. The color of the panels and the letters shall be uniform throughout the entire city.
(10) Kiosk (panel) sign 2 (KPS2).
a. Time for KPS-2. A kiosk (panel) sign may be erected on a property within a platted singlefamily
or two-family subdivision after approval of the final plat of the property.
b. Place for KPS-2.
i. Kiosk (panel) signs may be placed within the platted limits of a single-family or twofamily
residential subdivision. Kiosk (panel) signs approved as part of a sign coordination
plan as defined in section 70-14 of this chapter may be placed outside the platted limits of
a single-family or two-family residential subdivision on a property of the same ownership
as the developing subdivision.
ii. Kiosk (panel) signs may be placed in the right-of-way.
c. Manner for KPS-2.
i. A sign coordination plan must be approved by chief building official for the
placement of kiosk (panel) signs within a single-family or two-family residential
subdivision prior to issuance of a sign permit.
ii. The maximum height shall not exceed ten (10) feet.
iii. The maximum width shall not exceed six (6) feet. A kiosk (panel) sign and its
panels shall be of steel construction or wood construction painted with exterior oil-based
paint.
iv. The color of the panels and the letters shall be uniform throughout the entire
residential subdivision.
v. The cost of production, installation, and maintenance of the kiosk (panel) signs shall
be the responsibility of the developer or homeowners' association.
(11) Menu board sign.
a. Time. A sign permit is required. A sign permit shall not be issued to erect or place a menu
board sign on a property until a site plan is approved by the planning and zoning commission
for development of the property and after issuance of a building permit for a building on the
property.
b. Place. A menu board sign is permitted only in conjunction with a nonresidential use or in a
nonresidential zoning district. The minimum front building setback is twenty-five (25) feet
from the property line.
c. Manner.
i. Drive-thru menu board sign. A menu board sign shall be attached to the exterior of
the building or supported from the grade to the bottom of the sign having or appearing to
have a solid base. The design, materials, and finish of a menu board sign shall match those
of the building(s) on the same lot. One (1) freestanding menu board sign and one (1) wall
mounted menu board sign is permitted per drive-thru use. The maximum area of a
freestanding menu board sign is sixty (60) square feet. The maximum area of a wall
mounted menu board sign is twenty (20) square feet. The maximum height of a menu
board sign is six (6) feet.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 463/684
(A) Drive-thru preorder sign. A drive-thru preorder sign shall be supported from
the grade to the bottom of the sign having or appearing to have a solid base. The
design, materials, and finish of a drive-thru per-order sign shall match those of the
building(s) on the same lot. One drive-thru pre-order sign is permitted at the
entrance of the drive thru lane on a lot. The maximum area of a drive-thru pre-order
sign is twenty-four (24) square feet in area. The maximum height of a drive- thru
pre-order sign is six (6) feet.
(B) Drive-in menu board sign. A drive-in menu board sign shall be supported
from the grade to the bottom of the sign having or appearing to have a solid base. If
the drive-in stalls are covered by a canopy, the drive-in menu board signage may be
attached directly to the canopy support columns. The design, materials, and finish of
a drive-in menu board sign shall match those of the building(s) on the same lot. One
drive-in menu board sign is permitted per ordering station. The maximum area of a
drive-in menu board sign is nine (9) square feet in area. The maximum height of a
drive-in menu board sign is six (6) feet.
(12) Model home sign.
a. Time. A sign permit is required. A sign permit shall not be issued until a site plan has been
approved by the planning and zoning commission for development of the subdivision and after
final acceptance of the subdivision by the city, and after a building permit is issued for
construction of a dwelling model home or temporary sales trailer.
b. Place. A model home sign is permitted on a lot that has been issued a building permit for
construction of a residential dwelling or temporary sales trailer. One (1) model home sign is
allowed per residential lot. The minimum front setback of a model home sign shall be fifteen
(15) feet from the property line. The minimum side or rear setback of a model home sign shall
be ten (10) feet from the property line.
c. Manner. The maximum area of a model home sign shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square
feet. A model home sign shall be supported from the grade to the bottom having a solid
masonry base. All decorative embellishment borders and/or masonry borders will not be
included in the calculation of the total area of a model home sign, but shall not exceed twelve
(12) inches in width. The maximum height of a model home sign shall not exceed four (4) feet.
The average finished grade of the lot shall not be altered to increase the height of a model home
sign. Model home signs shall not contain neon or prohibited lights. Exterior lighting must meet
the requirements of the light and glare standards as defined in the city's comprehensive zoning
ordinance, as it currently exist or may be amended.
(13) Monument (individual) sign (MIS-1).
a. Time. A sign permit is required. A sign permit shall not be issued to erect, install or place
an MIS-1 on a property until a site plan has been approved by the planning and zoning
commission for development of the property and after the issuance of a building permit for a
building on the property.
b. Place. MIS-1 are permitted in nonresidential zoning districts and in residential zoning
districts so long as it is located on a lot within that residential district containing an apartment
complex, daycare facility, school, community center, amenity center, marketing center, or
religious facility. A MIS-1 is permitted on the same lot as a unified development monument
sign (UDMS), but the total number of UDMSs and MIS-1s located within a unified
development zone shall not exceed the number of lots located within the unified development
zone. The total number of signs shall not be permitted to exceed the total number of lots in the
unified development zone when additional MIS-1s or UDMSs are permitted on a property. The
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 464/684
minimum front yard setback for a MIS-1 is fifteen (15) feet from the property line. The
minimum side and rear setback from the property line shall be equal to the height of the MIS-1.
c. Manner.
i. The design, materials, and finish of a MIS-1 shall match those of the buildings on the
same lot. A MIS-1 shall contain minimum one (1) foot masonry with mortar border
around all sides. A MIS-1 constructed entirely of masonry materials, as defined in
comprehensive zoning ordinance as it currently exists or may be amended, shall satisfy
the one (1) foot masonry border requirement. Backlit MIS-1s shall be inset into the
pedestal rather than attached or applied to the pedestal.
ii. MIS-1s constructed in conjunction with UDMSs and monument (individual) sign-2
(MIS-2) shall be consistent with the building elements and materials of UDMSs within the
unified development, and MIS-2s on the same lot and within the unified development.
Architectural embellishments are also encouraged and may be considered through the
review of a sign coordination plan.
iii. A lot is allowed a maximum of one (1) MIS-1 per street frontage with a minimum
separation of seventy-five (75) feet.
iv. The maximum area of an MIS-1, excluding the one (1) foot masonry border, is sixty
(60) square feet.
v. The maximum height of a MIS-1 is eight (8) feet.
vi. MIS-1s are permitted to contain electronic variable message display subject to the
following conditions:
(A) Variable message monument displays shall only be permitted on lots adjacent
to a major thoroughfare or greater as designated in the city's thoroughfare plan, as it
currently exists or may be amended.
(B) Variable message monument displays shall only be permitted in nonresidential
zoning districts.
(C) Variable message displays integrated into wall signs are also permitted, but
only one (1) variable message display, either monument or wall, is permitted per lot.
(D) Variable message monument displays shall comply with section 70-27 of this
chapter.
(14) Monument (internal) signs (MIS-2).
a. Time. A sign permit is required. A sign permit shall not be issued to erect, install or place a
MIS-2 on a property until a site plan has been approved by the planning and zoning commission
for development of the property and after the issuance of a building permit for a building on the
property.
b. Place. A MIS-2 is permitted only in conjunction with a nonresidential use or in a
nonresidential zoning district. Minimum front setback - MIS-2 must be set behind the front
building line. The minimum rear and side yard setback shall be equal to the height of the sign.
c. Manner.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 465/684
i. The design, materials, and finish of MIS-2s shall match those of the building's facade
on the same lot. MIS-2s constructed in conjunction with UDMSs and/or MIS-1s shall be
consistent with the building elements and materials of the UDMSs within the UDMSs and
MIS-1s on the same lot and within the unified development.
ii. If a property averages more than two (2) MIS-2s per acre, a sign coordination plan
must be approved prior to placement of the MIS-2s.
iii. The maximum area of a MIS-2 is six (6) square feet.
iv. The maximum height of a MIS-2 is thirty (30) inches.
v. MIS-2s shall be supported from the grade to the bottom of the sign having or
appearing to have a solid base.
(15) Monument (unified development) sign (UDMS).
a. Time. A sign permit is required. A sign permit shall not be issued to erect, install or place a
UDMS on a property until a sign coordination plan has been approved and a subdivision plat,
preliminary site plan, and/or site plan for the property has been approved by the planning and
zoning commission, and after issuance of a building permit for a building within the unified
development zone.
b. Place.
i. UDMS shall be located within a unified development zone.
ii. A UDMS is permitted on the same lot as an MIS-1, but the total number of UDMSs
and MIS-1 located within a unified development zone shall not exceed the number of lots
located within the unified development zone.
iii. The minimum front setback for a UDMS is fifteen (15) feet from the property line.
iv. No minimum side yard and rear yard setbacks are required for a UDMS, but a
UDMS shall not be located closer than seventy-five (75) feet to another UDMS or an
MIS-1.
c. Manner.
i. A UDMS shall be constructed of materials and a design consistent with the buildings
located on the property. A UDMS shall contain a minimum one (1) foot masonry border
around the sign. A UDMS constructed entirely of masonry materials shall satisfy the
border requirement.
ii. The maximum area of a UDMS shall be based on the size of the unified development
zone. The maximum area of a UDMS for a development zone of five (5) acres or less is
sixty (60) square feet. For every whole acre over five (5) acres, the area of the UDMS
may be increased by twelve (12) square feet with the maximum area of a UDMS being
one hundred sixty-eight (168) square feet.
iii. The maximum height of a UDMS is sixteen (16) feet.
iv. Architectural embellishments for UDMSs are encouraged. Exceptions in maximum
height and area to allow for architectural embellishments may be considered through the
review of a sign coordination plan.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 466/684
v. One (1) UDMS is permitted per street frontage of the unified development zone. One
(1) additional UDMS is permitted along a street for each additional seven hundred fifty
(750) linear feet, or portion thereof, of street frontage that exceeds seven hundred fifty
(750) linear feet of street frontage.
vi. Prior to city consideration of a unified development zone, all property owners
located within a proposed unified development zone must submit notarized letters to the
city authorizing the creation of the unified development zone. A lot shall only be included
in one (1) unified development zone.
vii. Variable messages displays are permitted, but only one (1) variable message
display, either monument sign or wall sign is permitted per lot.
viii. UDMSs with variable message displays shall comply with section 70-27 of this
chapter.
(16) Mural.
a. Time. A sign permit is required. A sign permit shall not be issued to paint, draw, apply or
place a mural on a property until a site plan is approved by the planning and zoning commission
for development of the property and after issuance of a building permit for a building on the
property. A sign coordination plan shall be approved by development services prior to
placement of a mural.
b. Place. A mural shall be located above grade and below a roof and only be located within a
nonresidential zoned district. Murals shall not be applied to a roof or other similar cover of a
building or structure.
c. Manner. The maximum area of a mural shall not exceed the length or height of the exterior
wall on which it is painted, drawn or applied. A mural shall not face a residential neighborhood,
unless separated by a major thoroughfare. Murals are permitted only in conjunction with a
nonresidential use or in a nonresidential zoning district.
(17) Project/development sign (PDS).
a. Time. A sign permit is required. A sign permit shall not be issued to erect, install or place a
PDS on a property until a site plan has been approved by the planning and zoning commission
for development of the property. The sign permit number, date installed, and sign contractor's
name must be placed on the sign in no less than one (1) inch in height in a conspicuous place on
the sign. PDS signs must be removed when seventy-five (75) percent of the homes in the
subdivision have been issued a building permit. A PDS installed on a nonresidential lot where a
contractor requests a final inspection must be removed prior to the final inspection and issuance
of a certificate of occupancy.
b. Place. The PDS shall be installed no closer than fifteen (15) feet to any property line. The
minimum distance between a PDS and another PDS is two hundred (200) feet.
c. Manner. The maximum area of a PDS is ninety-six (96) square feet. The maximum height
of a PDS is sixteen (16) feet. A maximum of one (1) PDS is allowed along a major street
frontage per subdivision or commercial site. When a subdivision or commercial site has more
than one (1) major thoroughfare, one (1) PDS may be placed on each major thoroughfare.
(18) Projecting sign.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 467/684
a. Time. A sign permit is required. A sign permit shall not be issued to erect or install a
projecting sign at a property until a building permit is issued for the building where projecting
sign is to be attached.
b. Place. A projecting sign is permitted only in conjunction with a nonresidential use or in a
nonresidential district. A projecting sign may project into the right-of-way, but shall be located
a minimum of three (3) feet back from a curb of any adjacent street or drive. A projecting sign
may extend a maximum of three (3) feet from the facade of a building. When a projecting sign
is constructed over a pedestrian walkway or drive, a minimum of nine (9) feet clearance shall
be provided between the grade of the sidewalk or drive and the lowest portion of a projecting
sign. A projecting sign shall not extend above a building wall.
c. Manner. The maximum area of a projecting sign is twelve (12) square feet. In the OTC
district, the official logo (the steam engine) of the historic downtown shall be incorporated into
the frame of a projecting sign. The logo may be added to the sign instead of the frame. In either
scenario, the logo shall be in integral part of the projecting sign.
(19) Roof (secondary) sign.
a. Time. A sign permit is required. A sign permit shall not be issued to erect or place a roof
(secondary) sign on a property until a site plan is approved by the planning and zoning
commission for development of the property, and after the issuance of a building permit at the
property.
b. Place. A roof (secondary) sign may be erected on a secondary canopy or a secondary roof
over an entry to a building.
c. Manner. The structural or mechanical elements of a roof (secondary) sign shall not be
visible from six (6) feet above the grade of adjacent streets.
(20) Subdivision identity sign.
a. Time. A sign permit is required. A sign permit shall not be issued to erect or place a
subdivision identity sign on a property until a preliminary plat is approved by the planning and
zoning commission for development of the property.
b. Place. All subdivision identity signs shall be located within the platted limits of a
residential subdivision to which it pertains.
c. Manner. Subdivision identity signs may be in the form of a sign mounted to a screening
wall that does not project from the face of the wall more than one (1) inch. Alternative types of
a subdivision identity sign may be approved as part of a sign coordination plan. The sign
coordination plan shall be submitted for review with the final plat, landscaping, and screening
wall plans for review by development services department.
(21) Subdivision monument sign.
a. Time. A sign permit and building permit is required. A building permit and/or sign permit
shall not be issued to erect or place subdivision monument on a property until a preliminary site
plan is approved and issued by the planning and zoning commission for development of
nonresidentially zoned property, a site plan is approved by the planning and zoning commission
for the development of multifamily or townhome zoned properties, or a preliminary plat is
approved by the planning and zoning commission for development of single-family or 2-family
zoned properties. The requirement to prepare the fore mentioned plans may be waived should
the owner of the property on which the monument is proposed to be located or his/her
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 468/684
representative prepare written documentation and/or graphic illustrations to the satisfaction of
city staff to explain the relationship of the proposed monument to future land uses on the
property.
b. Place. Subdivision monument placed on private property shall observe all building line
and setback requirements of the governing zoning district. A nonhabitable monument may
encroach into a required setback provided all visibility clips and easements are observed and the
monument is deemed by city staff not to negatively impact fire protection of existing or future
development. Subdivision monument may be placed in the right-of-way subject to city council
approval and so long as all other requirements of this chapter and any other applicable
ordinances can be met, excluding TxDOT or other entities right-of-way unless consent is
granted. Subdivision monument may not be erected within an area designated as future right-ofway
on the city's thoroughfare plan, as it currently exists or may be amended.
c. Manner. The developer of the subdivision monument must provide a plan for future
maintenance of subdivision monument to the city for review. The maximum height of
subdivision monument shall not exceed the maximum height of the governing zoning district.
(22) Wall sign.
a. Time. A sign permit is required. A sign permit shall not be issued to erect, place or install a
wall sign on a property until a building permit has been approved for a building on the property.
b. Place. Wall signs are permitted only in conjunction with a nonresidential use or in a
nonresidential zoning district. When a wall sign of any character is placed directly on the face
of a wall and constructed over a pedestrian walkway or vehicular drive, a minimum of nine (9)
feet clearance shall be provided between the grade of the sidewalk or drive and the lowest
portion of a projecting sign. Wall signs that are painted on the face of a wall shall have no
minimum height requirement. A wall sign may not be erected or placed on a parapet wall,
unless the parapet wall extends around the entire perimeter of the building at the same
elevation. When projections on the wall face prevent the erection of the sign flat against the
wall face, the space between the back of the sign and the wall shall be closed at the top, bottom
and ends with incombustible materials. For buildings with a height of five (5) stories or greater
(>), a wall sign may extend above the roofline of the building on which it is attached up to
twenty-five (25) percent of the sign's height. The wall sign must be located on that portion of
the building that is five (5) stories or greater.
c. Manner. Wall signs up to twelve (12') feet in height are allowed in conjunction with
buildings and/or groups of continuous buildings with common wall construction and containing
a minimum of five hundred thousand (500,000) square feet. Wall signs of this size shall be:
i. Placed on walls that are, a minimum of thirty-seven (37) feet in height;
ii. Be placed directly on the face of a wall;
iii. Be set at a minimum of fourteen (14) feet above grade;
iv. Not project more than eighteen (18) inches from the face of the wall;
v. Not occupy more than fifty (50) percent in length of any wall on which it is erected.
In nonresidential districts or areas, neon tubing used for the sole purpose of accentuating
the outline of a building shall not be considered a wall sign and is permitted;
vi. MSO signs may be located on the face of the building in either a horizontal or
vertical direction. The direction of a sign positioned at an angle shall be determined based
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 469/684
on the degree of angle from the horizontal or vertical position. If the angle between the
horizontal and the sign is forty-five (45) degrees or less, the sign shall be considered as a
horizontal sign. If the angle between the horizontal and the sign is greater than forty-five
(45) degrees, the sign shall be considered as a vertical sign;
vii. The height of a horizontal MSO wall sign shall not exceed specifications listed in
table 1; and
viii. The width of a vertical MSO wall sign shall not exceed specifications listed in
table 1.
d. Wall signs are permitted to contain electronic variable message display subject to the
following conditions:
i. Variable message monument displays shall only be located on lots adjacent to a major
thoroughfare or greater as designated in the city's thoroughfare plan, as it currently exists
or may be amended.
ii. Variable message monument displays shall only be permitted in nonresidential areas.
iii. Variable message displays integrated into wall signs are also permitted, but only one
(1) variable message display, either monument or wall, is permitted per lot.
iv. Variable message monument displays shall comply with section 70-26 of this
chapter.
e. The size of wall signs shall be as follows:
Table 1
Horizontal Placement
Building Height Maximum Sign Height * Maximum % of Wall length
0 feet to 20 feet 4 feet maximum 75%
> 20 feet to 30 feet 6 feet maximum 60%
> 30 feet 8 feet maximum 50%
Vertical Placement
Building Height Maximum % of Wall Height * Maximum Sign Width
0 feet to 20 feet 75% 4 feet maximum
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 470/684
> 20 feet to 30 feet 60% 6 feet maximum
> 30 feet 50% 8 feet maximum
* Wall signs shall not occupy more than the maximum percentage of the length of any wall on which it is erected.
Corporate logos may exceed the maximum sign height by forty (40%) percent.
f. Wall signs for closed business. If a wall sign identifies a business that no longer is in
operation, the owner of the property where the sign is located shall remove the wall sign and
repair the wall to its original condition within thirty (30) days of the business's last day of
operation. As an alternative, the owner of the property where the sign is located may apply with
the city for a temporary permit to allow the current sign to remain while a replacement tenant
and/or operator is sought. This permit shall be issued for a maximum of six (6) months, during
which time the wall sign may remain but must be wrapped with a neutral color wrap approved
by the chief building official. The wrap must be applied tightly to the sign. The chief building
official has the final acceptance of color and wrap. The owner may also print the logo and/or
name of an existing business that the sign will identify on the wrap while a new sign is designed
and built. If the permit expires, the sign shall immediately be deemed an abandoned sign and
the owner shall remove the wall sign and repair the wall to its original condition. Nothing
contained herein shall prevent the owner from applying for a permit for a new wall sign that
uses all or a portion of the existing wall sign.
g. Changeable framed box wall signs. One framed changeable box sign may be placed on
each elevation of a building with a maximum area of six (6) square feet for each sign. Signs
shall not project greater than four (4) inches when located less than six (6) feet above grade.
Theaters are permitted to have framed changeable box signs equal to 1.5 times the number of
screens at a location and limited to nine (9) square feet each.
(23) Window sign illuminated.
a. Time. Illuminated window signs that exceed twenty-five (25) percent of a window requires
the issuance of a sign permit. A window sign may be displayed twenty-four (24) hours each and
every continuing day.
b. Place. Shall not be closer than three (3) feet from a public door.
c. Manner. Window sign(s) shall be installed on the inside or outside of a window. The
maximum area of a window sign shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the window
where the sign is displayed. Window signs are limited to one (1) sign per window. Illuminated
and nonilluminated window signs or its appendages shall not blink, strobe, fade, flash, scroll, or
move in any manner. Illuminated window signs shall remain static and stationary.
(24) Temporary construction fence sign.
a. Time. A sign permit is required. A sign permit shall not be issued to erect, place or install a
temporary construction fence sign on a property until a building permit has been issued for a
building on the property. The temporary construction fence sign must be removed prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the building on the property. Where the property has
multiple buildings with outstanding building permits, the temporary construction fence sign
must be removed upon the earlier of:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 471/684
i. The expiration or termination of all such outstanding building permits; or
ii. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the last such building on the
property.
b. Place. Temporary construction fence signs are permitted in all zoning districts except for
single-family residential zoning districts. A maximum of one (1) temporary construction fence
sign is allowed along a major street frontage per property. When a property has more than one
(1) major thoroughfare, one (1) temporary construction fence sign may be placed along each
major thoroughfare. A property with more than two hundred (200) feet of major street frontage
is entitled to place one (1) additional temporary construction fence sign with a minimum
separation of two hundred (200) feet between each temporary construction fence sign.
c. Manner. The maximum area of graphics, symbols, text or images printed directly onto the
fence or barrier's screening fabric is one hundred twenty-eight (128) square feet. Temporary
construction fence signs that are not printed directly onto the fence or barrier's screening fabric
shall be attached to the temporary fence or barrier with an approved rigid backing material that
is securely affixed to the fence or barrier. Temporary construction fence signs that are not
printed directly onto the fence or barrier's screening fabric may be a maximum of eight (8) feet
in height but shall not extend beyond the height of the fence or barrier and have a maximum
area of ninety-six (96) square feet.
(Ordinance 11-01-04, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 1/4/11; Ordinance 11-06-21, sec. 3, adopted 6/7/11; Ordinance 16-
03-25, ex. A, adopted 3/15/16; Ordinance 17-02-10 adopted 2/21/17)
Sec. 70-17 Signs allowed; no permit required
(a) Apartment sign.
(1) Time. No sign permit required. Apartment signs may be placed in the front yard of a property
developed as an apartment complex no earlier than Friday at 12:00 p.m. (noon) and shall be removed
from the property no later than Sunday at 6:00 p.m.
(2) Place. Apartment signs may not be installed on any public property or right-of-way area.
Apartment signs shall only be placed on the property for the apartment community to which it
pertains. Apartment signs installed within the front of a property shall not be placed closer than sixty
(60) feet from another apartment sign. Apartment signs shall not be installed within thirty (30) feet
from a side property line.
(3) Manner. An apartment sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in total area. The maximum
height of an apartment sign shall not exceed four (4) feet.
(b) Athletic registration sign.
(1) Time. No sign permit required, but prior permission of the property owner is required.
a. Athletic registration signs may be erected up to seven (7) calendar days prior to the
registration and removed no more than forty-eight (48) hours after the registration.
b. With prior permission of a homeowners association (HOA), athletic registration signs may
be erected on a subdivision-maintained community park up to seven (7) calendar days prior to
the registration and removed no more than forty-eight (48) hours after the registration.
c. With prior permission from a public or private school, athletic registration signs may be
erected up to seven (7) calendar days prior to the registration and removed no more than fortyeight
(48) hours after the registration ends.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 472/684
(2) Place. Athletic registration signs shall not be located within any median, any right-of-way or
easement, or on any other public property, except as allowed herein at public parks and public
schools.
a. At city-owned parks, athletic registration signs may be located at the city park exits or
other city park area approved by the director of parks and recreation or his/her designee.
b. At HOA-maintained parks or open space areas, athletic registration signs shall be located
on private HOA-maintained park property with written approval by the HOA board or their
designee.
c. At public or private school property, athletic registration signs shall be located at a school
exit or other area on school property approved by the school authority.
(3) Manner. The maximum area of an athletic registration sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet.
The maximum height of an athletic registration sign shall not exceed four (4) feet.
(c) Flag/flagpole.
(1) Time. No sign permit except for a flag attached to a pole within the OTC or along Preston
Road. A flag shall not be placed on a property until a site plan and/or a final plat is approved by the
planning and zoning commission for development of the property.
(2) Place. A flag and its ground-supported staff shall be located on private property behind the
property line. Flags may be placed at parks during social and athletic events.
(3) Manner. At a residential property no permit required, height of flagpole shall not exceed zoning
height requirements for that property. At a nonresidential property that contains a building with less
than (<) four (4) floors, the maximum height of a ground-supported flagpole shall be forty (40) feet
measured from the ground with the maximum area of the flag not to exceed sixty (60) square feet in
area. At a nonresidential property that contains a building with four (4) floors or more above-ground,
the maximum height of a flagpole shall be sixty (60) feet measured from the ground with the
maximum area of a flag not to exceed ninety-six (96) square feet in area. A maximum of four (4)
flags or flagpoles may be located on nonresidential property. A flag not displayed on a groundsupported
staff shall meet the permit and display requirements of a banner (see ‘banner').
(d) Garage sale sign.
(1) Time. No sign permit required. A garage sale sign shall not be erected earlier than 6:00 a.m. on
the Friday before the garage sale and must be removed by 6:00 p.m. on the Sunday following the
garage sale held during the same weekend. Garage sale signs shall not be erected Monday through
Thursday.
(2) Place. Garage sale signs shall be located only on a private residential property with the consent
of the property owner. Garage sale signs shall not be placed on a vehicle, fence, pole, tree, median, or
railing. Garage sale signs shall not contain any balloons, wind devices or other type of sign, except
stake signs, unless meeting the definition and requirements for that type of sign. Garage sale signs
shall not be placed on public property or right-of-way.
(3) Manner. A garage sale sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area (typically 2 feet x 3
feet). The maximum height of a garage sale sign shall not exceed four (4) feet.
(e) Government community event sign.
(1) Time. No sign permit required. A government community event sign may be erected up to
seven (7) business days prior to the event or activity, and shall be removed within two (2) business
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 473/684
days after the event or activity.
(2) Place. Government community event signs shall only be placed at a city public park and/or
other city government property that contains a public building, within a residential subdivision with
written permission from the homeowner's association or its representative, at a private or public
educational facility with permission, and at the event location.
(3) Manner. A government community event sign shall not be placed in medians, easements, or
within the right-of-way of any thoroughfare. Government pole banners shall have no restrictions.
(f) HOA neighborhood sign (HOA-NS).
(1) Time. No sign permit required.
(2) Place. A HOA-NS shall be located on private property within the subdivision or in HOAmaintained
areas. A HOA-NS shall not be located along any major thoroughfare or street artery
outside of the subdivision screening wall or perimeter barrier.
(3) Manner. The maximum area of a HOA-NS shall not exceed six (6) square feet. The maximum
height of a HOA-NS shall not exceed four (4) feet.
(g) Home improvement sign.
(1) Time. No sign permit required. A home improvement sign may be erected at the time work
commences at the property and shall be removed within fifteen (15) days thereafter.
(2) Place. A home improvement sign shall be located only on the lot at which the home
improvement is occurring. A home improvement sign shall not be erected on private property closer
than ten (10) feet from the edge of any street pavement or designated roadway.
(3) Manner. A home improvement sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area. A home
improvement sign shall not exceed four (4) feet in height. A maximum of one (1) home improvement
sign shall be erected on a lot.
(h) Human sign.
(1) Time. No sign permit required. Human signs may be displayed from sunrise to sunset each and
every continuing day.
(2) Place. A human sign shall be located on the private property for which the human sign is
advertising where a sale, event, promotion is occurring. The human sign shall be a minimum of ten
(10) feet from the adjacent right-of-way.
(3) Manner. Human sign is a sign held by or attached to a person. The sign or person may not have
attached wind devices, flags or balloons or other devices. A human sign shall only be a person who
stands or walks on the private property where the sale, event or promotion is occurring. Podiums,
risers, stilts, vehicles, roofs, or other structures or devices shall not support a human sign. No more
than one human sign, for each business location, may be actively engaged at each major
thoroughfare. A person who wears or holds a human sign shall be over the age of twelve (12) years
old.
(i) Instructional/information sign.
(1) Time. A sign permit is not required. No restrictions.
(2) Place. No restrictions.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 474/684
(3) Manner. The maximum area of an instructional/informational sign is sixteen (16) square feet.
(Refer to definition section for additional information).
(j) Mobile advertisement sign.
(1) Time. A sign permit is not required. No restrictions.
(2) Place. A mobile advertisement sign is prohibited from being parked, driven, stationed, or
moving in any manner on private property within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction for longer
than twenty (20) minutes per twenty-four (24) hour day.
(3) Manner. A mobile advertisement sign shall only be driven on public streets in the city and its
extraterritorial jurisdiction.
(k) Open house residential sign (OHRS).
(1) Time.
a. No sign permit required.
b. Signs shall be in place only during hours the house is open, plus one (1) hour before and
be removed two (2) hours after the event. Such sign shall be used only when a sales person or
homeowner or homeowner's agent is present during the time of the open house.
c. Such sign shall not be erected during weekdays.
(2) Place.
a. OHRS shall be located only on private residential property with the consent of the property
owner and/or the subject property having the open house.
b. Location of sign is restricted to the street side of the property.
c. Signs are not allowed on the golf course frontage or to be visible from the golf course.
d. Signs are not allowed on the waterfront, or view side of properties.
e. One (1) OHRS shall be located only on private property with the consent of the property
owner.
(3) Manner.
a. The maximum area of an OHRS sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet.
b. The maximum height of an OHRS shall not exceed four (4) feet.
c. Such sign shall not be illuminated.
d. Such sign shall not be placed so as to create a traffic hazard.
e. Such sign shall not be placed in any right-of-way.
f. Such sign shall not contain balloons, streamers, flags, pennants, or other wind devices.
g. Such sign shall not be placed on a vehicle, fence, pole, tree, or railing.
h. One (1) sign per lot.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 475/684
(l) Open house community entrance sign (OHCES).
(1) Time.
a. No sign permit required.
b. Signs shall be in place only during hours the house is open, plus one (1) hour before and
be removed two (2) hours after the event. Such sign shall be used only when a sales person or
homeowner or homeowner's agent is present during the time of the open house.
c. Such sign shall not be erected earlier than 8:00 a.m. or later than 6:00 p.m.
d. Such sign shall not be erected during weekdays (with the exception of holidays).
(2) Place. One (1) OHCES shall be located only on private property with the consent of the
property owner. If the property is owned by an HOA, permission from the HOA is required.
(3) Manner.
a. The maximum area of an OHCES sign face shall not exceed eighteen (18) inches tall by
twenty-four (24) inches wide and only signs pictured in figure 10 and provided by the city or
the Collin County Association of Realtors shall be authorized (see figure 10). Exception: A
HOA may use OHCES signs that have been designed to meet the colors and design of their
community. They may also provide a means to check out the signs from their staff or have their
staff place the signs.
b. The maximum height of an OHNRS in its frame or stand shall not exceed twenty-four (24)
inches.
c. There shall be no more than one (1) OHCES sign per community entrance at any time.
d. A phone number of the current listing agent or homeowner shall be affixed to the sign. The
numbers shall be no larger than one (1) inch in size shall be affixed to the bottom of the sign.
The phone number gives other realtors or homeowners the ability to identify how long the sign
will be in place.
e. Such signs may be placed in HOA-maintained right-of-way.
f. Such sign shall not be illuminated.
g. Such sign shall not be placed so as to create a traffic hazard.
h. Such sign shall not be placed in any right-of-way.
i. Such sign shall not contain balloons, streamers, flags, pennants, or other wind devices.
j. Such sign shall not be placed on a vehicle, fence, pole, tree, or railing.
(m) Political sign.
(1) Time. No sign permit required. Political signs shall be removed within ten (10) calendar days
after the election is decided.
(2) Place. Political signs can only be located on private property with the consent of the property
owner. A political sign shall not be placed or posted:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 476/684
a. Closer than ten (10) feet from the edge of the street pavement;
b. On any public property except where authorized by law; and/or
c. Within a designated public easement or right-of-way.
(3) Manner. Political signs shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height measured from the ground to
the highest point of the sign. Political signs shall not exceed thirty-six (36) square feet in area.
Political signs shall not be illuminated. Political signs shall not contain any moving elements or parts.
Political signs shall not be dilapidated or cause a hazard. (LGC section 216.903.)
(n) Residential real estate sign (RRES).*
(1) Time. No sign permit required. A RRES may be erected twenty-four (24) hours each and every
day until the property is sold or leased.
(2) Place. A RRES shall be erected only on the lot on which the home or property is for sale or
lease. A RRES shall be erected no closer than ten (10) feet from the street pavement.
(3) Manner. A RRES shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area. The maximum height of a RRES
shall not exceed four (4) feet. A maximum of one (1) RRES shall be erected on a lot.
(o) School sign.
(1) Time. No sign permit required. A school sign may be erected up to seven (7) calendar days
prior to the event and shall be removed no more than forty-eight (48) hours after the conclusion of
the meeting or event.
(2) Place. With permission of the owner, a school sign shall be placed at a private or public school,
and/or at an improved property that has received a certificate of occupancy. A school sign shall be
erected on private property not closer than ten (10) feet from the edge of any street pavement.
(3) Manner. The maximum area of a school sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet. The
maximum height of a school sign shall not exceed four (4) feet. A school sign shall not contain any
balloons, streamers, pennants, flags, or wind devices.
(p) Scoreboards.
(1) Time. No sign permit required. No restrictions.
(2) Place. Scoreboards shall be erected within an athletic field or stadium.
(3) Manner. No restrictions.
(q) Temporary religious sign.
(1) Time. No sign permit required. A temporary religious sign may be erected during times of
worship provided that the sign is placed no earlier than seven (7) days prior to worship and removed
no later than forty-eight (48) after worship.
(2) Place. A temporary religious sign shall be placed on private property with consent of the
property owner. Temporary religious signs shall be erected on private property not closer than ten
(10) feet from the edge of any street pavement or designated roadway or right-of-way.
(3) Manner. The maximum area of a temporary religious sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet.
The maximum height of a temporary religious sign shall not exceed four (4) feet. A temporary
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 477/684
religious sign shall not contain balloons, streamers, flags, pennants, or wind devices.
(r) Vehicle sign.
(1) Time. No sign permit required. Vehicle signs are allowed twenty-four (24) hours each and
every continuing day.
(2) Place.
a. Vehicle signs are permitted provided that during periods of inactivity such vehicle is not
parked in the right-of-way or placed adjacent to a major thoroughfare.
b. ‘For sale' signs placed in or on vehicles when the vehicle is parked or placed in a manner
that the vehicle sign is readily visible from an adjacent public right-of-way are prohibited, with
the exception that one (1) vehicle may contain a ‘for sale' sign parked or placed at an occupied
single-family, two-family, townhome, or multifamily-dwelling unit is permitted.
(3) Manner. Vehicle signs are permitted provided that:
a. The primary purpose of the vehicle is not for display of the sign;
b. The sign(s) are painted upon or applied directly (to include magnetic) to an integral part of
the vehicle and designed to be placed on a vehicle;
c. The vehicle is operable, currently registered and licensed to operate on public streets and
actively used in the daily function of the business to which such signs relates;
d. The vehicle is not used as a static display, advertising a product or service, not utilized as
storage, shelter, or distribution points for commercial products or services for the public; and
the vehicle does not meet the definition of a mobile advertisement sign;
e. In districts other than residential, the vehicle shall be parked behind the front plane of the
building if parking allows; and
f. In districts other than residential, the vehicle shall not be parked in parking spaces fronting
a major thoroughfare.
(s) Vending machine sign.
(1) Time. No sign permit required. Vending machine signs may be displayed twenty-four (24)
hours each and every day.
(2) Place. Vending machine displaying vending machine sign(s) shall not obstruct pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.
(3) Manner. Vending machine signs shall be directly attached to a vending machine or gasoline
pump. Vending machine signs shall be flat and shall not project from the vending machine or
gasoline pump. Unless, otherwise, required by federal, state or local laws, signs that promote
products or other items shall not be attached to light poles, canopy supports, rails, trees, parking
signs, vehicles, or other objects.
(t) Window sign.
(1) Time. No sign permit required, except illuminated window signs. A window sign may be
displayed twenty-four (24) hours each and every continuing day.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 478/684
(2) Place. Window signs shall only be displayed on the inside or exterior of a window.
(3) Manner. Window sign(s) shall be installed on the inside or outside of a window. The maximum
area of a window sign shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the window where the sign is
displayed. Window signs are limited to one (1) sign per window. Illuminated and nonilluminated
window signs or its appendages shall not blink, strobe, fade, flash, scroll, or move in any manner.
Illuminated window signs shall remain static and stationary.
(u) Yard sign.
(1) Time. No sign permit required. Yard signs may be erected twenty-four (24) hours each and
every day.
(2) Place. Yard signs shall be located only on lots containing an occupied single-family, twofamily,
or multifamily dwelling. Yard signs shall be erected no closer than ten (10) feet from edge of
the street pavement.
(3) Manner. Signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area. Seasonal decorations are excluded
from place and manner requirements.
(v) Zoning.
(1) Time. No sign permit required.
a. The property owner or his/her representative shall erect the sign on the property fourteen
(14) calendar days prior to the first public hearing scheduled to discuss the applicable zoning
case. The property owner shall be responsible for maintaining the zoning sign on the property
throughout the zoning case;
b. The property owner or his/her representative must provide verification with a photograph
that the zoning sign is erected at the property one (1) week prior to the scheduled planning and
zoning commission meeting date; and
c. The property owner or his/her representative must remove the zoning sign:
i. Within three (3) calendar days after the city council's approval of the ordinance that
rezones the property;
ii. Within three (3) calendar days after the planning and zoning commission denies the
request, unless an appeal to the city council is made; or
iii. Within three (3) calendar days after the city council denies the zoning request.
(2) Place.
a. The number and placement of the signs shall be determined by the director of development
services or his/her designee.
b. The number and placement of signs shall be determined by the director of development
services or his/her designee.
(3) Manner. The department of development services shall maintain the criteria for the required
size and content of the sign.
(Ordinance 11-01-04, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 1/4/11; Ordinance 16-03-25, ex. A, adopted 3/15/16)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 479/684
Sec. 70-18 Prohibited signs
The construction, placement, existence, use of or advertisement on signs of the following nature is prohibited:
(1) Abandoned sign.
(2) Audible sign.
(3) Balloons and other floating devices.
(4) Billboard.
(5) Cloud buster balloon and air devices.
(6) Feather flag.
(7) Merchandise display.
(8) Moving sign.
(9) Neglected sign.
(10) Off-location or off-premises sign.
(11) Pennant.
(12) Pole sign.
(13) Portable signs.
(14) Prohibited signs:
a. Any sign not referenced in or governed by this chapter;
b. Any sign erected or installed without the issuance of a permit, either prior to or after the
adoption of this chapter (if a permit was required);
c. Any sign that emits odor or visible matter;
d. Any changeable electronic variable message sign (CEVMS) or light emitting diode (LED)
billboards located, relocated, or upgraded along a regulated highway within the corporate limits
or extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city;
e. Any sign erected or installed in or over a public right-of-way or access easement, unless
permitted within this chapter;
f. Any sign that does not comply with this or other applicable municipal ordinances, or those
which do not comply with federal or state laws;
g. Any sign supported by a bench, tree, rock, bridge, public utility pole;
h. Any sign supported by a fence, except for temporary construction fence signs governed by
this chapter; or
i. Any sign not allowed or defined by this chapter.
(15) Revolving sign.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 480/684
(16) Roof sign.
(17) Searchlight or skylight.
(18) Temporary nuisance signs.
(19) Vacant building sign.
(20) Wind device.
(Ordinance 11-01-04, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 1/4/11; Ordinance 16-03-25, ex. A, adopted 3/15/16; Ordinance 17-
02-10 adopted 2/21/17)
Sec. 70-19 Other
Many of the single- and multiple-family projects in the city have established their separate restrictions through
their homeowners' association or property owners' association (association). The provisions of this chapter shall
not override a provision contained in the restrictions of such association if that provision is more restrictive than
this chapter. The restrictions of such an association shall not override the city ordinance if the association
restrictions are less restrictive. The HOA or property managers association is responsible for enforcing their
deed restrictions. (Ordinance 11-01-04, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 1/4/11; Ordinance 16-03-25, ex. A, adopted
3/15/16)
Sec. 70-20 Public safety protection
(a) Nothing in this chapter is meant to prevent any public safety organization or agency from setting up and
utilizing any type of sign needed on a temporary basis to protect and enhance public safety solely at the
discretion of the public agency in the performance of its official duties.
(b) Federal Bankruptcy Courts will issue orders that allow persons to violate this sign chapter of the city
unless public health or safety is involved. It has been determined that the following listed signs impose a safety
risk to the residents of the city. Therefore, all debtors and consultants in bankruptcy proceedings shall follow all
local rules and regulations regarding these signs:
(1) Balloons and other floating devices: Not allowed.
(2) Cloud buster balloon and air devices: Not allowed.
(3) Feather flags: Not allowed.
(4) Moving signs: Not allowed.
(5) Pennants: Not allowed.
(6) Audible signs: Not allowed.
(7) Any sign supported by a fence: Not allowed.
(8) Vehicle sign: Must follow regulations in this chapter.
(9) Human sign: Must follow regulations in this chapter.
(10) Temporary nuisance sign: Not allowed.
(Ordinance 11-01-04, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 1/4/11; Ordinance 16-03-25, ex. A, adopted 3/15/16)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 481/684
Sec. 70-21 Civil and criminal penalties
The city shall have the power to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter as may be required by
governing law. Any person violating any provision of this chapter is subject to suit for injunctive relief as well as
prosecution for criminal violations. Any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance. (Ordinance
11-01-04, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 1/4/11; Ordinance 16-03-25, ex. A, adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 70-22 Criminal prosecution
Any person, firm, corporation or business entity violating this chapter, or as amended, shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined a sum not exceeding five hundred and no/100 dollars
($500.00). Each continuing day's violation under this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. The penal
provisions imposed under this chapter shall not preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin the violation. The city
retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law. (Ordinance 11-01-04,
sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 1/4/11; Ordinance 16-03-25, ex. A, adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 70-23 Civil remedies
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a waiver of the city's right to bring a civil action to enforce the
provisions of this chapter and to seek remedies as allowed by law, including, but not limited to the following:
(1) Injunctive relief to prevent specific conduct that violates the chapter or to require specific
conduct that is necessary for compliance with the chapter, including removal of signs that violate this
chapter at the expense of the sign owner; and
(2) A civil penalty up to one thousand and no/100 dollars ($1,000.00) a calendar day when it is
shown that the defendant was actually notified of the provisions of the chapter and after receiving
notice committed acts in violation of the chapter or failed to take action necessary for compliance
with the chapter; and
(3) Other available relief.
(Ordinance 11-01-04, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 1/4/11; Ordinance 16-03-25, ex. A, adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 70-24 Other enforcement
Upon receiving a court order authorizing removal, the city may remove any sign not in compliance with this
chapter at the sign owner's expense. (Ordinance 11-01-04, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 1/4/11; Ordinance 16-03-25, ex.
A, adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 70-25 Calculation of sign area
The area of an individual sign shall be calculated as follows.
(1) Single-faced signs. Sign area shall include the entire area within a single continuous perimeter
composed of squares or rectangles with no more than eight (8) lines that enclose the extreme limits of
all sign elements, including, but not limited to, sign structures or borders, written copy, logos,
symbols, illustrations, and color. Supporting structures such as sign bases and columns are not
included in sign area provided that they contain no lettering or graphics except for addresses or
required tags. The calculation of sign area for various types of single-faced signs is illustrated in
figure 1.
Figure 1.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 482/684
(2) Double-faced signs. Where two (2) faces of a double-faced sign are located two (2) feet or less
from one another at all points, or located at an interior angle of forty-five (45) degrees or less from
one another, the sign area shall be computed as the area of one face. Where the two (2) faces are not
equal in size, the larger sign face shall be used. Where two (2) faces of a double-faced sign are
located more than two (2) feet or forty-five (45) degrees from one another, both sign faces shall be
counted toward sign area. See figure 2.
Figure 2.
(3) Multi-faced signs. On a three-faced sign, where at least one interior angle is forty-five (45)
degrees or less, the area of two (2) faces (the largest and smallest face) shall be summed to determine
sign area. In all other situations involving a sign with three (3) or more sides, sign area shall be
calculated as the sum of all faces.
(4) Three-dimensional signs. Signs that consist of, or have attached to them, one or more threedimensional
objects (i.e., balls, cubes, clusters of objects, sculpture, or statue-like trademarks), shall
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 483/684
have a sign area of the sum of all areas using the four vertical sides of the smallest cube that will
encompass the sign. See figure 3.
Figure 3.
(5) Sign area measurement. The measurement of sign area to determine compliance with the sign
area limitations of this chapter shall be calculated by enclosing the extreme limits of all framing,
emblem, logo, representation, writing, or other display within a single continuous perimeter
composed of squares or rectangles with no more than eight (8) lines. See figure 4.
Figure 4.
(6) Determining frontage. Frontage shall be determined as shown in figure 5 and figure 6.
Figure 5.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 484/684
Figure 6.
(Ordinance 11-01-04, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 1/4/11; Ordinance 16-03-25, ex. A, adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 70-26 Sign specifications, design and other requirements
(a) Compliance with zoning ordinance, International Building Code, National Electrical Code, and other
ordinances. All sign structures shall comply with the city's comprehensive zoning ordinance, as it currently
exists or may be amended, the International Building Code, the National Electrical Code, and other city
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 485/684
ordinances, as they currently exist or may be amended. If the standards as described herein are more restrictive
than another ordinance or code, then the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
(b) Visibility. All signs shall observe all visibility requirements. Signs shall not be placed within visibility
triangles, corner clips, and V.A.M. (visibility, access, and maintenance) easements as defined in the city's
thoroughfare and circulation design requirements, as it currently exists or may be amended. Signs shall not
create a hazard.
(c) Signs posted in specified areas. Unless otherwise permitted within this chapter, no person shall post or
cause to be posted, attach or maintain any sign upon:
(1) Any city-owned property or right-of-way without written permission of the city manager or
his/her designated representative;
(2) Any utility easement. Should a property owner be able to demonstrate to the city engineer
and/or franchise utility company that there is no other viable location for a sign other than a utility
easement, a sign may be located within the utility easement subject to written approval from the city
engineer and/or franchise utility company and subject to the providing of a letter to the city releasing
the city of any liability for repair or replacement of a sign damaged by work occurring within the
utility easement;
(3) Any tree, utility pole or structure, street sign, rail, or any fence;
(4) Any fence, railing or wall, except in accordance with section regarding wall signs; or
(5) Any sidewalk within the right-of-way or sidewalk easement, curb, gutter, or street, except for
house numbers or fire lane designation.
(d) Signs attached to fire escapes. No sign shall be attached in any manner to any fire escape or to the
supporting members of any fire escape, nor shall it be guyed to or supported by any part of a fire escape.
(e) Accumulation of rainwater. All signs shall be constructed to prevent the accumulation of rainwater in the
sign.
(f) Location near telephone cable, power line, or streetlight. No sign shall be erected nearer than two (2) feet
from any telephone cable, power line or any streetlight standard.
(g) Signs not to block or interfere with exits or windows, or pedestrian and vehicular traffic. No sign shall be
erected to block, partially block, or interfere in any way with a required means of exit from any building nor
with any window. No sign shall block, interfere, or otherwise hinder pedestrian or vehicular traffic on a public
sidewalk, a public thoroughfare, a fire lane easement, or a driveway required to access parking.
(h) Glass signs over public property or pedestrian area. Signs constructed of glass or other materials which
may shatter upon impact are prohibited over a public right-of-way or pedestrian area.
(i) Identification marking required. All signs that require the issuance of a permit after adoption of this chapter
shall have attached, written, or painted in a weatherproof manner and in a conspicuous place thereon, in letters
not less than one (1) inch in height, the date of erection and the sign permit number on the sign.
(j) Assumed wind load for design purposes. For the purposes of design of structural members in signs, an
assumed wind load of twenty (20) pounds per square foot shall be used.
(k) Multiple signs on a property or building. The permitting of a sign on a property or building shall not
preclude the permitting of other types of signs on a property or building, unless the signs are expressly
prohibited herein.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 486/684
(l) Exemptions. Signs located within a building, with the exception of window signs, shall not be regulated by
this chapter.
(Ordinance 11-01-04, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 1/4/11; Ordinance 15-03-14, sec. 2, adopted 3/17/15; Ordinance 16-
03-25, ex. A, adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 70-27 Changeable copy sign requirements
Changeable copy/electronically activated signs shall be permitted subject to the applicable provisions within the
zoning districts in which they are located as well as the following:
(1) Such signs shall display static images for a period of:
a. Three (3) seconds on any sign located within four hundred (400) feet of a freeway or
tollway travel lane, on any sign the illuminated face of which is visible from a freeway travel
lane, or along travel lanes where the speed limit is greater than forty (40) miles per hour; or
b. Three (3) seconds on any other sign.
(2) Variable message signs shall not be animated, flash, travel, blink, fade, or scroll. Variable
message signs shall transition instantaneously to another static image. Each sign message shall be
complete in itself and shall not continue on a subsequent sign message.
(3) In all zoning districts such signs shall come equipped with automatic dimming technology,
which automatically adjusts the sign's brightness based on ambient light. Signs existing prior to
November 1, 2010 shall only be required to include automatic dimming technology upon any
upgrade or retrofit of the existing sign.
(4) Variable message monument signs are permitted to contain time and temperature displays. The
time and temperature shall remain static for not less than three (3) seconds.
(5) Such signs shall not exceed a brightness level of 0.3 footcandles above ambient light as
measured by the guidelines below:
a. At least thirty (30) minutes prior to sunrise or thirty (3) minutes past sunset, use a
footcandle meter to record the ambient light reading for the area. This is done while the digital
sign is off or displaying all black copy.
b. Take a reading using footcandle meter at five (5) feet above grade and one hundred (100)
feet from the sign.
c. The meter shall be aimed directly at the digital sign.
d. Turn the sign on and illuminated entirely in white or red.
e. Take a reading using a meter at five (5) feet above grade and one hundred (100) feet from
the sign.
f. The meter shall be aimed directly at the digital sign.
g. Take the reading from (5) [feet] above and subtract the reading from (2) [feet] above. If the
result is 0.3 footcandles or lower, than the sign is in compliance. If the result is greater than 0.3
footcandles, the sign is out of compliance and must be adjusted to meet standards or turned off
until compliance can be met.
h. All measurements shall be taken in footcandles.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 487/684
(6) Exception. Temporary signs required by government agencies for road and street repairs, public
notifications, traffic control, and similar activities.
Figure 7.
Figure 8.
(Ordinance 11-01-04, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 1/4/11; Ordinance 16-03-25, ex. A, adopted 3/15/16)
Sec. 70-28 Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter, the words below shall have the following definitions, whether or not capitalized
unless the context clearly requires another meaning, ascribed to them and the requirements and regulations set
forth for each shall apply in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 488/684
A-frame sign. A temporary sign used to identify a business name, telephone number, hours of operation, and/or
the business' website address. An A-frame sign is made of two (2) pieces of wood, metal or other similar
material approved by the chief building official connected at the top by hinges or similar device(s) and may
collapse when the connecting device(s) are overextended or the two (2) pieces of wood, metal or other similar
material are against one another. Also commonly-referred to as a “sandwich board sign.”
Abandoned sign. A sign that had a permit, but the permit has been expired for thirty (30) or more consecutive
days and/or does not identify or advertise a bona fide business, lessor, service, owner, product, event, or activity,
or pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer applies. Abandoned signs are prohibited in the city and
its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
Amortization. In terms relevant to signage and urban planning, it conveys the “grace period” beginning on the
date a sign owner is notified that removal of a previously conforming sign has been ordered, and ending on the
date removal is required. This process makes a sign structure, which was legally erected or placed pursuant to
permit, legally nonconforming for a period of time - the amortization period. After the amortization period
expires, the sign becomes illegally nonconforming and must be removed.
Apartment sign. A temporary stake sign made of wood, metal or other similar material approved by the chief
building official used to convey information that relates to the operations of an apartment community or
complex, including advertising for tenants.
Athletic registration sign. A temporary stake sign used to convey sport-related, nonprofit city- based team
registrations (i.e., softball, football, soccer, swimming, golf, tennis, etc.) that publicizes dates, times or locations
of registrations. Athletic registration signs excludes information pertaining to dates, times and/or locations of
scheduled games or award ceremonies.
Audible sign. Any sign that emits music, talking, words, or other sound or amplification. Audible signs are
prohibited in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
Awning. A retractable or nonretractable projection, shelter or structure of rigid or nonrigid canvas, metal, wood,
or other similar material approved by the chief building official that extends above a window, door, patio, or
deck as protection from the weather, used as a decorative embellishment or used for identity, which may be
illuminated. An awning requires the issuance of a building permit prior to installation, unless approved with the
initial building permit.
Awning sign. A permanent sign that is directly applied, attached or painted onto an awning that covers a
pedestrian walkway, intended for protection from the weather or as a decorative embellishment, projecting from
a wall or roof of a structure over a window, walk, door, or the like. An awning sign is used to advertise the name
of the business, logo, hours of operation, business telephone number, business address, and/or website address.
Awning sign attachments. Awning sign attachments that covers a pedestrian walkway are accessory,
supplemental extensions that are attached above or below an awning commonly used in conjunction with a wall
sign. Awning sign attachments provide the name of the business.
Balloons and other floating device(s). A visible airtight or air-flow through apparatus commonly made of latex,
mylar or other similar material that extends by a cord, rope, string, wire or other similar material. No person
shall erect, maintain, or allow the installation of any floating device(s) anchored to the ground, any vehicle,
structure or any other fixed object for the purpose of advertising or attracting attention to a business, commodity,
service, sale, or product, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter. Balloons and all other floating device(s)
are prohibited in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
Banner. A temporary sign having characters, letters, or illustrations applied to plastic, cloth, canvas, or other
light fabric or similar material, with the only purpose of such nonrigid material being for background. A banner
advertises the business' name, opening dates, telephone number, hours of operation, and/or type of products
offered or sold. A banner does not include a municipal banner.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 489/684
Billboard. A sign erected in the outdoor environment for the purpose of the display of commercial or
noncommercial messages not pertinent to the use of products sold on, or the sale or lease of, the property on
which it is displayed. Billboards include any of its support, frame or other appurtenances. Billboards are
prohibited in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
Canopy sign. A sign that is applied, attached, painted or affixed on a canopy or other roof-like cover over
gasoline fuel pumps, vacuum area at car detail facilities, or other areas where services are provided to a patron in
a vehicle intended for protection from the weather or as a decorative embellishment. A canopy sign may contain
only the business' name and/or logo on the canopy band.
Changeable copy/electronically activated message board. A sign whose alphabetic, pictographic, or symbolic
informational content can be changed or altered on a fixed surface composed of electrically illuminated or
mechanically driven changeable segments. These electronic activated changes are allowed in intervals and shall
not have the illusion of movement.
Chief building official. The chief building official or his/her designee or other city-authorized agent appointed by
the city manager.
City manager. The city manager or his/her designee or other city-authorized agent appointed by the city
manager.
Cloud buster balloon and air devices. Any visible airtight or air-flow through, inflatable apparatus that exceeds
one (1) square foot in total area made of latex, mylar, or other similar material that extends higher than ten (10)
feet into the sky by a cord, rope, string, wire, or other similar material. A cloud buster balloon or air device is
commonly used to attract persons to a location having a promotion, sale, or other function. Cloud buster
balloons, blimps, and other air devices are prohibited in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
Commercial real estate sign (CRES). An on-site, temporary sign made of wood, metal or similar material
approved by the chief building official that pertains to the sale or lease of the property where the sign is located.
A CRES shall not be a V-shaped sign. A CRES advertises the name of a building or property for sale or lease,
property owner name, realtor information, telephone number, zoning information, and other information, so long
as such information relates to the sale or lease of nonresidential property.
Developed. A developed property is a nonresidential property for which a certificate of occupancy has been
issued by the chief building official to occupy a building on the property or a residential property for which a
certificate of final acceptance has been issued by the city.
Dilapidated. Any surface element, background, or support of any sign that has finished materials that are
missing, broken, bent, cracked, decayed, dented, harmful, hazardous, illegible, leaning, splintered, ripped, torn,
twisted, or unsightly.
Director. The city director or development services and/or his/her designated representative.
Director of parks and recreation. The city director of parks and recreation and/or his/her designated
representative.
Erect or install. To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, affix, paint, display, apply, assemble or place in
any manner, including but not limited to on the exterior of a building or structure.
Exempt. A sign permit is not a requirement; however, compliance with all other city ordinances and the
comprehensive zoning ordinance, as it currently exists or may be amended, is required.
Feather flag. A wind device that contains a harpoon-style pole or staff driven into the ground for support.
Feather flags are prohibited in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction unless the feather flag is located on a
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 490/684
property with single-family or two-family zoning for which a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the
sole purpose of expressing patriotism or for a celebration or seasonal decoration. See also wind device.
Flag/flagpole. A piece of fabric or other flexible material attached to a ground-supported staff on one end used
as a symbol of a nation, state, political subdivision, or organization.
Garage sale sign. A temporary stake sign used to advertise a garage sale, yard sale, or estate sale at an occupied
residential property that has obtained a certificate of occupancy.
Government community event sign. A temporary stake sign, banner, or other apparatus used to convey
information to the public regarding city-related activities and events (i.e., Operation Clean Sweep, National
Night Out, Daddy-Daughter Dance, Eggstravaganza, and the like).
Graffiti. Pictures, words or slogans, images, or other artwork painted, drawn, scratched or applied in any manner
to exterior walls, fences, structures, vehicles, stone, statues, buildings, or other items in public view. Graffiti
includes the illegal or unauthorized defacing of a building, wall, or other edifice or object by painting, or
otherwise, marking it with words, pictures, or symbols, advertising, logos, relations with a group,
indecent/vulgar images or offensive language(s). Graffiti is prohibited in the city and its extraterritorial
jurisdiction.
Grand opening. A commemoration that promotes the opening of a new business is a grand opening. A grand
opening shall be within one hundred eighty (180) days of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy from the
chief building official. Grand openings after one hundred eighty (180) days after the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy requires approval from the chief building official. A grand opening may only be located at the
business that received a certificate of occupancy from the chief building official. A grand opening shall not
exceed fourteen (14) consecutive days in length.
Grand opening balloon(s) and/or balloon arrangement. A grand opening balloon is a visible airtight, inflatable
apparatus with a maximum of one (1) square foot in total area in various shapes and/or designs made of latex,
mylar, or other similar material approved by the chief building official. A grand opening balloon is customarily a
handheld device with a maximum ten (10) foot in length cord, rope, string, wire or other similar material.
Balloon arrangements are grand opening balloons tied, twisted, or connected in such a manner to design creative
figures, shapes, crescents, and/or other displays.
HOA-neighborhood sign (HOA-NS). A temporary stake sign used to convey residential subdivision board
meetings, announcements, or other subdivision-related events to residents within the subdivision.
Home improvement sign. An on-site temporary stake sign that advertises the name, phone number, website
address, and/or type of construction being performed on the property, such as a roof, fence, pool, paint,
landscape, or other home improvement contractor.
Human sign. A sign held by or attached to a human being who stands or walks on the ground, on-site at a
business location. A human sign also includes a person dressed in costume, for a commercial purpose of
advertising or otherwise drawing attention to an individual, business, commodity, service, activity, or product of
a business.
Illuminated sign. A sign designed or made that consists of lights, LEDs, or other form of illumination that
displays a message or picture that does not scroll, fade, blink, flash, travel, or any other means that does not
provide constant illumination.
Impounded sign. A sign that is legally removed by a city-authorized official, inspector, officer, other city
employee(s) or city-authorized person(s) in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
Inflatable device sign (IDS). A sign manufactured of plastic, cloth, canvas or other flexible or light fabric,
inflated with air, secured to the ground, does not float, and does not exceed thirty (30') feet in height. An IDS
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 491/684
only advertises the opening dates, sale of items offered or sold, date of sale, name of business, telephone
number, and/or website information of a business.
Instructional/informational sign. A sign that provides instruction, information, or direction to the general public.
The sole purpose of an instructional/informational sign is to provide instruction, information, or direction to the
general public that is essential to the health, safety, and public welfare of the community. An
instructional/informational sign shall contain no other message, corporate logo, copy, announcement, or
decoration other than the essential instruction, information or direction and shall not advertise or otherwise draw
attention to an individual, business, commodity, service, activity, or product. Such signs shall include, but are not
limited to, a sign identifying a property address, street address, restrooms, public telephones, handicap parking
spaces, reserved parking spaces, freeze warning, no trespassing, no dumping, no loitering, no soliciting, beware
of warning, water resource information, neighborhood watch informational, lock/take and hide informational,
construction entrance and/or exit signage. Instructional/informational signs erected by the city, local, federal or
state governments for the purpose of public instruction, warnings or other similar hazards, street or highway
designation, traffic control and similar purposes incidental to public interests shall be considered an
instructional/informational sign. An instructional/informational sign will include a sign of a warning, directive or
instruction erected by a public utility company that operates under a franchise agreement with the city and/or
signs required by federal, state or other local authorities.
Kiosk (panel) sign 1(KPS1). A kiosk (panel) sign 1 is a sign placed in the public right-of-way, pursuant to a
written agreement with the city, pursuant to a written agreement with the city, that contains individual panels
and, is generally used to provide direction to residential single-family or two-family subdivisions from major
thoroughfares (“KPS-1”). A KPS1 sign may also provide direction to municipal facilities.
Kiosk (panel) sign 2 (KPS2). A kiosk (panel) sign 2 is a sign placed in the public right-of-way, pursuant to a
written agreement with the city, which contains individual panels and which is generally used to provide
direction to schools, amenities, information centers, community facilities, and neighborhoods within a
residential subdivision (“KPS-2”).
Logo. Any design, insignia or other marking of a company or product, which is used in advertising to identify
the company, business or product.
Menu board sign. A sign erected in conjunction with a use that incorporates a drive-thru or drive- in and
generally used to provide service and/or product options and pricing for patrons who remain in a vehicle.
Merchandise signs and/or display(s). Any goods, wares, and/or merchandise or other advertising object or
structure suspended displayed, suspended, applied, erected, and/or installed from or on any building, or pole,
structure, sidewalk, parkway, driveway, parking area, fuel pump island or its supports, bridge or overpass for the
purpose of advertising such items or attracting patrons. Merchandise signs and/or displays are prohibited in the
city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction, except as specifically allowed by any city ordinance or required by
federal or state law.
Mobile advertisement sign. An operable or inoperable vehicle with illuminated or nonilluminated panels, other
devices, or appendages used to advertise, promote or draw attention to products, services, events, or other
similar purpose. The primary purpose of a mobile advertisement sign is advertising.
Model home sign. A sign used to identify a builder or contractor model house that is open to the public for
inspection by customers and located within a residential district. A model home sign provides a builder's name,
corporate logo, hours of operation, website information, and/or telephone number.
Monument (individual) sign (MIS-1). A sign supported from the grade to the bottom of the sign having or
appearing to have a solid and opaque base and used to identify tenants or name of a business located on the same
lot. If the MIS-1 is in a planned development district, it can also identify tenants or the name of a business within
a planned development or on a separately platted lot within a planned development, if so permitted by the
ordinance creating the planned development district.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 492/684
Monument (internal) signs (MIS-2). A MIS-2 is a sign that is supported from the grade to the bottom of the sign
having, or appearing to have, a solid base and generally used to provide direction to drive-thru lanes, buildings,
and tenants within large multi-tenant retail, multifamily, or office developments.
Monument (unified development) sign (UDMS). A UDMS is a sign that is supported from the grade to the
bottom of the sign having, or appearing to have, a solid base and is used to identify multiple tenants within a
unified development. A UDMS is permissible on a nonresidential zoned property subject to the following
conditions; time, place and manor requirements of section 70-16.
Moving sign. Any sign, sign appendages or apparatus designed or made to move freely in the wind or designed
or made to move by an electrical or mechanical device. Moving signs, and/or any sign appendage that moves,
are prohibited in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
Municipal banner sign. Deleted.
Mural. Pictures or artwork painted, drawn or applied on the exterior walls that does not depict or contain
advertising, logos, or images of a product or service available on-site or off-location. Murals are not used to
advertise products or services offered or sold off-location or on-site.
Neglected sign. A sign that has any missing panels, burned out lights, missing letters or characters, has rust, has
loose parts, has damage, faded from its original color, supports or framework with missing sign or parts, or is not
maintained. Neglected signs are prohibited in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
Neon tubing. A discharge tube containing neon that ionizes and glows with various colors when electric current
is sent through it.
Nonconforming sign. Any sign and its supporting structure that does not conform to all or any portion of this
chapter and was in existence and lawfully erected prior to the effective date of this chapter; and was in existence
and lawfully located and used in accordance with the provision of any prior ordinances applicable thereto, or
which was considered legally nonconforming there under, and has since been in continuous or regular use; or
was used on the premises at the time it was annexed into the city and has since been in regular and continuous
use continuously existed as a nonconforming sign.
Notice. Notice required by this chapter shall be sufficient if it is affected by personal delivery, registered or
certified mail, return receipt requested, by the United States Postal Service and/or posting at premises.
Off-location or off-premises sign. A sign that advertises, promotes, or pertains to a business, person,
organization, activity, event, place, service, product, etc. at a location other than where the business, person,
organization, activity, event, place, service, product, etc. is located. Off-location and off-premises signs are
prohibited in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. A billboard is an example of an off-location or offpremises
sign.
On-site. The property or location on which a business, person, organization, activity, event, place, service,
product, etc. is located.
Open house residential sign (OHRS). One (1) temporary stake sign used to advertise the name of the realtor or
homeowner, phone number, open house address, date, and/or time of an open house.
Original town commercial (OTC) district. The area that consisting of the old town commercial (OTC) district
located beginning on the north side of Ash Street, south of Maple Street, west of North County Road and South
County Road, and east of the Dallas North Tollway, as established by the city's comprehensive zoning ordinance
no. 00-11-01, as it currently exists or may be amended.
Pennant. Any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, whether or not it contains a message of any kind,
suspended from a rope, wire, cord, string or other similar material designed to move in the wind whether
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 493/684
existing in a series or individually. Pennants are prohibited in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
Person. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, company, limited liability company, organization, business
or entity of any kind.
Pole banner. A banner that is mounted on city-owned streetlight poles that do not have a traffic signal affixed to
them, or are not used for distribution of electrical power.
Pole sign. A sign erected on a vertical framework consisting of one (1) or more uprights supported by the
ground. With the exception of the pole signs specifically authorized by this chapter, such as zoning signs and
kiosk (panel) sign, pole signs are prohibited in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
Political sign. A sign that relates to the election of a person to a public office, relates to a political party, relates
to a matter to be voted upon at an election called by a public body, or contains primarily a political message.
Portable sign(s). Any sign designed or intended to be relocated from time-to-time, whether or not it is
permanently attached to a building or structure, or is located on the ground. Portable signs include signs on
wheels or on portable or mobile structures, such as, among other things, trailers, skids, banners, tents or other
portable structures, A-frame signs, T-shaped signs, airborne devices, or other devices used for temporary display
or advertising. Portable signs are prohibited in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction, except as specifically
allowed by other sections of this chapter.
Prohibited light(s)/lights. Lights are any form of light source(s) or lumens, whether by electromagnetic
radiation, flame, reflection, or any other form of lumens that acts upon the retina of the eye and optic nerve that
makes sight possible. Prohibited light(s) are lights that blink, strobe, flash, fade, scroll, or anything other than
stationary or static that attracts the attention of the general public, or causes light pollution or light trespass.
Prohibited light(s) placed in any manner where the light is visible from the exterior of a business or other
nonresidential use facility are prohibited in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. Exception: federal, state
and municipal authorized emergency devices or apparatuses, emergency vehicles, utility repair vehicles, fire and
building code light devices for emergency and/or security purposes, or other required lighting for public safety
purposes are not prohibited and must comply with all applicable ordinances or regulations.
Prohibited signs.
(1) Any sign not referenced in or governed by this chapter;
(2) Any sign erected or installed without the issuance of a permit, either prior to or after the
adoption of this chapter (if a permit was required);
(3) Any sign that emits odor or visible matter;
(4) Any sign erected or installed in or over a public right-of-way or access easement, unless
permitted within this chapter;
(5) Any sign that does not comply with this or other applicable municipal ordinances, or those
which do not comply with federal or state laws;
(6) Any changeable electronic variable message sign (CEVMS) or light emitting diode (LED)
billboards located, relocated, or upgraded along a regulated highway within the corporate limits or
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city; or
(7) Any sign not allowed or defined by this chapter.
Project/development sign (PDS). A temporary sign used to advertise or display contact information of property
owner(s), opening date(s), architect(s), contractor(s), engineer(s), landscape architect(s), and/or financier(s), who
are engaged with the design, construction, improvement or financing of a residential subdivision with homes
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 494/684
under construction within the subdivision to which it pertains or within a commercial project to which it
pertains. PDS is generally constructed of wood, metal or other similar materials approved by the chief building
official. A PDS may include zoning information and advertise residential builders selling homes within a
subdivision. In no case shall a PDS contain information that pertains to off-premises uses.
Projecting sign. A sign attached and projecting out from a building face or wall, generally at a right angle to the
building. A projecting sign advertises the name, telephone number, street address, and/or website information of
a business.
Property. An area of real estate designated as a parcel or lot on a final plat approved by the city and filed with
the county clerk's office, or an unplatted tract of land as shown on an abstract.
Public nuisance. Any sign or similar device that causes annoyance either to a limited number of persons or to
the general public or because of its attraction causes a hazard or dangerous condition.
Public view. Visible from any public right-of-way, city right-of-way, or access easement.
Residential real estate sign (RRES). An on-site, temporary stake sign used to advertise a home or residential
property for sale or lease. A RRES is used to advertise the name of the owner or realtor, telephone number,
property information, and/or website address.
Revolving sign. Any sign that turns, spins, or partially revolves or completely revolves 360 degrees on an axis.
Revolving signs are prohibited in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
Roof sign. A sign mounted on and supported by the roof portion of a building or above the uppermost edge of a
parapet wall of a building and which is wholly or partially supported by such a building or a sign that is painted
directly to or applied on the roof or top of a building or structure. A sign that is mounted on mansard facades,
pent eaves or architectural projections, such as canopies or the fascia (wall) of a building or structure shall not be
considered to be a roof sign. Roof signs are prohibited in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
Roof (secondary) sign. A roof (secondary) sign is a sign that is mounted to or projects from a canopy or
secondary roof over the entry to a building, but does not project above the highest point of the building.
School sign. An on-site temporary stake sign used to convey school registrations, enrollments, open houses,
award ceremonies, PTA meetings, or other school-related events or functions for a city-based public or private
educational facility to where the information pertains. A school sign excludes information pertaining to dates,
times, and/or locations of scheduled athletic games.
Scoreboards. A scoreboard is a structurally engineered sign erected at an athletic field or stadium and which is
generally used to maintain the score or time expired in an event at the field or stadium. This definition includes
signs mounted or applied to the outfield wall within a baseball field.
Searchlight (or skylight). Any apparatus capable of projecting a beam or beams of light. Searchlights (skylights)
are prohibited in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
Sign. Any form of publicity or advertising which directs attention to an individual, business, commodity, service,
activity, event, or product by means of words, lettering, parts of letters, figures, numerals, phrases, sentences,
emblems, devices, trade names or trademarks, or other pictorial matter designed to convey such information and
displayed by means of print, bills, posters, panels, or other devices erected on an open framework, or attached or
otherwise applied to stakes, posts, poles, trees, buildings, or structures or supports. This definition shall also
include any device, fixture, placard, or structure that uses any color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol, or
communicate information of any kind to the public.
Sign ordinance. Chapter 70 of this code, as amended.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 495/684
Snipe/bandit sign. A sign made of any material when such sign is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued, or
otherwise attached to trees, poles, stakes, fences, or other objects, and the advertising matter appearing thereon is
not applicable to the use of the premises upon which such Sign is located.
Stake sign. A temporary sign that does not exceed six (6) square feet in area with a base/stake commonly made
of metal, wood or other similar material approved by the chief building official with an end for driving into the
ground.
Subdivision identity sign. A subdivision identity sign is a sign mounted to a screening wall or engraved into a
masonry block which identifies a residential development or a planned development, whether residential or
noncommercial, and generally refers to the platted name of the subdivision or planned development.
Subdivision monumentation. Subdivision monumentation is a physical improvement such as signs, walls, entry
features or other similar improvements constructed to draw attention to or enhance a subdivision or its
surrounding area.
Temporary construction fence sign. A sign containing graphics, symbols, text or images securely attached to, or
printed directly onto the screening fabric of, a temporary fence or barrier placed around the entire perimeter of
an active construction site that is removed at the conclusion of construction. Such graphics, symbols, text or
images advertise or depict only those businesses, professions, products, services, accommodations and/or
activities that are permitted and planned to be conducted, sold or offered on the premises on which the
temporary fence or barrier is located.
Temporary nuisance sign. Any temporary sign placed in the public right-of-way and/or on public property that is
not otherwise expressly allowed to be located within the public right-of-way and/or public property pursuant to
this chapter.
Temporary religious sign. A temporary stake sign used to provide the name of and direction to a location
occupied by a religious organization or religious group that temporarily operates in a school or other facility. A
temporary religious sign identifies the meeting location/address, website information, hours of service, and/or
telephone number of a religious organization or group.
Temporary sign. Any sign used to display information that relates to a land use, or a sign with a limited duration
which is not rigidly and permanently installed into or on the ground, attached to a building, or as identified in
this chapter.
Traffic lights and signage. Any traffic-related sign, light, apparatus, or device installed that provides information
to vehicular drivers and/or pedestrian traffic. Traffic-related signs, lights, apparatuses, or devices requires
approval from the engineering department, which includes the review and approval of design, size, placement,
and any other specifications or requirements prior to installation from the traffic engineer. Exemption: Signs,
lighting, apparatuses, and/or devices installed or required by federal or state laws.
Undeveloped. An undeveloped residential or nonresidential property for which a certificate of occupancy has not
been issued by the chief building official to occupy a building on the property or for which final acceptance has
not been issued by the city.
Unified development zone. A unified development zone shall consist of multiple lots which were depicted on the
same preliminary site plan, or site plan, and be united through common building architecture, building color, and
building materials, landscaping, access and parking on contiguous parcels.
V-shaped sign. A sign that fronts two (2) street frontages with more than (>) five (5) degrees of parallel.
Vacant building sign. No sign shall be permitted to remain on any vacant building, except a sign pertaining to the
lease or sale of the building to which it pertains, or a sign which is under lease from an owner or his/her
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 496/684
authorized agent when such sign is maintained by a person operating under his/her own bond. Vacant building
signage is prohibited in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
Variance. An official written request to the planning and zoning commission to allow exceptions to regulations
or requirements of this chapter.
Vehicle. Any operable or inoperable motorized machine on wheels, treads, or runners by which any person,
materials, commodity, or property is or may be transported.
Vehicle sign. A sign painted upon or applied directly (to include magnetic, but not signs taped to) to any vehicle,
truck, car, bus, trailer, boat, recreational vehicle, motorcycle or any other vehicle; however, any vehicle, whether
operable or not, shall not be parked and/or decorated where the intent is to use the vehicle as advertising. Vehicle
signs shall exclude bumper stickers and state required registration or inspection stickers/identifications.
Vending machine sign. A sign attached to or incorporated as part of a vending machine or gasoline pump and
generally advertises products dispensed, offered or sold from the vending machine or gasoline pump.
Wall sign. Any sign erected against an exterior wall, erected parallel to a wall or painted directly onto a wall. A
wall sign is a sign painted on or erected parallel to and extending not more than twelve (12) inches from the
facade of any building to which it is attached, supported throughout its entire length by the building face. A wall
sign identifies the name of a business and/or logo of a business or products and services offered by the business.
With approval from the chief building official, a building located within the OTC that contains a maximum wall
height of nine (9) feet and is adjacent to a nonpedestrian traveled way may contain a wall sign at the
nonpedestrian traveled way of a building wall. An approved wall sign installed on a building wall that does not
exceed nine (9) feet in height shall not project greater than one (1) inch from the wall surface. Neon shall not be
installed on any wall sign installed below nine (9) feet from grade. A wall sign may include neon tubing attached
directly to a wall surface when forming a border for the subject matter or when forming letters, logos, or
pictorial designs. This definition shall not include painted on murals. (Please see ‘murals,' above.). Murals are
not subject to the wall sign regulations contained herein. Wall signs are permissible subject to the following
conditions and upon issuance of a sign permit. No building shall have both a wall sign and an awning sign on the
same building face.
Wall sign/multi-story office. Any sign on a building with three or more stories for office use in which the tenant
has no direct outside entrance from the tenant space.
Window sign. Any sign, poster, window slick, or other similar displayed item, excluding banners (see ‘banners'),
located on the internal or external surface of a window for the purpose of advertising a business' name, telephone
number, website information, services, commodities, and/or products offered or sold that are available within the
building that is visible from a public street or sidewalk. A sign applied on or over a window and/or visible
through a window from the exterior of a building is a wall sign.
Wind device. Any pennant, streamer, spinner, balloon, cloud buster balloon, inflatable objects or similar devices
made of cloth, canvas, plastic or any flexible material designed to float or designed to move, or moves freely in
the wind, with or without a frame or other supporting structure, used for the purpose of advertising or drawing
attention to a business, commodity, service, sale or product. Exception: Flags and grand opening balloons and/or
balloon arrangements. Wind device(s) are prohibited in the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
Yard sign. A temporary stake sign used to publicize the arrival of a newborn, participation of a family member in
a school activity or sport, the presence of a security system, animals, seasonal decorations, and other
noncommercial messages.
Zoning sign. A temporary sign erected to publicize a request to zone or rezone a property.
Figure 9. Definition Sign Examples
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 497/684
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 498/684
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 499/684
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 500/684
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 501/684
Figure 10. Approved Open House Community Entrance Sign (OHCES)
(Ordinance 11-01-04, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 1/4/11; Ordinance 11-06-21, sec. 4, adopted 6/7/11; Ordinance 16-
03-25, ex. A, adopted 3/15/16; Ordinance 17-02-10 adopted 2/21/17)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 502/684
CHAPTERS 71–73
RESERVED
CHAPTER 74
SOLID WASTE*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 74-1–74-18 Reserved
ARTICLE II. RECYCLING
Sec. 74-19 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Doublewide enclosure means a refuse enclosure or recycling enclosure with a net enclosure opening of at least
24 feet but not more than 35 feet, 11 inches.
Miscellaneous means all zoning classifications as defined in Ordinance No. 00-11-01, as amended, in their
entirety apply to all references to zoning classifications within this chapter.
Net enclosure opening means the measured distance between inside walls of a refuse enclosure or recycling
enclosure, gates, hinges, mounting hardware, and doorstops shall not infringe upon the minimum net enclosure
opening.
Recyclable material means any re-useable commodity including, but not limited to:
(1) Plastics numbered one through five and seven;
(2) Colored and white (clear) glass;
(3) Aluminum and steel cans;
(4) Newspaper and newsprint;
(5) Magazines;
(6) Telephone books;
(7) White and mixed office paper;
(8) Corrugated cardboard.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 503/684
Recycling container means steel or metallic bin of various sizes used for the collection and short-term storage of
recyclable materials.
Recycling enclosure means a masonry enclosure with a net enclosure opening of at least 12 feet intended to
house a recycling container. All recycling enclosures must have a sign affixed stating “recycling facility” in
three-inch letters.
Refuse dumpster means steel or metallic bin of various sizes used for the collection and short-term storage of
trash and/or refuse.
Refuse enclosure means a masonry enclosure with a net enclosure opening of at least 12 feet intended to house a
refuse dumpster. All refuse enclosures must have a sign affixed stating “refuse facility” in three-inch letters.
Singlewide enclosure means a refuse enclosure or recycling enclosure with a new enclosure opening of at least
12 feet but not more than 23 feet, 11 inches.
Triplewide enclosure means a refuse enclosure or recycling enclosure with a net enclosure opening of at least 36
feet but not more than 45 feet, 11 inches.
(Ordinance 01-02-14, sec. 3, adopted 2/19/01)
Sec. 74-20 Commercial properties required enclosure construction
(a) All commercial properties receiving an approved site plan after the effective date of the ordinance from
which this article is derived and meeting any one or more of the following criteria shall be required to construct
at least one singlewide refuse enclosure and one singlewide recycling enclosure:
(1) A business having 20 or more employees.
(2) A commercial property having in excess of 2,000 square feet of contiguous HVAC space.
(3) A multi-tenant building with centralized refuse collection.
(b) The refuse enclosure and recycling enclosure may be combined into one doublewide or triplewide
enclosure.
(c) All refuse enclosures and recycling enclosures at multifamily properties shall be screened from view on at
least three sides by a masonry wall not less than six feet and not more than ten feet in height, or by an enclosure
within a building. All trash compactor unit enclosures shall be screened from view on at least three sides by a
masonry wall not less than eight feet and not more than ten feet in height, or by an enclosure within a building.
(d) Exterior design of all refuse enclosures and recycling enclosures shall comply with all existing
requirements of the city.
(e) Each refuse enclosure and/or recycling enclosure shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from any
adjacent residential district boundary lines. Trash compactors shall be located a minimum of 150 feet from any
adjacent residential district boundary lines.
(f) Each refuse enclosure and/or recycling enclosure shall be located so as to provide safe and convenient
servicing by refuse and/or recycling agencies using a 15-foot inside turning radius within a 30-foot approach.
The openings or gates of all enclosures are to be angled no more than 30 degrees from the centerline of the solid
waste collection route. Curbs shall not interfere with the collection route of refuse and/or recycling vehicles.
(g) All refuse enclosures and recycling enclosures shall be located a minimum of 30 feet from any and all
traffic and/or pedestrian entrances and exits to the property.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 504/684
(h) Refuse dumpsters and recycling containers must be able to be lifted overhead without obstructions as set
forth herein. Driveway access is required to have a minimum overhead clearance of 14 feet. Refuse enclosures
and recycling enclosures are required to have a minimum overhead clearance of 25 feet.
(i) Gate stops are required on all gates so as to hold back gate doors during servicing of a refuse dumpster
and/or recycling container.
(Ordinance 01-02-14, sec. 4, adopted 2/19/01)
Sec. 74-21 Multifamily properties required enclosure construction
(a) All multifamily properties receiving an approved site plan after the effective date of the ordinance from
which this article is derived and consisting of 30 or more total living units shall construct at least one triplewide
recycling enclosure in addition to constructing appropriate refuse enclosures.
(b) Each refuse enclosure and/or recycling enclosure shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any
residential apartment building and a minimum of 100 feet from any adjacent residential district boundary lines.
Trash compactors shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from any residential apartment building and 150 feet
from any adjacent residential district boundary lines.
(c) All refuse enclosures and recycling enclosures at multifamily properties shall be screened from view on at
least three sides by a masonry wall not less than six feet and not more than ten feet in height, or by an enclosure
within a building. All trash compactor unit enclosures shall be screened from view on at least three sides by a
masonry wall not less than eight feet and not more than ten feet in height, or by an enclosure within a building.
All refuse enclosures and recycling enclosures at multifamily properties shall have an evergreen screen around
the perimeter provided and maintained in a manner to satisfy the city.
(d) Exterior design of all refuse enclosure and recycling enclosure shall comply with all existing requirements
of the city.
(e) Each refuse enclosure and/or recycling enclosure shall be located so as to provide safe and convenient
servicing by refuse and/or recycling agencies using a 15-foot inside turning radius within a 30-foot approach.
The openings or gates of all enclosures are to be angled no more than 30 degrees from the centerline of the solid
waste collection route. Curbs shall not interfere with the collection route of refuse and/or recycling vehicles.
(f) Refuse dumpsters and recycling containers must be able to be lifted overhead without obstructions as set
forth herein. Driveway access is required to have a minimum overhead clearance of 14 feet. Refuse enclosures
and recycling enclosures are required to have a minimum overhead clearance of 25 feet.
(g) Gate stops are required on all gates so as to hold back gate doors during servicing of refuse dumpster
and/or recycling container.
(Ordinance 01-02-14, sec. 5, adopted 2/19/01)
Sec. 74-22 Administration of program
Administration of this article shall be performed by the city manager of the city, or his designee. The city shall
provide assistance in developing a refuse and recycling plan for any property subject to this article within 30
days of receiving a written request from the property owner or his representative. The city may deny the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy if the property does not conform to the specification and requirements of
this article. (Ordinance 01-02-14, sec. 7, adopted 2/19/01)
Sec. 74-23 Penalty provision
Any person, firm, corporation or business entity violating this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction thereof shall be fined a sum not exceeding $2,000.00. Each continuing day's violation under
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 505/684
this article shall constitute a separate offense. The penal provisions imposed under this article shall not preclude
the city from filing suit to enjoin the violation. The city retains all legal rights and remedies available to it
pursuant to local, state and federal law. (Ordinance 01-02-14, sec. 8, adopted 2/19/01)
CHAPTER 75
RESERVED
CHAPTER 76
SPECIAL EVENTS
Sec. 76-1 Purpose
The purposes of this chapter are to facilitate and coordinate the review of special events within the city and to
help ensure citizen and visitor safety by establishing public safety standards for special events. This chapter
focuses on public safety and adherence to local, state and federal laws and provides for special event public
safety equipment, event sanitation and health, medical care and fire rescue, law enforcement, traffic management
and other city services. This chapter enhances the positive image of the city while stimulating economic growth,
supporting tourism and promoting the health, safety and welfare of the city's residents, businesses and visitors.
(Ordinance 19-07-59 adopted 7/2/19)
Sec. 76-2 Definitions
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
City. The City of Frisco, Texas.
Force majeure event. Fire, casualty, strikes, lockouts, labor trouble, inability to procure materials or supplies,
failure of power, governmental authority, inclement weather, acts of God, war or terrorism or the potential or
actual threat thereof, public safety or public welfare considerations, riots, strikes, or local, national or
international emergencies or other reason of a similar nature.
Nonprofit. An association, corporation, company or organization that is not maintained or organized for profit, as
recognized by the state and the federal Tax Code.
Organizer. The person seeking to hold a special event, including the person's employees, agents, affiliates,
successors, permitted assigns and other persons controlled by the organizer.
Person. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind, but does
not include the city or its departments, officials or employees.
Public property. Real property that is owned, leased, operated, maintained or controlled by the city.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 506/684
Public right-of-way. The land owned or controlled by a city, state or political subdivision of the state for the
purposes of providing transportation facilities such as streets, sidewalks or hike-and-bike trails. The public rightof-
way typically extends at least eleven feet from the edge of any public street and includes the sidewalk
adjacent to the street. Any city hike-and-bike trail that is not adjacent to a public street is also contained within
the public right-of-way.
Site plan. A detailed, to scale, diagram of the entire event area identifying all items to be used for the execution
of the event including, but not limited to, parking, proposed street closings, event routes, stages, tents,
concessions, restrooms, structures, electrical items, signage and vendor booth locations.
Special event or event. A preplanned, single gathering or event or series of related, consecutive daily gatherings
or events of an entertainment, cultural, recreational, political, sporting or any other nature, to be held in whole or
in part on public property. For a preplanned, single gathering or event or series of related, consecutive daily
gatherings or events of an entertainment, cultural, recreational, political, sporting or any other nature to be held
wholly on nonpublic property, the gathering or event shall be considered a “special event” under this chapter if
the event or gathering is expected to draw 100 or more people as participants, attendees or spectators, or if the
person promoting or sponsoring the event or gathering requests or requires one or more city services, including
public safety equipment, event sanitation or health, medical care or fire rescue, law enforcement or traffic
management. Special events may include festivals, fundraisers, parades, runs, walks, relays, marathons and
similar events.
Special event permit. The document evidencing approval from the city for a special event.
Special event review committee. A committee composed of city staff members who are appointed by the city
manager or his/her designee and which reviews special event permit applications; performs functions as set forth
in this chapter; procures from organizers clarifications or additional information deemed necessary for the
approval, denial or revocation of special event permits; and takes other actions with respect to events as
authorized by the city manager or his/her designee.
Sponsorship and event development manager. The city employee designated by the city manager who is
responsible for reviewing the initial special event permit application, coordinating meetings between the
organizer and city representatives, collecting special event permit fees, and helping enforce this chapter. The
sponsorship and event development manager shall chair the special event review committee.
Venue. The place or facility where an event is held.
(Ordinance 19-07-59 adopted 7/2/19)
Sec. 76-3 Special event permit applications
(a) A person desiring to hold, sponsor or promote a special event shall apply for a special event permit by
filing a completed special event permit application with the sponsorship and event development manager on the
form provided by the city.
(b) Each special event permit application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in the
amount of $150.00. If the application is submitted fewer than ninety (90) days before the start of the event, an
additional late fee of $150.00 shall be assessed.
(c) The special event permit application must be completed in its entirety. An incomplete special event permit
application will not be accepted by the city.
(d) The special event permit application submittal must include the following information:
(1) Completed special event permit application form;
(2) Application fee;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 507/684
(3) Detailed summary of the event;
(4) Site plan;
(5) Proof of insurance required by this chapter;
(6) Completed park pavilion application or field rental agreement, if applicable;
(7) Prior written approval from the property owner(s) is required if any portion of the event is to be
held on private property; and
(8) The estimated number of participants, attendees and spectators.
(Ordinance 19-07-59 adopted 7/2/19)
Sec. 76-4 Fee exemptions
A special event permit fee shall not be required under this chapter for the following:
(1) An event hosted by the city where the city is the organizer. This does not include events for
which the city is only a sponsor of the event.
(2) An event wholly contained on property specifically designed or suited for the event where the
city has issued a certificate of occupancy for such activity.
(3) A private event held on property not owned by the city in which the public is not invited,
provided that the event does not involve activities or facilities not permitted by applicable zoning
laws.
(4) An event for which the armed forces of the United States of America, the military forces of the
state or a political subdivision of the state is the organizer.
(Ordinance 19-07-59 adopted 7/2/19)
Sec. 76-5 Attendance estimates
For purposes of this chapter, attendance estimates by the special event organizer, including those required by
section 76-3, shall be accompanied by a written statement for the basis of the estimate. Each estimate shall be
based upon all the relevant factors known at the time, including past attendance at similar events or functions
having the same or similar elements, both in the city and in comparable communities; the price of admission;
and the extent of advertising and promotion contemplated. The special event review committee shall accept the
organizer's attendance estimate representation unless it clearly appears to the special event review committee
from the written statements that the estimate is understated. In such instance, the special event review committee
shall substitute an estimate for that of the special event organizer. (Ordinance 19-07-59 adopted 7/2/19)
Sec. 76-6 Approval of application
(a) The special event review committee shall issue a special event permit as provided for in this chapter when,
from a consideration of the organizer's complete special event permit application and such other information as
may otherwise be obtained, the special event review committee finds that:
(1) The application allows for ample opportunity to properly plan and prepare for the special event;
(2) Police, fire, other city services or the city's residents will not be unduly burdened or adversely
affected by the conduct of the special event;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 508/684
(3) The conduct of the special event is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property,
to provoke disorderly conduct or to create a disturbance;
(4) The conduct of the special event will meet the requirements of the city for the safe and orderly
movement of other pedestrian or vehicular traffic contiguous to its route or location;
(5) The conduct of the special event will not require the diversion of so great a number of city
police officers to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent
normal police protection of the city;
(6) The concentration of persons, animals or vehicles at the special event will not unduly interfere
with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such special
event areas;
(7) Adequate sanitation and other required health facilities are or will be made available in or
adjacent to any public assembly areas;
(8) The organizer has secured police, fire and medical protection based on the standards in this
chapter and as required by the city;
(9) No event is scheduled elsewhere in the city where the police, fire or medical resources required
for that event are so great that the deployment of public safety services for the proposed event would
have an immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons and property; and
(10) The special event review committee is aware of no other information that would prevent it
from making a fair determination that a permit should be issued.
(b) The special event review committee shall grant or deny the special event permit application no fewer than
thirty (30) days prior to the start of the event or as soon as reasonably practicable after submission of the special
event permit application.
(Ordinance 19-07-59 adopted 7/2/19)
Sec. 76-7 Permits required
A person commits an offense if the person engages, participates, aids or commences in a special event within the
city without first making a complete, written application for and receiving a special event permit from the city
where a permit is required under this chapter.
(1) Issuance of a special event permit does not authorize the removal or alteration of public
property. Any such removal or alteration is strictly prohibited except as expressly allowed in writing
by the sponsorship and event development manager or other authorizing official.
(2) In addition to complying with all conditions of the permit and all applicable city ordinances,
regulations, rules, policies and guidelines, the organizer must comply with all applicable federal,
state, county and local laws, rules and regulations. It is the responsibility of the organizer to obtain all
permits necessary to conduct the event and all permits required by other governmental authorities
shall be obtained and adhered to.
(3) Special event permits are organizer- and location-specific. An organizer may not, and shall
have no authority to, assign, sell, transfer, pledge, encumber or otherwise convey the permit or any
rights, duties, responsibilities or obligations thereunder, and no permit may be transferred from place
to place. Any such assignment or transfer shall be null and void and may, in the discretion of the city,
result in the revocation of the permit.
(4) No rights granted by a permit shall create rights in any person other than the permittee.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 509/684
(Ordinance 19-07-59 adopted 7/2/19)
Sec. 76-8 Permit conditions
(a) Within thirty (30) days before the event, the organizer shall submit a final site plan, route and/or map that
addresses all comments and recommendations made by the special event review committee.
(b) The special event review committee may require the organizer to obtain licenses and permits required by
other city ordinances or applicable law, restrictions, regulations, cost for city services, safeguards and other
conditions necessary for the safe and orderly conduct of a special event.
(c) The special event review committee shall provide the sponsorship and event development manager the
estimated cost for city services provided by the respective city departments to ensure the safe and orderly
conduct of the special event. The sponsorship and event development manager shall prepare and provide the
organizer with a detailed estimate identifying these costs. The organizer shall pay the estimated costs in full not
fewer than seven (7) days before the start of the special event. Failure to pay such costs shall be grounds for
denial or revocation of the permit. If the actual costs for city services are less than estimated, the city will issue a
refund to the organizer no fewer than thirty (30) days after the special event. If actual costs for city services are
more than estimated provided, the city will invoice the organizer, with payment due within thirty (30) days of
the date of the invoice.
(Ordinance 19-07-59 adopted 7/2/19)
Sec. 76-9 Denial, cancellation or revocation of permit
(a) The special event review committee may deny a special event permit if:
(1) The organizer fails to comply with any of the terms or conditions of this chapter or any other
city ordinance, rule or regulation;
(2) The organizer fails to timely submit a complete special event permit application;
(3) The organizer fails to pay the required special event permit fee;
(4) The organizer fails to adequately plan and provide for:
a. The protection of event participants;
b. Maintenance of public order in and around the special event location;
c. Crowd security, taking into consideration the size and character of the event;
d. Emergency vehicle access; or
e. Safe, sanitary conditions for preparation or operation of food concessions.
(5) The organizer makes a false statement of material fact on the special event permit application;
(6) The event would substantially interfere with any other event for which a permit has already
been granted, or substantially interfere with the provision of public safety or other city services in
support of such other previously-scheduled event or events, or have an unmitigatable adverse impact
upon residential or business access and traffic circulation in the area in which it is to be conducted;
(7) The event would conflict with previously planned programs organized and conducted by the
city and previously scheduled for the same time and place;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 510/684
(8) The event would present an unreasonable danger to the health or safety of the organizer, other
users of the venue, city employees or the public;
(9) The conduct of the event is prohibited by law, by this code and ordinances of the city;
(10) The conduct of the event would substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of
aerial navigation, public transportation or other vehicular and pedestrian traffic in the area of the
event; or would cause irresolvable conflict with construction or development on city property or at a
venue where the event is held; or will close streets or unreasonably restrict the number of traffic lanes
during peak commuter hours on weekdays so as to cause unsafe conditions for the public; or the
expected attendance at the event will exceed the lawful capacity of the venue under the city's fire
code; or the parking available at the venue will be inadequate to accommodate the expected
attendance at the event;
(11) The organizer fails to provide proof that the organizer possesses or is able to obtain all
licenses and permits required by this chapter and other city ordinances or other applicable law for the
conduct of all activities included as part of the special event;
(12) The organizer has had a special event permit revoked within the preceding twelve months or
the organizer has committed two or more violations of a condition or provision of a special event
permit or this chapter within the preceding twelve months;
(13) The organizer fails to pay any outstanding costs owed to the city for past special events;
(14) The organizer fails to provide payment due for city services associated with the event no
fewer than seven (7) days before the start of the event;
(15) The organizer is not legally competent to contract;
(16) The organizer publicly promotes the event before approval of the event permit application;
(17) The organizer makes unauthorized use of the city logo or other intellectual property.
(b) The city may postpone, cancel, suspend or close any special event or revoke a permit for any force
majeure event. The city shall have no liability for such postponement, cancellation, suspension or closure.
(c) The city may revoke a permit at any time due to the failure of the organizer to comply with any of the
terms or conditions of the special event permit, this chapter or any other city ordinances, rules or regulations.
(d) The failure of the city to revoke a permit or to exercise any right, power or authority under this chapter
shall not constitute a waiver of the terms or conditions of the permit, this chapter or any other city ordinances,
rules or regulations and shall not affect the rights of the city to enforce the same against any other person or a
subsequent breach by the organizer.
(e) The revocation of a permit does not prohibit the city from exercising any and all additional rights and
remedies available by law or equity against the organizer for failure to comply with the terms and conditions of
the permit, or other city ordinances, rules or regulations.
(f) The city may revoke a permit if the special event deviates from the approved timeline as determined by the
special event review committee, the city manager or his/her designee.
(Ordinance 19-07-59 adopted 7/2/19)
Sec. 76-10 Appeals
(a) Review by sponsorship and event development manager.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 511/684
(1) Any organizer who is denied a special event permit or who has had a special event permit
revoked or was assessed fees or costs pursuant to this chapter (an “appellant”) may, within five (5)
business days of the service of notice of such determination, file a written appeal from such
determination with the sponsorship and event development manager.
(2) An appellant may appeal the permit fee or other applicant requirement or cost established by or
assessed under this chapter if the applicant demonstrates that the event proposed is exclusively or
primarily for speech or other expressive activity protected by the First Amendment to the United
States Constitution and that the application of the permit fee or other expense is unreasonably
burdensome or cannot be met due to insolvency or indigence.
(3) The sponsorship and event development manager shall have five (5) business days from the
date on which the appeal was received in which to serve upon the appellant a notice that the action
appealed from was affirmed, modified or reversed.
(4) The notice to appellant shall be deemed served upon the appellant when it is personally
delivered or when it is sent by email or United States mail, with proper postage prepaid, to the name
and address set forth on the application for permit.
(b) Form of appeals. Any appeals filed pursuant to this chapter shall state succinctly the grounds on which it is
asserted that the action should be modified or reversed and shall be accompanied by copies of the application for
permit, the written notice of the determination of the city and any other papers material to the determination.
(c) Final decision. The appellant, within five (5) business days after denial or modification of his or her appeal
by the sponsorship and event development manager, may appeal that denial to the city manager for a final
decision based on the documents and circumstances presented within five (5) business days of receiving the
appeal. Judicial review of any such final decision may be obtained through the filing of an appropriate action
with a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ordinance 19-07-59 adopted 7/2/19)
Sec. 76-11 Street closure plan
(a) Certain streets within the city may be temporarily closed to limit or exclude vehicular or pedestrian traffic
before, during or after a special event. An organizer requesting one or more street closures for a special event
shall submit for approval a street closure plan showing the layout of all barricades, traffic-control devices and
signs as part of the permit application. The special event review committee shall consider such request in
evaluating the application and may require additional or fewer street closures. Some street closures may require
the organizer to obtain the consent of businesses, property owners or other persons in the area. Should street
closures be approved, the city shall supervise the placement of all barricades and signs placed on public streets
or other public rights-of-way.
(b) The city's traffic engineering division shall determine the type and number of traffic-control devices
required to close a public street or other public right-of-way. Such traffic-control devices shall meet the
standards of the then-current Texas Manual of Uniform Traffic-Control Devices.
(c) The city's traffic engineering division may require the use of electronic changeable message signs to direct
event and nonevent traffic on major roadways.
(d) Electronic changeable message signs shall be used within the public right-of-way when road closure or
special parking situations require them. Such signage shall not be used to identify or promote an event.
(e) Any event equipment or other property that is permitted to be located within the public right-of-way during
the event shall be removed in a timely manner to facilitate the reopening of a closed street as soon as possible.
For races and rallies, equipment and other property shall be removed as soon as the last participant passes that
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 512/684
point of route. For other events, the organizer shall start removing equipment and other property no later than the
advertised end time of the event. The organizer shall prioritize removing equipment and other property that is in
the public right-of-way before taking down equipment or other property in other areas.
(Ordinance 19-07-59 adopted 7/2/19)
Sec. 76-12 Parking
(a) The organizer is responsible for making appropriate parking arrangements for the special event in
accordance with the city's special event parking ordinance (sections 90-155–90-165 of this code), as it currently
exists or is amended in the future.
(b) The organizer is responsible for obtaining and submitting written verification from all owners of property
on which parking for the special event will be made available, evidencing that they have agreed to allow their
property to serve some or all of the event's parking needs.
(c) Each required accessible/handicapped parking space affected by the event must be temporarily replaced
using one or more spaces outside the event area that is as close as feasible to the entrance to the establishment.
Such temporary spaces must meet all then-current ADA/TAS requirements.
(d) Remote parking and shuttle routes must be submitted with the proposed site plan for the event and
approved by special event review committee.
(Ordinance 19-07-59 adopted 7/2/19)
Sec. 76-13 Special events in city parks
All special events taking place in a city park must complete a parks rental application and pay applicable rental
fees. All events are subject to a use fee depending on the scope and size of event. Please refer to chapter 58 of
this code. (Ordinance 19-07-59 adopted 7/2/19)
Sec. 76-14 Police/security services
(a) Sufficient security measures will be solely approved by the city.
(b) If required, the city police department will have final say on the number of security personnel needed for
the event and the manner in which they are deployed.
(c) The city police department may require the organizer to deploy certain security measures during the event
at the expense of the organizer.
(d) The city shall maintain a fee schedule for personnel and guidelines for the timeliness and method of
payment.
(Ordinance 19-07-59 adopted 7/2/19)
Sec. 76-15 Fire/emergency medical services
(a) Fire and emergency medical services for special events shall be provided by the city fire department,
unless specific provisions are authorized by the fire chief in accordance with the city's emergency medical
services and private ambulances ordinance (sections 38-191–38-203 of this code), as it currently exists or is
amended in the future. Prior to the issuance of a special event permit, the organizer must coordinate with the
city's fire department to discuss the specific needs of each event and make arrangements to retain the services of
the city's fire department personnel. The city shall have final say as to the extent of the services required to
properly serve the special event.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 513/684
(b) Venues that are specifically designed for events and that hold a certificate of occupancy for such activity
are required to enter in to a service agreement with the city for police, fire and emergency medical services.
Provisions of such agreements shall include:
(1) Compensation of personnel as employees of the venue;
(2) Worker's compensation or employer's liability insurance through the venue's insurance
provider;
(3) Hourly rates for services determined by the city; and
(4) Adherence to city medical direction protocols.
(Ordinance 19-07-59 adopted 7/2/19)
Sec. 76-16 Fireworks and pyrotechnic displays
An event with a firework display must coordinate permit approval through the city's fire department prior to the
issuance of a special event permit for such event. (Ordinance 19-07-59 adopted 7/2/19)
Sec. 76-17 Trash and recycling services
(a) Green event. An event in excess of 100 estimated attendees shall be designated as a “green event.” The
organizer of a green event shall provide recycling and trash services. The organizer of all other events shall
provide for trash services. An event with fewer than 100 estimated attendees may, at the organizer's request, be
designated as a “green event” and all requirements applicable to a green event shall apply.
(b) Trash services. The organizer shall be responsible for the procurement, distribution and placement of cityapproved
trash receptacles for the storage and collection of trash. The number of required trash receptacles for
use at the event shall be determined, before the event, by the environmental services manager or his/her
designee. Organizer shall arrange for trash services to be provided by the city's contracted commercial service
provider(s). All costs associated with this service shall be the sole responsibility of the organizer. Pricing may
vary according to the event needs.
(c) Recycling services. The organizer shall be responsible for the procurement, distribution and placement of
city-approved recycling receptacles for the storage and collection of recyclables, including plastic bottles,
aluminum and steel cans, glass, cardboard and paper products (i.e. fliers, brochures). The number of recycling
receptacles for use at the event shall be determined, prior to the event, by the environmental services manager or
his/her designee. Arrangements for the recycling service shall be provided by the city's contracted commercial
service provider. All costs associated with this service shall be the sole responsibility of the organizer. Pricing
may vary according to the event needs. Recyclables must be transported to a city-approved materials recovery
facility for sorting and processing.
(d) Set up and take down. The organizer shall be responsible for the set up and placement of carts for the
event. The organizer is also responsible for moving carts to predetermined, designated area(s) at the conclusion
of event for collection by the city's contracted providers.
(e) Prior approval. The organizer shall submit a written plan, outlining trash and recycling services and their
implementation, to the city's environmental services manager or his/her designee for review no fewer than thirty
(30) days before the start of the event. In the event that said plan fails to meet city requirements, the
environmental services manager or his/her designee reserves the right to require further trash/recycling
provisions. Failure to comply with recommendations may result in the denial, cancellation or revocation of the
special event permit.
(Ordinance 19-07-59 adopted 7/2/19)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 514/684
Sec. 76-18 Food
All temporary food establishments, including caterers, at special events must be approved by the city's health
and food safety division. Temporary food establishments must obtain a health permit from the city's health and
food safety division no fewer than thirty (30) days before the start of the event and pay any required fees,
including late fees, applicable for temporary health permits. Refer to the city's temporary food establishment
health ordinance (sections 22-19–22-26 of this code), as it currently exists or is amended in the future.
(Ordinance 19-07-59 adopted 7/2/19)
Sec. 76-19 Alcohol
The sale and distribution of alcohol at a special event must be coordinated with the city secretary's office prior to
the issuance of a special event permit for such event, and must comply with city's alcohol permit requirements
and other applicable state and local laws, ordinances and regulations. (Ordinance 19-07-59 adopted 7/2/19)
Sec. 76-20 Restroom facilities
(a) The organizer shall provide ample restroom facilities for the event. If the event site does not provide
sufficient permanent restroom facilities, the organizer shall arrange for a sufficient number of portable restrooms
to be on site.
(b) Restrooms shall be located in close proximity to the event site or venue.
(c) Portable restrooms shall be delivered no earlier than 24 hours before the start of the event and shall be
removed from the site no more than 24 hours after the conclusion of the event. Failure to remove portable
restrooms within this time period may result in additional fees.
(d) Portable restrooms shall comply with all applicable requirements under the American Disabilities Act, as
it exists or may be amended.
(Ordinance 19-07-59 adopted 7/2/19)
Sec. 76-21 Noise
The organizer shall be responsible for ensuring that the event complies with all applicable provisions of the city's
noise ordinance at all times. Failure to comply with a requirement from the city's police department concerning
noise may result in the immediate revocation of the special event permit and/or prosecution under applicable
law. (Ordinance 19-07-59 adopted 7/2/19)
Sec. 76-22 Signs
(a) All signs used to advertise, promote or provide information relating to a special event must comply with all
then-current applicable ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city.
(b) Written permission from the city must be obtained prior to placing signs/inflatables on public property.
The design of signs placed on public property must be approved by the city. Signs placed on public property
must be designed and constructed such that they do not leave adhesive residue on property when removed.
Inflatable signs promoting special events are permitted on property hosting event; however, inflatables must be
anchored to the ground - not a building or other structure. Staking signs deeper than 12 inches is prohibited.
Please refer to the city's sign ordinance.
(c) Permanent existing signs may not be removed.
(d) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no signs, banners, streamers, lights, vehicles,
balloons, inflatables or any other materials or devices advertising, promoting or providing information relating
to the event may be displayed on or within public right-of-way.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 515/684
(Ordinance 19-07-59 adopted 7/2/19)
Sec. 76-23 Electrical services
A licensed electrician who is registered with the building inspections division and permitted to work in the city
must perform any electrical work for or relating to the event. A permit shall be required for new electrical work
and temporary generators for special events. (Ordinance 19-07-59 adopted 7/2/19)
Sec. 76-24 Tents and temporary structures
Tents that are 400 square feet and greater require a tent permit. A tent permit application and flame-retardant
certificate must be submitted in connection with a special event permit application. If the cooking of food is to
occur under a tent, a certificate of flame retardancy is required even if a tent permit is not required. Refer to the
city's fire code for specific requirements regarding tents and other membranes. (Ordinance 19-07-59 adopted
7/2/19)
Sec. 76-25 Required insurance
(a) The organizer of an event to be held in whole or in part on public property, as well as all contractors and
subcontractors performing work on public property for or on behalf of the organizer in connection with the
event, shall procure and maintain insurance at their own expense for and during the event, including its setup
and teardown. All such insurance and certificates of insurance shall contain the following provisions:
(1) Name the city, its officers, agents, representatives and employees as additional insureds as to all
applicable coverage. Such coverage shall be primary to all other coverage the city may possess.
(2) Provide for a waiver of subrogation against the city for injuries, including death, property
damage or any other loss to the extent the same is covered by the proceeds of insurance. All
insurance policies that are required to name the city as an additional insured must be endorsed to read
as primary and noncontributory coverage regardless of the application of other insurance.
(b) All insurance companies providing the required insurance shall be authorized to transact business in the
state and rated at least “A-” by AM Best or other equivalent rating service.
(c) A certificate of insurance evidencing the required insurance shall be submitted at least ten (10) business
days before the start of the event. The event is subject to cancellation without the required insurance.
(d) Type and amount of insurance required: General liability insurance for personal injury (including death)
and property damage with a minimum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence and two million
dollars ($2,000,000.00) aggregate, including coverage for advertising injury and products coverage.
(Ordinance 19-07-59 adopted 7/2/19)
Sec. 76-26 Reimbursable costs
The organizer shall be required to pay the city for certain costs and expenses incurred by the city for activities
associated with the event, including the following:
(1) Utility services provided to the special event, including all the costs of installation,
maintenance and connection;
(2) Barricades and traffic cones;
(3) Electronic changeable message signs;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 516/684
(4) Repair, maintenance and removal of real property, facilities, equipment and other property
damaged during the course of the event in the event of a failure of organizer to do so;
(5) Repair of public right-of-way, parks and other public property damaged during the course of
the event;
(6) Police protection;
(7) Fire protection;
(8) Emergency medical service;
(9) Trash and recycling disposal and cleanup;
(10) Traffic control; and
(11) Other direct costs associated with the special event.
(Ordinance 19-07-59 adopted 7/2/19)
Sec. 76-27 Offenses; penalties
(a) A person commits an offense if the person commences or conducts a special event:
(1) Without a special event permit, where a permit is required under this chapter;
(2) In violation of any provision of a special event permit, this chapter or any other city ordinance
or applicable law, rule, standard or regulation; or
(3) That makes unauthorized use of the city logo or other intellectual property.
(b) A person who commits an offense under this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and on
conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) if the violation
relates to zoning, the public health, sanitation or dumping of refuse, otherwise the fine shall be in an amount not
exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). A violation of any provision of this chapter or a requirement of a
special event permit shall constitute a separate violation for each calendar day in which it occurs. The penal
provisions imposed under this section shall not preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin the violation. The city
retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law.
(Ordinance 19-07-59 adopted 7/2/19)
Sec. 76-28 Chapter cumulative
The provisions in this chapter are cumulative of all city ordinances. Except as provided in this chapter, parade
permits, park permits, building permits, electrical permits, food establishment permits, amplification permits,
alcoholic beverage licenses and all other permits and licenses required by ordinance or other law for specific
activities to be conducted in conjunction with or as part of the special event permit must be applied for
separately in accordance with the applicable ordinance or other law. The sponsorship and event development
manager shall receive and coordinate applications for any city-issued permit or license required in addition to
the special event permit. (Ordinance 19-07-59 adopted 7/2/19)
CHAPTER 77
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 517/684
RESERVED
CHAPTER 78
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 78-1 Thoroughfare and circulation design standards
Ordinances concerning the establishment of engineering design standards and construction design requirements
in effect at the time of adoption of this Code, as amended, are incorporated by reference as if set forth herein.
Sec. 78-2 Construction standards for paving and drainage facilities
Ordinances concerning general construction standards for paving and drainage facilities, in effect at the time of
adoption of this Code, as amended, are incorporated by reference as if set forth herein.
Sec. 78-3 Exclusive control of streets
No entity, including other political subdivisions of the state, may extend a street into the city's corporate limits or
connect a street to an existing city street without the prior written approval of the city council. This section shall
not apply to any state or federal designated roadways or the city's construction of or improvements to the city's
own roadways. This section also shall not apply to existing roads being rebuilt, expanded or realigned by another
city with city financial participation as defined in a council approved interlocal agreement with that other city.
(a) Application to extend street or connect to existing city street. To be eligible for city council
approval for the extension of a street into the city's corporate limits or connection to an existing city
street (the “proposed street(s) and/or connection(s)”) an application must first be filed with the
director of engineering services on a form supplied by the city. The following shall be attached to or
incorporated within the application:
(1) A schematic showing the proposed street(s) and/or connection(s);
(2) A schematic showing at least one alternative route for the proposed street(s) and/or
connection(s);
(3) A summary explaining why the proposed street(s) and/or connection(s) is needed and will
benefit the city and the region;
(4) A statement of the method by which the applicant shall:
a. Coordinate public and private investment in the proposed street(s) and/or
connection(s);
b. Minimize conflicts between land uses;
c. Influence and manage the development of property that would foreseeably use the
proposed street(s) and/or connection(s);
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 518/684
d. Increase the benefits and cost-effectiveness of the public investments;
e. Predict infrastructure and service needs in advance of demand; and
f. Ensure that adequate community facilities and public infrastructure are available and
located to best serve the needs of the city and the region.
(5) Complete engineering plans for the design and construction of the proposed street(s)
and/or connection(s), in accordance with the requirements of all city ordinances;
(6) A study, which demonstrates, to city council's satisfaction, that the proposed street(s)
and/or connection(s) will not adversely affect the health, safety and general welfare of the
citizens of the city and will provide reasonable protection to properties within the city that will
be impacted by the additional traffic projected to come into the city by virtue of the proposed
street(s) and/or connection(s). This study shall consider and discuss the impact of the proposed
street(s) and/or connection(s) at the date of application, through the construction phases, up
until the ultimate build-out of both private and public development in the area;
(7) A traffic impact study proposed, prepared by a licensed professional engineer in the State
of Texas, which shall determine the effect that the of street(s) and/or connection(s) into the
city's transportation system will have on the city's existing and planned streets, including, but
not limited to, the projected level of service that will occur on city streets and intersections, the
mobility and access of traffic on the city streets, any bottleneck considerations, whether the
projected traffic is consistent with adjacent land uses through which traffic will pass, and
whether the projected traffic is consistent with the city's comprehensive plan. These impacts
must be quantified. The traffic impact study shall also include an arterial and intersection
analysis and must use the city's most current transportation computer model;
(8) Payment of the application fee, which shall be the same as the amount required for a
planned development zoning change. The applicant shall also deposit with the city $10,000.00
to be used for direct and indirect expenses in reviewing the application. Any of those deposited
funds not expended for review shall be refunded to the applicant after city council has made a
final decision relating to the application;
(9) Any other information that the director of engineering services deems necessary.
(b) Incomplete applications. Any application that does not provide all of the required information
or documents as set forth in this section, shall be deemed incomplete and returned to the applicant.
Rights under V.T.C.A., Local Government Code sec. 245 shall not vest for any incomplete
application that is returned. If the applicant resubmits the application with/without additional
information, that resubmitted application shall be treated as a completely new application.
(c) Staff review. Within 30 business days of receiving a complete application and before the
application may be placed on any planning and zoning commission or city council agenda for
consideration, the director of engineering services or his/her designee shall hold a staff review
conference with the applicant, where the city may ask for additional information from the applicant
regarding the proposed street(s) or connection(s). Within 30 additional business days of receiving all
of the additional information requested at the staff review conference, the director of engineering
services shall place the application on an agenda for the next planning and zoning commission
meeting. The director of engineering services shall also prepare a written report that advises planning
and zoning commission and city council about any concerns he/she may have regarding the
application and the proposed street(s) and/or connection(s).
(d) Public hearing. The planning and zoning commission and the city council shall consider the
application in a public hearing after publishing notice as required for zoning cases. The planning and
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 519/684
zoning commission will recommend and the city council will determine whether the proposed
street(s) and/or connection(s) promote the general health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the
City of Frisco. In making this determination, the planning and zoning commission and the city
council may consider all of the information incorporated in or attached to the application as well as
the impact that the proposed street(s) and/or connection(s) would have on traffic, mobility, land uses,
property values, the city's transportation system, the city's budget, the comprehensive plan, the
thoroughfare plan, and any other information the planning and zoning commission and/or the city
council deems relevant. City council may approve or reject the application as submitted. The city
shall not approve a proposed street or connection until sufficient remedial measures have been
provided for by the applicant to address the impacts that the proposed street(s) and/or connection(s)
will have on the city's transportation system. Such remedial measures are listed in subsection (e)(3).
Remedial measures shall not be required for city-sponsored or city-initiated projects relating to the
construction or improvement of the city's own roads.
(e) Remedial payments and mitigation.
(1) Pursuant to the city's police powers existing under its charter and consistent with the
Texas Constitution, Article XI, sec. 5, the applicant shall provide sufficient funds or
contributions to offset the impact directly attributable and roughly proportional to the proposed
street(s) and/or connection(s).
(2) The city may require the execution of a development agreement setting forth any and all
remedial measures by the city.
(3) Remedial measures may include, but are not limited to:
a. The applicant's payment of funds necessary for the city to upgrade its existing city
streets to handle the adverse impacts caused by the proposed street(s) and/or connection(s)
on the city's transportation system. This may include capacity improvements to existing
roadways located within the city; and
b. The applicant's acquisition of right-of-way (at their own cost) on streets already
existing in the city in order to accommodate the additional traffic generated by the
proposed street(s) and/or connection(s); and
c. The applicant's installation (at their own cost) of traffic signals, signs, and other
traffic control devices for movement and safety of traffic when such signals, signs, and
traffic control devices are necessitated by and attributable to the proposed street(s) and/or
connection(s).
(4) The applicant shall be required to reimburse the city for any and all costs and expenses
relating to required dedications, capacity improvements, roadway improvements such as turn
lanes and signal timings, when such costs and expenses are necessitated by and attributable to
the proposed street(s) and/or connection(s).
(5) The applicant shall be responsible for the construction of any extension, modification,
and/or completion of city streets shown on the thoroughfare plan, when such extension,
modification, and/or completion are necessitated by and attributable to the proposed street(s)
and/or connection(s). If such construction is deemed impractical by the city, then the applicant
shall provide sufficient escrow funds to the city in lieu of the construction, modification, and/or
completion of such city streets.
(f) Engineering and permitting after approval. If city council approves the application, no proposed
street(s) and/or connection(s) may be constructed unless the applicant gets approval of their
engineering plans by the director of engineering services. The applicant shall schedule a
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 520/684
preconstruction meeting with the director of engineering services. The director of engineering
services shall approve the engineering plans if:
(1) The applicant submits to the city plans and schematics that show that the proposed
street(s) and/or connection(s) shall be constructed in accordance with the general design
standards of the city, and all other applicable codes and ordinances of the city, from the point of
touching the existing roadway to the city limits or the end of the radius of the curb return
outside the city, whichever is further; and
(2) The applicant submits to the city plans and schematics that show that the proposed
street(s) and/or connection(s) will include the required paving, curbs, and gutters, for the entire
length and width of the proposed street(s) and/or connection(s); and
(3) The applicant pays a $1,500.00 inspection deposit to pay for the city's cost of inspecting
the construction of the proposed street(s) and/or connection(s). Inspection of construction shall
be at an hourly rate of $50.00. The inspection deposit shall be used to pay for inspection of
construction. Any funds not expended shall be refunded to the applicant after the street and/or
connection is approved and accepted by the city. Any additional fees shall be the responsibility
of the applicant. Streets and connections that will have to be maintained by the city upon
completion shall be subject to the same inspection fees as defined in the subdivision ordinance;
and
(4) The applicant submits to the city a good and sufficient maintenance bond with a reputable
and solvent corporate surety registered with the State of Texas, in favor of the city, to indemnify
the city against any repairs, which may become necessary to any part of the construction work
performed in connection with the proposed street(s) and connection(s), arising from defective
workmanship or materials used therein. The maintenance bond shall cover a full period of two
years from the date of final acceptance of the entire project relating to the proposed street(s)
and/or connection(s). The bond shall cover 100 percent of the value of the work to be done in
constructing the proposed street(s) and/or connection(s). Final acceptance by the city will be
withheld until said maintenance bond is furnished to the city attorney for approval.
(g) Final approval rights. Upon completion of construction of the proposed street(s) and/or
connection(s) (“the project”), the applicant shall submit as-built drawings to the city. The city shall
then inspect the project, and shall have the right to reject the project if the construction fails to meet
the requirements set forth in this section and any related development agreements adopted pursuant
to this section. The city shall not unreasonably withhold approval and acceptance of the project.
(h) Penalty. Any person, firm, corporation or entity violating this section shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined a sum not exceeding $500.00. Each
continuing day's violation under this section shall constitute a separate offense. The penal provisions
imposed under this section shall not preclude Frisco from filing suit to enjoin the violation. Frisco
retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law.
(Ordinance 08-08-77, sec. 2, 3, adopted 8/19/08)
Secs. 78-4–78-22 Reserved
ARTICLE II. RIGHT-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 78-23 Administration
The city manager shall appoint a right-of-way manager, who is the principal city official responsible for the
administration of the right-of-way, right-of-way permits, the regulation of same and ordinances related thereto.
The right-of-way manager may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder. The right-of-way manager shall have
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 521/684
the duties, responsibilities and authority as specified for the right-of-way manager stated herein. (Ordinance 02-
05-65, sec. 3(1.1), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-24 Definitions
The following definitions apply in this article. The terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivations
shall have the same meanings herein. When not inconsistent with the context words used in the present tense
include the future; words in plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular include the
plural. The word “shall” is mandatory and not merely permissive.
Abandoned facilities means facilities no longer in service or physically disconnected from the operating
facilities, or from any other facilities, or from any other facilities that are in use or that still carry service.
Administration fee means the fee charged by the city to recover its costs incurred for right-of-way management;
including, but not limited to, costs associated with registering applicants; issuing, processing, and verifying
right-of-way permit applications; inspecting job sites and restoration improvements; determining the adequacy
of the right-of-way restoration; revoking right-of-way permits and other costs the city may incur in
implementing the provisions of this article.
Applicant means an owner or authorized agent of an owner, who submits an application for a permit under the
provisions of this article.
Area of influence means that area around a utility excavation where the pavement and sub-grade is impacted by
the excavation and is subject to more rapid deterioration due to the trench excavation.
Backfill means the following:
(1) The placement of new dirt, fill, or other material to refill an excavation; or
(2) The return of excavated dirt, fill or other material to an excavation.
Certified Telecommunications Provider or “CTP” means a person who has been issued a certificate of
convenience and necessity, certificate of operating authority, or service provider certificate of operating authority
by the Texas Public Utility Commission or “PUC” to offer local exchange telephone service as defined by
V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 283 or “the Act”.
City means the City of Frisco, Texas and the city's officers and employees.
City project means the construction, location, maintenance, relocation, alteration, improvement, repair, removal
or other work performed by the city, or its designee, in the public right-of-way or on any city utilities or city
facilities.
City utilities means any water, sewer or drainage line owned and operated by the city or the North Texas
Municipal Water District.
Collector street means any roadway or street classified on the city's comprehensive plan, as it exists or may be
amended, as a collector.
Compaction refers to consolidating backfill material in a trench to prevent future settlement.
Comprehensive plan means the city's comprehensive plan, as it exists or may be amended.
Construction means boring, the breaking of pavement, or the installation, modification, upgrade, maintenance,
removal, or similar activities, within the right-of-way. The definition includes, but is not limited to, providing
primary service, restoration, or maintenance of existing facilities within the right-of-way.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 522/684
Contractor means any public or private person, subcontractor or organization, other than the city.
Day means business day unless otherwise specified.
Department means the city department of public works or a successor department that is responsible for
management of the right-of-way and roadway infrastructure.
Emergency operations are defined as those operations and repairs necessary to prevent damage or injury to the
health or safety of the public or any person and the work necessary to address or prevent an immediate service
interruption. Upgrading of facilities, new service installation and neighborhood improvement projects are not
emergency operations.
Excavation means any activity that removes or otherwise disturbs soil, pavement, driveways, curbs, or sidewalks
in the right-of-way and does not include landscaping activity unless the activity removes or disturbs the paved
portion of the right-of-way.
Facilities means the equipment, and property, including but not limited to, lines, poles, mains, pipes, conduits,
ducts, cables, valves, manholes, handholes and wires located under, on, or above the surface of the ground
within the right-of-way, and related facilities and equipment used or useful for the provision of utility services.
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission.
Governing body means the mayor and the city council of the City of Frisco, Texas.
Governmental entity means any county, township, city, town, village, school district, library district, road
district, drainage or levee district, sewer district, water district, fire district or other municipal corporation, quasimunicipal
corporation or political subdivision of the state or of any other state of the United States and any
agency or instrumentality of the state or of any other state of the United States.
Holiday shall refer to days in which city offices are closed in observance of a holiday.
Local street means any roadway or street not classified on the city's comprehensive plan, as it exists or may be
amended, as a highway/tollway, major thoroughfare, minor thoroughfare or collector.
Main line shall refer to lines other than service connections used to convey the right-of-way user's product.
Major project means any project, which includes 300 or more linear feet of excavation or any excavation under
pavement.
Pavement shall refer to streets containing Portland cement, asphalt, brick or other rigid or semi-rigid material
that covers the surface of a street and their underlying subgrade and base.
Permit means a permit issued under this article authorizing excavation in the right-of-way.
Permittee means any person or right-of-way user to whom a permit is issued to excavate a right-of-way.
Perpendicular excavations means any trench with a centerline that when projected toward the centerline of the
street, the two lines intersect at an angle of 90 degrees.
Person means any person, company, partnership, contractor, subcontractor, agency or other public or private
entity, excepting the city.
Public inconvenience penalty shall refer to a penalty assessed to the right-of-way user who denies the public the
use of public property for a time period greater than allowed by this article.
PUCT means the Public Utility Commission of Texas.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 523/684
Registration means the annual application process of the right-of-way user to use any portion of the right-ofway.
Registration certificate shall refer to the document provided by the city, annually, upon approval of the
application for registration.
Repair means the temporary or permanent construction work necessary to make the right-of-way useable.
Repair area means that area around excavation where the pavement and subgrade is impacted by an excavation.
Restoration means the process by which an excavated right-of-way and surrounding area, including, but not
limited to, pavement and foundation structures, ground cover, landscaping, and monuments are returned to the
same condition, or better than that which existed before the commencement of the work.
Resurfacing means any repaving, overlay, seal or reconstruction which creates a new pavement surface over the
entire width of the street, excluding crack seals and localized base and pavement repairs.
Right-of-way or public right-of-way means the surface of, and the space above and below, any street, road,
highway, freeway, tollway, lane, path, drainageway, channel, fee interest, public way or place, sidewalk, alley,
boulevard, parkway, drive, fire lane or other easement now or hereafter held by the city or over which the city
exercises any rights of management or control and shall include, but not be limited to, all easements now held,
or hereafter held, by the city, but shall specifically excludes private property.
Right-of-way manager means the right-of-way manager of the city, or his designee.
Right-of-way user means a person, its successors and assigns, that uses the right-of-way for purposes of work,
excavation, provision of services, construction, or installing, constructing, maintaining, or repairing facilities in
the right-of-way, including, but not limited to, landowners, service providers, utilities and contractors.
Routine service operation means a work activity that makes no material change to the facilities and does not
disrupt traffic.
Service means a commodity provided to a person by means of a delivery system that is comprised of facilities
located or to be located in the right-of-way, including, but not limited to, gas, telephone, cable television,
Internet services, open video systems, alarm systems, steam, electric, water, telegraph, data transmission,
petroleum pipelines, or sanitary sewage.
Service connection shall refer to the line that serves no more than two individual customers or two meter banks.
Street means only the paved portion of the public right-of-way used for vehicular travel, being the area between
the inside of the curb to the inside of the opposite curb, or the area between the two parallel edges of the paved
roadway for vehicular travel where there is no curb. It does not include the median. A “street” is generally part
of, but smaller in width than the width of the entire public right-of-way; while a public right-of-way may include
sidewalks and utility easements, a “street” does not. A “street” does not include the curb or the sidewalk, if
either are present at the time of a permit application or if added later.
Surface mounted markers refers to any sign, post or other marker, which rises above the surface of the ground to
show the location of an underground utility.
Thoroughfare means any roadway or street classified on the city's comprehensive plan, as it exists or may be
amended, as a highway, tollway, major thoroughfare or minor thoroughfare.
TMUTCD means the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, as it exists or may be amended.
Traffic control representative shall refer to the designated representative of the right-of-way user who is
responsible for work zone safety and compliance with TMUTCD. The right-of-way user shall ensure such
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 524/684
person has adequate training, knowledge and authority to perform the responsibilities listed above.
Trench shall refer to excavation deeper than 24 inches. This shall include linear trenches, holes, pits and etc.
Underground Facility Damage Protection Safety Act shall refer to the V.T.C.A., Utilities Code sec. 251.001 et
seq. as it exists or may be amended.
Utility means any privately or publicly owned entity which uses right-of-way to furnish the public any general
public service, including, without limitation, sanitary sewer, gas, electricity, water, telephone, petroleum
products, telegraph, heat, steam or chilled water, together with the equipment, structures, and appurtenances
belonging to such entity and located within and near the right-of-way. Poles are regulated herein only as
specifically set forth in this article.
White lining means marking the excavation site with white washable marking paint or flags prior to requesting a
utility location in order to further identify the site.
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(1.2), adopted 5/7/02; Ordinance 06-08-86, sec. 2, adopted 8/2/06; Ordinance 16-09-
70, sec. 2, adopted 9/6/16; Ordinance 17-08-58, sec. 2, adopted 8/15/17)
Sec. 78-25 Utility coordination committee
Each utility shall name a utility coordinator who shall participate in the utility coordination committee. All rightof-
way users with open permits shall send one representative to the monthly utility coordination committee
meetings at the time and location established by the city. The city shall notify, by any means, the right-of-way
users of the monthly meetings. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(1.3), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-26 Field utility coordination
(a) The right-of-way user shall notify the department at each of the following times during a project:
(1) Forty-eight hours before the start of construction;
(2) Upon completion of the initial backfill; and
(3) Upon completion of the project.
(b) The use of markets, stakes, poles, barricades or other devices shall be used in such a way to avoid damage
to adjoining property. A person shall only use a water-based paint in the public right-of-way to mark the location
of existing underground utilities. A person commits an offense if the person makes a marking in the public rightof-
way for the purpose of identifying the location of existing underground utility facilities and such marking
remains visible longer than sixty (60) days after being applied.
(c) Compliance with the Texas Utilities Code, as amended, is required at all times.
(d) All barricades, plates, cones, traffic directional equipment and all other traffic control devices owned,
leased or used by the right-of-way user and used on or near any excavation shall be clearly and visibly marked
with the name of the permittee and/or right-of-way user or subcontractor, as applicable, at all times such
equipment is used on or near the right-of-way. An exception to the marking requirement may be made in the sole
discretion of the right-of-way manager in the event the traffic control equipment is not owned by the permittee
or right-of-way user.
(e) Location of facilities.
(1) A permit does not relieve a right-of-way user of the responsibility to coordinate with other
utilities and to protect existing facilities. A right-of-way user working in the right-of-way shall obtain
line locates from all affected utilities or others with facilities in the right-of-way prior to any
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 525/684
excavation. Use of the geographic information system or the plans of record does not satisfy this
requirement.
(2) In performing location of facilities in the public rights-of-way in preparation for construction
under a permit, the right-of-way user is responsible for compiling all information obtained regarding
its or any other facilities in the public rights-of-way related to a particular permit and shall make that
information available to the city in a written and verified format acceptable to the right-of-way
manager.
(f) Protection of facilities.
(1) Before beginning excavation in any public right-of-way, a right-of-way user shall:
a. Make a request with the Texas One-Call System for facility locates and any possible
conflicts in compliance with the Underground Facility Damage Prevention and Safety Act
(chapter 251 of the Texas Utilities Code, as amended, and 16 Tex. Admin. Code chapter 18, as
amended);
b. Make a request with the department for facility locates and any possible conflicts; and
c. Make inquiries of all utility companies, districts, other local government entities and all
other agencies that might have facilities in the area of work to determine the location of such
facilities and any possible conflicts.
(2) Facility locations shall be marked prior to commencing work. The right-of-way user shall
support and protect all pipes, conduits, poles, wires or other apparatus that may be affected by the
work from damage during construction or settlement of trenches subsequent to construction.
(3) It shall be unlawful for a right-of-way user to work in the public right-of-way without having a
valid and unexpired line locate confirmation number issued by the department. Information provided
by the department regarding facility locations shall be valid for 14 business days or the expiration
date that the department's assigned line locater indicates on the department-issued line locate request
form, whichever period is greater.
(4) No facility may be placed within four feet (4') horizontally, of or within any distance above, an
existing or proposed city facility without a city-approved encroachment agreement, unless otherwise
approved by the director of the department.
(g) Work in the public right-of-way shall be done in a manner that causes the least interference with the rights
and reasonable convenience of property owners and residents.
(h) If the right-of-way user's work in the right-of-way involves more than five hundred (500) feet of
continuous trenching or boring or the installation of more than three (3) new node support poles or more than
three (3) electrical meter pedestals or ground boxes, then the right-of-way-user shall submit to the city daily
work location information, on the form provided by the city, each day before work can begin.
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(1.4), adopted 5/7/02; Ordinance 16-09-70, sec. 2, adopted 9/6/16; Ordinance 17-08-
58, sec. 2, adopted 8/15/17)
Sec. 78-27 Maps and records of registrants
(a) Within 30 days of passage of this article, each right-of-way user shall provide the city an accurate map of
their service area. The map shall be in electronic format overlaid over the North Central Texas Council of
Government base digital map. In dual coverage areas, the city may request additional information to enable
identification of right-of-way users.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 526/684
(b) Each right-of-way user must maintain accurate maps and records of its facilities. The city's road network
may be provided in digital format upon request. The right-of-way user is encouraged to maintain their system
maps geo-referenced to the city's street network, which is on the North Central Texas Council of Government
base digital map. The map should include true bearings and distances to the nearest established street lines and
official monuments, which shall be accurately described on the map. The right-of-way user will provide the city
with digital information within 90 days of a request for maps from the city for any user with less than 50 miles
of utilities within the city. All other right-of-way users shall provide the digital information within one year of
the request. Thereafter, the data is to be provided to the city on an annual basis by January 1.
(c) If the maps and records submitted in response to any request by or requirement of the city include
information expressly designated by the right-of-way user as a trade secret or other confidential information
protected from disclosure by state law, the city and its agents, employees, or other representatives may not
disclose that information to the public without the consent of the right-of-way user, unless otherwise compelled
by an opinion of the attorney general pursuant to the Texas Public Information Act, as amended, or by a court
having jurisdiction of the matter pursuant to applicable law. This subsection may not be construed to authorize a
right-of-way user to designate all matters in its maps and records as confidential or as trade secrets.
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(1.5), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-28 Notice
Notice for purposes of this article shall be made to the city via electronic message (e-mail), overnight courier
(generally used carrier with tracing available) or hand delivery with signed receipt, facsimile to the department
or United States mail return receipt required. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(1.6), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-29 Registration
(a) Nothing in this section relieves a person from obtaining a permit under this article to perform work in the
right-of-way.
(b) In order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, each right-of-way user must register with the
right-of-way manager in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) The right-of-way user must apply for registration on a form furnished by the right-of-way
manager; the application must be made in the name of the right-of-way user.
(2) The registrations of right-of-way users that are utilities shall expire on December 31st of each
year. The registrations of all other right-of-way users shall expire one year from the date of
registration. For utilities that fail to renew registration within 30 calendar days after the date the city
sends the utility a notice of noncompliance, the utility's facilities will be deemed to have been legally
abandoned.
(3) If information provided by the right-of-way user as part of the registration application changes,
then the right-of-way user must inform the right-of-way manager, in writing, within 30 days of the
change.
(4) Each right-of-way user shall submit the following to the right-of-way manager at the time it
submits its registration application:
a. The complete name, mailing address and telephone number of the person making the
application; if the applicant is a firm, corporation or business entity, the applicant must provide
the name and private mailing address of a principal of the firm, corporation or business entity
who is authorized to bind the firm, corporation or business entity in legal agreements. Each
applicant must also provide the names of all employees authorized to obtain permits to work in
the right-of-way;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 527/684
b. The names, addresses and telephone numbers of at least two persons who will be general,
day-to-day contacts for the right-of-way user. At least one of the addresses must be within the
Dallas/Fort Worth metropolitan area;
c. The name and mailing address of the person(s) authorized to receive service of process on
behalf of the right-of-way user;
d. The names and telephone numbers of at least two persons serving as emergency contacts
for the right-of-way user who can be reached by telephone 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
The telephone numbers should be accessible without the city having to pay long-distance
telephone or toll charge;
e. Proof of existing insurance that complies with article V (indemnification, insurance,
bonding and liability) of this chapter; and
f. Any other information deemed necessary by the right-of-way manager.
g. Each right-of-way user that is a utility also shall submit the following to the right-of-way
manager at the time it submits its registration application:
i. The name of the utility using the right-of-way, including any business name, assumed
name, or trade name the utility operates under or has operated under in the city within the
past five years;
ii. If the utility is a CTP, the certificate number issued by the Texas Public Utility
Commission;
iii. The ordinance number of any franchise or license issued by the city that authorizes
the utility to use the right-of-way; and
iv. The name, address and telephone number of any contractor or subcontractor who
will be working in the right-of-way on behalf of the utility. This list may be amended as
needed by the utility; however, no work shall be performed in the right-of-way by a
contractor or subcontractor that is not on the list, regardless of whether a permit is
required.
(c) In extending the rights and privileges of such registration, the city makes no statement regarding the
competency of those so registered, and no manner of license is proffered.
(d) No permit to perform work in the right-of-way shall be issued to any right-of-way user unless the right-ofway
user holds a valid registration with the city under this article.
(e) No right-of-way user who obtains registration from the city under this article shall permit the use of such
registration by any person, other than the right-of-way user's employees, for the purpose of doing any work
within the right-of-way, nor shall the right-of-way user subcontract to any other person any work for which a
registration is issued to such right-of-way user.
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(1.17), adopted 5/7/02; Ordinance 16-09-70, sec. 2, adopted 9/6/16)
Sec. 78-30 Traffic handling training
The right-of-way user is responsible for work zone safety including, but not limited to, traffic control through
the designated traffic control representative. The representative is responsible for compliance with the TMUTCD
and the traffic control plan (if required) at all work zone sites. The traffic control representative shall ensure
employees on the job site have adequate training. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(1.8), adopted 5/7/02)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 528/684
Sec. 78-31 Reporting obligations
All right-of-way users shall, upon request, provide proof of any necessary permit, license, certification, grant,
registration, franchise agreement or any other authorization required by any governmental entity, including, but
not limited to, the city, state, or federal government, or railroad or pipeline company, including a description of
the right-of-way user's intended use of the right-of-way, information sufficient to determine whether the right-ofway
user is subject to franchising or licensing by the city, and information to determine whether the right-of-way
user has applied for and received any certificate of authority required by the PUCT. The information provided
shall be sufficient enough to determine whether the right-of-way user has applied for and received any permit or
other approvals required by the FCC. Right-of-way user shall provide all such other information as may be
reasonably required by the city to complete the registration statement. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(1.9), adopted
5/7/02)
Sec. 78-32 Surface mounted markers
Where surface mounted markers are needed, curb mounted medallions shall be used whenever possible.
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(1.10), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-33 Relocation of facilities for city projects and public improvements
(a) In the exercise of governmental functions, the city has first priority over all uses of the right-of-way. The
city reserves the right to, among other things, lay water, sewer, drainage, and other pipelines or cables and
conduits, and to do underground and overhead work, and attachments, restructuring, or changes in street
facilities in across, along, over, or under a public street, alley or right-of-way occupied by an agency or right-ofway
user, and to change the curb, sidewalks, or the grade of streets.
(b) The right-of-way user must relocate its facilities, at its own expense and in accordance with section 78-89,
prior to the start of construction of a city project. Failure to comply with this provision shall subject the right-ofway
user to the enforcement provisions contained herein.
(c) A permit will be required when making facility adjustments in preparation for city projects.
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(1.11), adopted 5/7/02; Ordinance 06-08-86, sec. 3, adopted 8/2/06)
Sec. 78-34 Permit required
It is unlawful for any person, its agents, servants or employees to dig, plow, blast, make cuts, openings, bore,
tunnel, excavate or close lanes on a thoroughfare or collector without first having made application and obtained
a permit therefor except for as allowed by this section. It is unlawful for any person, its agents, servants or
employees to make or cause to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any right-of-way for the
installation, repair or removal of any facilities, or for any other purpose without first obtaining from the right-ofway
manager a permit in compliance with this article.
(1) Before issuing a permit, the right-of-way manager shall have been provided a written
application, on a form furnished by the right-of-way manager, setting forth the name and residence or
business address of the applicant; the location and approximate area of the excavation, including its
approximate length and width, and, if the excavation is in a street, whether it is parallel or transverse
to the direction of the travel lanes; and, the purpose of the excavation. The application form shall
include plans prepared in accordance with city specifications. Plans shall be drawn at a reasonable
scale that legibly and accurately show all existing improvements and proposed work. All proposed
work must be shown in heavy or bold type lines and fonts. If proposed work is in phases or part of
another overall drawing, show all existing and future work in lighter or faded out lines and fonts. If
right-of-way user cannot show distinctive line weights, the plans shall clearly label the above
information using text. When required by the Texas Engineering Practice Act, as amended, the plans
must be sealed by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the state.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 529/684
(2) At the time the permit issued, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable permit application fee in
an amount as provided for in article IV.
(3) The proposed location, depth and other characteristics of any facilities for which the permit is
issued shall be subject to approval of the right-of-way manager, and all backfilling, compaction and
pavement restoration performed for any excavation shall comply with the requirements of this article.
(4) No fee or requirement authorized or imposed pursuant to this article shall be construed to affect
or alter in any way any obligation of public and/or private utilities with facilities installed in any
right-of-way to relocate the facilities, at no cost to the city, subject to state law, if applicable, in the
event that relocation is required by the city to accommodate a proper governmental use of the rightof-
way.
(5) Combinations of permits shall be permitted at the sole discretion of the right-of-way manager.
Fees shall be assessed based on the excavations permitted.
(6) Subdivision monuments, historical markers, and any other signs or structures with foundations
in the right-of-way, excluding billboards, are subject to this article.
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(1.12), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-35 Exceptions to required permit
(a) The right-of-way manager reserves the right in his discretion to require a right-of-way permit on service
connections. Unless otherwise required by the right-of-way manager, service connections do not require a permit
if all of the following conditions are met:
(1) The service connection excavation shall not exceed four feet inside the right-of-way to property
line;
(2) All excavation shall be in accordance with service connection drawings;
(3) The address for the service connection is on the city provided form, which is submitted to the
right-of-way manager via e-mail. Work shall not begin until the electronic form is transmitted to the
right-of-way manager;
(4) The excavation required is less than 24 inches in depth;
(5) The excavation is no wider than two inches or is hand dug; and
(6) The service connection does not require boring.
(b) Irrigation and backflow system installation does not require a right-of-way permit if all of the following
conditions are met:
(1) The work is performed with an existing valid irrigation or backflow permit issued by the city
for the installation of an irrigation or backflow system, as applicable;
(2) The excavation does not exceed 16 inches in depth and 24 inches in width;
(3) The address for the site of the work is listed on the irrigation or backflow permit; and
(4) Line locates from the city are not required provided that the right-of-way user performing the
work accepts full responsibility for any damages to or interference with city facilities caused by such
work.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 530/684
(c) New construction of single-family residential driveways, sidewalks, mailboxes and minor earthwork
grading of single-family residential lots (less than 24 inches in depth) does not require a permit if all of the
following conditions are met:
(1) The work is performed with an existing valid residential building permit issued by the city for
the residential building;
(2) The excavation does not exceed 24 inches in depth;
(3) The address for the new residential construction is listed on the residential building permit and
the building permit has not expired or been closed or terminated; and
(4) Line locates from the city are not required provided that the right-of-way user performing the
work accepts full responsibility for any damages to or interference with city facilities caused by such
work.
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(1.12.1), adopted 5/7/02; Ordinance 17-04-25 adopted 4/4/17)
Sec. 78-36 Permit application
(a) Application for a permit shall be addressed to the right-of-way manager and made on a form furnished for
that purpose, stating the extent, dimensions, character and purpose of the cut or excavation to be made, the
location, by street and number if possible, where the work is to be done, and the time in which it is to be
completed. The application form shall be accompanied by maps of the existing facilities in the area, to the extent
available, and the location of the proposed facilities, methodology of construction, and proposed start and
completion dates. When the work includes excavating, which will exceed five feet in depth, a trench safety
design sealed by a licensed professional engineer shall also accompany the application, unless otherwise
provided by law.
(b) A permit shall only be valid for the area of the right-of-way specified within the permit. No permittee may
cause any work to be done outside the area specified in the permit, except as provided herein. Any permittee
who determines that an area is greater than that which is specified in the permit must apply for and receive a new
right-of-way permit.
(c) Applicants may apply jointly for permits to excavate the right-of-way at the same time and place.
Applicants who apply jointly for a right-of-way permit may share in the payment of the permit fee. Applicants
must agree among themselves as to the portion each shall pay. The city will recognize only one point of contact.
(d) Permits will be issued or denied within five business days of the city receiving a complete application.
Permits shall be valid for the dates specified in the permit. The applicant may request but is not guaranteed the
permit be valid for such longer period as may be necessary in the circumstances, in advance, as part of the
application. The city may approve or deny the application for such extended permit period. No permittee may
commence work before the permit start date and, except as provided herein, no permittee may continue working
after the end date. If a permittee does not complete the work by the permit end date, the permittee must apply for
and may receive a new right-of-way permit or a permit extension for additional time. This supplementary
application must be submitted to the city prior to the permit end date. Applicants are encouraged to request a
pre-submission meeting for large projects.
(e) An expedited permit may be requested, and shall be issued or denied within two days of application upon a
showing of good cause, as solely determined by the right-of-way manager.
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(1.13), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-37 Issuance of permit
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 531/684
Every person making application for a permit in accordance with the provisions of this article, and having
complied with such provisions, shall be entitled thereto, and, upon filing such application with the right-of-way
manager, it shall be his duty to issue the permit, when the provisions of this article have been complied with.
(1) Upon receiving a written application for a permit and a plan prepared in accordance with the
city specifications, the right-of-way manager's designee shall set forth all requirements, approve or
disapprove the application, sign and return it to applicant. Excepting only emergency excavations, at
least one working day prior to the start of work, the applicant shall notify the right-of-way manager
the date the work will commence when traffic control devices are necessary on a thoroughfare.
(2) No permit shall be transferable. A permit shall be void unless the excavation to be made
pursuant thereto is commenced within the time stated therein and the work diligently completed.
(3) Each permit shall state a time period for completion of all the work to be done hereunder. The
right-of-way manager may in his sole discretion, grant extensions of time.
(4) No person in violation of any requirement of this article shall be issued an excavation permit,
nor shall any contractor or agent apply for or be issued a permit on the person's behalf, until the
outstanding violation is/are corrected or a plan for correction is approved by the right-of-way
manager. The foregoing requirement is in addition to any penalty or remedy for violation that may be
imposed or sought by the city at law or equity.
(5) No work shall be done under any permit issued under this article except as stated in the permit.
If the permit is allowed to expire, the right-of-way user shall procure a new permit, paying the
applicable fee, prior to proceeding with any such work.
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(1.14), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-38 Posting of signs
The right-of-way user and contractor (if used) shall be identified by three feet by three feet information signs on
all work requiring a permit. The signs shall state the name and phone number of the right-of-way user and
contractor (if used). The signs shall be placed in the right-of-way on each approach to the location where
construction is occurring from the time of the beginning of work in the right-of-way and shall continue to be
posted at the location during the entire time the work is occurring. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(1.15), adopted
5/7/02)
Sec. 78-39 Excavation to be under supervision of the right-of-way manager
(a) Any right-of-way user engaged in making or backfilling any excavation in any right-of-way shall, at all
times while such work is in progress, keep at the job location the permit, or a copy thereof, and shall provide of
the same, when requested by any authorized city employee. At all times while the work is in progress, the rightof-
way user shall also maintain, at the job location, a sign, barricade or other device bearing the right-of-way
user's name.
(b) The right-of-way user shall protect from damage, utility conduits, sewer conduits, water conduits, lawns,
shrubbery, trees, fences, structures, irrigation, sidewalks, streets, signs, street lights, or other property at, near or
encountered in its work. The right-of-way user shall determine the boundary of the right-of-way.
(c) All excavations and other construction in the streets shall be conducted so as to interfere as little as
practicable with the use of right-of-way and with the use of private property, in accordance with any lawful and
reasonable direction given by or under the authority of the governing body of the city pursuant to the policy and
regulatory powers of the city necessary to provide for public convenience. The right-of-way user shall not
trespass upon private property. The right-of-way user shall determine the boundary between right-of-way and
private property.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 532/684
(d) The city reserves the right to among others, lay, and allow to be laid, electricity, sewer, gas, water and
other pipe lines or cables and facilities, as well as drainage pipes, and channels and streets, and to perform, and
allow to be performed, any underground and overhead installation or improvement that may be deemed
necessary or proper by the governing body of the city, in, across, along, over or under any right-of-way or public
place occupied by a right-of-way user and to change any curb or sidewalk or the grade of any street and to
maintain all of the city's facilities. In allowing such work to be performed by others, the city shall not be liable to
a right-of-way user for any damage caused by those persons or entities. Nothing herein shall relieve any third
party from responsibility for damages caused to a right-of-way user by such third party.
(e) All transmission and distribution structures, lines, equipment and facilities erected by a right-of-way user
within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of the right-of-way, and
to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who join any of
said streets. No pole may be placed in an area prohibited by another section of this article.
(f) If the city requires a right-of-way user to adapt or conform its facilities, or in any way or manner to alter,
relocate or change its property to enable any other corporation or person, except the city, to use, or to use with
greater convenience, any right-of-way or public place, the right-of-way user shall not be required to make any
such changes until such other corporation or person shall have undertaken, with solvent bond, to reimburse a
right-of-way user for any loss and expense which will be caused by, or arise out of such removal, change,
adaptation, alteration, conformance or relocation of a right-of-way user's facilities; provided, however, that the
city shall never be liable for such reimbursement.
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(1.16), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-40 Registration certificate required; suspension or revocation of registration
(a) It is unlawful for any right-of-way user to perform construction in the right-of-way unless the right-of-way
user is the holder of a valid registration under section 78-29 (registration) of this article.
(b) The right-of-way manager is entitled to suspend or revoke, temporarily or permanently, a right-of-way
user's privilege to work in the right-of-way on any of the following grounds: providing false or misleading
information; failing to provide updated information to the right-of-way manager within 30 days of the date such
information changes as required by section 78-29(b)(3) of this article; allowing another person, other than the
right-of-way user's employees, to use the right-of-way user's registration for the purpose of doing any work
within the right-of-way; subcontracting to any person any work for which a registration is issued to the right-ofway
user; failing to maintain insurance that complies with article V (indemnification, insurance, bonding and
liability) of this chapter; failing to make a request for or an inquiry regarding facilities locates in compliance
with section 78-26 of this article and/or working in the public right-of-way without having a valid and unexpired
line locate confirmation number issued by the department; or being convicted of, or acknowledging, three or
more violations of this chapter 78 [article II] (right-of-way management) or any other ordinance of the city
within a 12-month period.
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(1.16.1), adopted 5/7/02; Ordinance 16-09-70, sec. 2, adopted 9/6/16)
Sec. 78-41 Hours of operation for nonemergency work
(a) Excavation and boring shall be conducted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on Monday through
Friday, except on holidays. No excavation or boring shall be performed on holidays.
(b) All other work requiring an inspection shall be done between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on
Monday through Friday, except on holidays. No work shall be performed on holidays. A right-of-way user may
work on Saturday subject to the approval of the right-of-way manager and a notification no later than noon on
Thursday before the Saturday in which the work is to be performed. The Saturday inspection fee must be paid
prior to noon on Thursday prior to the Saturday in which the work is to be performed.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 533/684
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(1.17), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-42 Denial of permit
A permit may be denied or suspended for any of the following reasons:
(1) Failure to provide proof of a surety bond or liability insurance acceptable to the city or notice
of termination of the same.
(2) Failure to secure a contractor's license or other required license.
(3) Failure to perform in accordance with the requirements of this article.
(4) The excavation would be in a street and not otherwise permitted by this article.
(5) The proposed warning or other traffic control procedures or equipment do not comply with the
requirements of the TMUTCD or the requirements of the right-of-way manager.
(6) The proposed activity would violate any city ordinance or state or federal law, rule, regulation
or statute.
(7) The permit application contains false or misleading information.
(8) The activity would cause a public health or safety hazard.
(9) The right-of-way user is not authorized within the city.
(10) The right-of-way user is in violation of this article relative to work in progress.
(11) The right-of-way user has not compensated the city, or is not legally obligated to compensate
the city by contract, by agreement or by law, for using the public property; or the right-of-way user
has failed to timely make required payments.
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(1.18), adopted 5/7/02; Ordinance 06-08-86, sec. 4, adopted 8/2/06)
Sec. 78-43 Appeal
A right-of-way user that (i) has been denied registration or a permit; (ii) has had its registration or a permit
suspended or revoked; or (iii) believes that fees imposed are invalid, may appeal such denial, suspension,
revocation or fee imposition as follows:
(1) The right-of-way user shall file a written notice of appeal with the right-of-way manager within
five business days of the date the decision was rendered or the action occurred. The notice must state
the grounds for the appeal and, if applicable, the alternatives available and routes explored, hardship
encountered, cost comparison of other alternatives and a statement of any other significant factors.
The right-of-way manager shall provide a written decision on the appeal within five business days.
Failure to render a decision within five business days shall constitute a denial.
(2) If the right-of-way user's appeal to the right-of-way manager is denied, the right-of-way user
may file a written notice of appeal to the director of public works within five business days of receipt
of the right-of-way manager's written decision. The director of public works shall provide a written
decision within five business days of receipt of an appeal in accordance with this section. Failure to
render a decision within five business days shall constitute a denial.
(3) If the right-of-way user's appeal to the director of public works is denied, the right-of-way user
may file a written notice of appeal to the office of the city manager within five business days of
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 534/684
receipt of the director of public works' written decision. The city manager shall provide a written
decision within five business days of receipt of an appeal in accordance with this section. Failure to
render a decision within five business days shall constitute a denial. The city manager's decision shall
be final.
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(1.19), adopted 5/7/02; Ordinance 16-09-70, sec. 2, adopted 9/6/16)
Secs. 78-44–78-74 Reserved
ARTICLE III. TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS
Sec. 78-75 Lawful use of right-of-way
(a) The use of the right-of-way in any manner which violates federal, state, or local laws, or city codes,
ordinances and regulations, including, without limitation, those relating to health, safety, noise, environmental
protection, waste disposal and water and air quality, is prohibited. All permittees shall provide satisfactory
evidence of compliance with the foregoing upon request of the city.
(b) The permittee shall dispose of all material removed from the right-of-way and any waste created by
permittee in compliance with all state, federal and local laws and requirements. Temporary storage of material
may be placed in a pile no higher than 30 inches.
(c) If a permittee excavates any contaminated, regulated or hazardous materials in the right-of-way, such
permittee shall be responsible for environmental assessment, excavation, testing, transportation and disposal of
that material in accordance with applicable law. The permittee shall promptly notify the city, orally, of the
condition within two hours of discovery of any contaminated, regulated or hazardous materials in the right-ofway,
and within eight hours provide the aforementioned information to the city in writing. The permittee must
consult with and receive written authorization from the city before undertaking any of the steps/actions set forth
in this subsection.
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(2.1), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-76 Compliance with safety regulations
The permittee and right-of-way user shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local safety regulations
and requirements, including, by example and not limitation, the occupational safety and health standards for the
construction industry. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(2.2), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-77 Conformance with the thoroughfare plan
A right-of-way user should consult the city's thoroughfare plan (TP) prior to the acquisition of any interest in
real property in the city for the installation or relocation of service lines or other equipment or facilities along or
adjacent to any street, right-of-way, thoroughfare, highway, or any proposed street, right-of-way, highway or
thoroughfare to attempt to minimize any future conflict regarding the location of such facilities. All right-of-way
users are charged at all times with constructive notice of the TP subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance
from which this article is derived. The city shall, at a minimum, have no liability for the value of or loss by a
right-of-way user of any improvements constructed in the area shown on the TP, except as provided herein.
Typical locations of city facilities are depicted in Figure 1 of the thoroughfare plan. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec.
3(2.3), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-78 Tree trimming and graffiti abatement
Permission is granted to a right-of-way user, subject to the requirements of the city's tree preservation article, as
it exists or may be amended from time to time, to trim trees upon and overhanging the right-of-way, so as to
prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with a right-of-way user's facilities. When so directed
by the city, the tree trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of the city. The city shall report
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 535/684
damage or vandalism to the right-of-way user's facilities as soon as practicable after the city discovers or learns
of such event. The right-of-way user shall make the necessary repairs or restoration, including, but not limited
to, cleaning of graffiti, as soon as practicable but not to exceed seven days after the right-of-way user discovers
or learns of any misuse, destruction, damage or vandalism to its facilities. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(2.4),
adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-79 Employee communication
The right-of-way user shall ensure that there is at least one employee on the job site, during any type of work
activity, who can read, write and speak English fluently. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(2.5), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-80 Routing and spatial assignment
The city reserves the right, in the permit or otherwise, to restrict or determine the route (pathway) and/or spatial
location, whether horizontal, vertical or depth, of any facility and/or structure or improvement in the right-ofway.
The city reserves the right to reserve space for future utilities. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(2.6), adopted
5/7/02)
Sec. 78-81 Commencement and completion
After obtaining the permit and prior to commencing the work, the permittee shall notify the right-of-way
manager, and shall commence and complete all work within the time specified in the permit, unless an extension
of time is granted by the right-of-way manager. No work shall commence until erosion control measures (e.g.
silt fence) and advance warning signs, markers, cones and barricades are in place. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec.
3(2.7), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-82 Notification of affected property owners
Except in the case of an emergency, whenever excavation is required in the right-of-way adjacent to an occupied
property, the right-of-way user shall notify the property owner of the activity through use of a door hanger,
which shall include the following information:
(1) Permit number;
(2) Identify of the contractor and the right-of-way user, including a contact name and phone
number by which more information regarding the project could be obtained and a 24-hour a day
emergency phone number; and
(3) The anticipated duration of the construction work.
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(2.8), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-83 Safe conduct of work
Every permittee and right-of-way user shall prosecute its work diligently and in a good, safe, and workmanlike
manner, and shall safeguard and protect the public, using the street or right-of-way where the work is being
performed, from accidents or damage by placing barriers, lights and other sufficient safeguards around all cuts,
openings and excavation. All material, implements and tools stored upon the premises and used in connection
with the excavation shall be stored in a safe and nonhazardous manner. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(2.9),
adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-84 Revocation or suspension of permit
The city reserves its right, as provided herein, to revoke or suspend any permit, without refund of the permit fee,
in the event of a breach by the permittee of the terms and/or conditions of the permit, this article and/or any
other city ordinance. A breach of the terms of the permit shall include, but not be limited to any of the following:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 536/684
(1) The violation of any provision of the permit.
(2) An evasion or attempt to evade any provision of the permit, or the perpetration or attempt to
perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon the city or its citizens.
(3) Any material misrepresentation of any fact in the permit application.
(4) The failure to meet insurance, surety bond or indemnification requirements.
(5) The failure to complete the work as specified in the permit.
(6) The failure to correct a condition indicated on an order issued pursuant to this article.
(7) Repeated traffic control violation.
(8) Failure to protect facilities or repair facilities damaged in the right-of-way.
(9) Violation of any part of this article.
(10) Recognition by the right-of-way manager that a permit was issued in error.
(11) Failing to comply with an order of the right-of-way manager on the permit and any other valid
permit held by the right-of-way user.
(12) Any safety violation or other action that threatens the health, welfare and/or safety of the
public as solely determined by the right-of-way manager.
If the right-of-way manager determines that the permittee has committed a breach of any law or condition of the
right-of-way permit, the right-of-way manager shall make a written demand upon the permittee to remedy such
violation. Continued violation may be cause for revocation of the permit or legal action, or both. The right-ofway
manager may, in his discretion, revoke the permit, provide specifications to cure the breach, or both. Within
five days of receiving notification of the breach, permittee shall contact the right-of-way manager with a plan,
acceptable to the right-of-way manager, for correction of the breach. Permittee's failure to do so or permittee's
failure to timely implement the approved plan shall be cause for revocation of the permit.
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(2.10), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-85 Work not in accordance with permit declared unlawful
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to make, cause or allow to be made, any excavation, or to install, cause
or allow to be installed any tank, pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, utility pole or other utility or appliance in or under
the surface of any street, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way or other public place, at any location, other than that
described in the application for the permit and as shown on the plans filed with the right-of-way manager, and in
accordance with the requirements of the permit. If the circumstances appearing after the excavation is
commenced make it impossible to comply with the permit, the right-of-way manager may, in his sole discretion,
grant a waiver to take the circumstances into account.
(b) Failure to comply with requirements set forth in this article or on any permit shall be cause for revocation
of the subject permit and of any other permits held by the same permittee until the violations have been
corrected or the right-of-way manager has approved alternative requirements.
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(2.11), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-86 Work done without a permit
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 537/684
No cut, excavation, grading or disturbing of the right-of-way, in any way, shall be made, other than excavations
necessary for emergency work, without first securing a permit. No person or right-of-way user shall, at any time,
open or encumber more of the right-of-way than shall be reasonably necessary to complete a project in the most
expeditious manner. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(2.12), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-87 Cessation of work
At any time, the right-of-way manager may order the immediate cessation of any work that poses a threat to the
health, safety or well-being of the public. The right-of-way manager may revoke the permit of any permittee in
any instance where there is a threat to the health, safety or well being of the public. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec.
3(2.13), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-88 Violations of standards; notice
The right-of-way manager may issue a written notice to the permittee indicating work that does not conform to
the terms of the permit, applicable standards, conditions, codes or other applicable regulation. Within ten days
after issuance of written notice, the permittee shall present proof to the right-of-way manager that the violation
has been corrected. If such proof has not been presented within the required time, the right-of-way manager may
revoke the permit. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(2.14), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-89 Location and relocation of facilities
Subject to applicable federal, state, and local laws, the right-of-way user shall, upon the request of the city,
which shall be in writing, locate and/or relocate its facilities situated within any right-of-way, at no expense to
the city, where reasonable and necessary to accommodate any city project. The written request provided by the
city shall state the date by which the relocation by the right-of-way user shall be completed and a reasonable
amount of time shall be provided by the city. When relocation is necessitated by federal government
requirements, which includes reimbursements of costs, the city will reimburse applicant for its proportionate
share from funds provided to the city in such reimbursements. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(2.16), adopted
5/7/02; Ordinance 06-08-86, sec. 5, adopted 8/2/06)
Sec. 78-90 Relocation facilities for the city
In the event the city finds it necessary to move a right-of-way user's facilities to protect the right-of-way, any
city utilities and/or street, the city shall notify the local representative of the right-of-way user. Right-of-way
user shall promptly move or facilitate the relocation of the subject facilities at right-of-way user's sole expense.
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(2.17), adopted 5/7/02; Ordinance 06-08-86, sec. 6, adopted 8/2/06)
Sec. 78-91 Abandoned facilities
(a) A right-of-way user owning abandoned facilities in the right-of-way shall:
(1) Remove its facilities and repair, at its sole expense, any damage caused by the removal. The
right-of-way manager may allow some or all facilities to remain if the right-of-way manager
determines same is in the best interest of the public to do so; or
(2) Provide information satisfactory to the city that the right-of-way user's obligations for its
facilities in the right-of-way have been lawfully assumed by another authorized right-of-way user.
(b) The facilities of the right-of-way user who fails to comply with this section, and those facilities which
remain unused for two years, shall be deemed to be abandoned unless, within the aforesaid two-year period, the
city receives written confirmation and reasonable evidence, as solely determined by city, that the right-of-way
user intends to use the facilities. The city may exercise any remedies and/or rights it has at law or in equity,
including, but not limited to, taking possession of the abandoned facilities or requiring the removal of the
facilities by the right-of-way user at the right-of-way user's sole expense.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 538/684
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(2.18), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-92 Underground service requirements
Placement of new utility support structures (poles) shall be prohibited for electrical distribution lines with
60,000 volts and less and all communication utilities, unless otherwise allowed by an existing franchise
agreement between the right-of-way user and the city or a PUCT tariff. (This does not prohibit replacing existing
poles for maintenance purposes.) (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(2.21), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-93 Location of poles and conduits
All poles in the right-of-way shall be of sound material and straight, and shall not interfere with the flow of
water in any gutter or drain, and shall be placed so as not to unduly interfere with vehicular and pedestrian
travel. All poles in the right-of-way shall be located within three feet of the right-of-way line. Poles with bases
greater than 36 inches in diameter shall not be placed within the right-of-way. Poles shall not be placed within
the center median of any street. The location and route of all conduits, fiber, cables, utilities and facilities placed
and constructed by a right-of-way user in the construction and maintenance of its system in the city shall be
subject to the reasonable and proper control, direction and approval of the city. Replacement of existing poles
does not require a permit. The specifications in this article modify the provisions of the American National
Standards Institute, Incorporated, the National Electrical Safety Code and such other codes and standards that
are generally accepted by the industry to the extent of any conflict. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(2.22), adopted
5/7/02; Ordinance 15-07-47, sec. 3, adopted 7/20/15)
Sec. 78-94 Size and location of aboveground facilities
Longitudinal lines in the right-of-way shall be limited to single pole construction. Except for poles, the
maximum dimensions for utility structures above the ground in the right-of-way adjacent to streets are seven feet
long (parallel to the road), two feet wide (perpendicular to the road) and six feet in height. For such structures
three feet or less in height, the width may be 44 inches. The height of utility structures shall be measured from
the lowest grade at any point 18 inches or less from the side of the structure that faces the street to the highest
point of the structure. Utility structures exceeding those dimensions shall not be located in the right-of-way
adjacent to streets, unless otherwise approved in writing by the right-of-way manager. All aboveground
facilities, including poles and appurtenances thereto, shall be located outside of the corner visibility triangle at
all intersections, planned intersections and driveways. No aboveground facilities may be placed in a parkway
that is across from a median opening. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(2.23), adopted 5/7/02; Ordinance 15-07-47,
sec. 3, adopted 7/20/15)
Sec. 78-95 Height of overhead line
The minimum vertical clearance above the street shall be 22 feet for overhead electric lines, and 18 feet for
overhead communication and cable television lines. Clearances for such lines shall be greater if required by the
National Electrical Safety Code and governing laws. Right-of-way users shall ensure that all overhead lines are
constructed and maintained in compliance with the National Electrical Safety Code, except where generally
accepted industry standards require greater protections for the city to safely maintain, operate, construct,
reconstruct and repair any existing or planned street lighting facility, traffic signal pole, mast arm, luminaire or
other aboveground city facility, in which case such industry standards shall apply. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec.
3(2.24), adopted 5/7/02; Ordinance 15-07-47, sec. 3, adopted 7/20/15)
Sec. 78-96 Attachments to poles
(a) Nothing shall obligate or restrict a right-of-way user from exercising its rights to enter into pole
attachment, pole usage, joint ownership or other wire space or facilities agreements with light and/or power
companies or with other wire-using companies authorized to operate within the city.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 539/684
(b) A right-of-way user shall utilize existing pole space, conduit, and other facilities whenever reasonably
and/or economically possible.
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(2.25), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-97 Temporary rearrangement of aerial wires
The right-of-way user shall rearrange its transmission media temporarily as necessary to permit the moving of
houses or other bulky structures. The requesting parties shall, pay the reasonable and necessary expense of such
temporary rearrangements. The right-of-way user shall in a reasonable time frame and reasonable cost, remove
its transmission media in connection with the demolition of unsafe structures, including emergency or ordered
demolitions at no cost to the city. The right-of-way user may invoice the requesting parties for the cost of this
work, where applicable. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(2.26), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-98 Street closures
(a) All lane closures on any thoroughfare or collectors shall comply with TMUTCD, and shall include a lane
closure exhibit to be submitted with the permit to the right-of-way manager. The right-of-way manager may
require a traffic control plan. Arrow boards and message boards may be required for lane closures on
thoroughfares and collectors.
(b) Except in an emergency, no thoroughfare or collector street shall be closed on weekdays during the hours
of 6:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. Everyday of the week, all roadways shall be open to traffic
by sunset on the same day as the construction.
(c) All lane closures require 24-hour notification of the police and fire departments prior to closing
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(2.26.1), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-99 Site maintenance during construction and prior to full restoration
(a) Erosion control and stormwater management. The right-of-way user shall be responsible for stormwater
management, erosion control and excavation safety measures that comply with city, state and federal guidelines.
Requirements shall include, but not limited to, construction fencing around any excavation that will be left
overnight, silt fencing in erosion areas until reasonable vegetation is established, barricade fencing around open
holes, and high erosion areas will require wire backed silt fencing. Upon request of right-of-way manager, the
right-of-way user may be required to furnish documentation submitted or received from the federal or state
government.
(b) Dust control. The right-of-way user shall ensure that the work is conducted and site maintained to
minimize blowing dust. At any time dust leaves the job site so that it is a nuisance, the work will stop until
measures can be taken to eliminate the dust.
(c) Traffic control safety. In the event of noncompliance with the TMUTCD, the right-of-way user shall be
notified of the violation. In the event of continued noncompliance, the right-of-way manager may revoke the
permit, in addition to any other remedies available to the city. At any time the right-of-way manager determines
the work threatens public safety, he may take immediate action as necessary including but not limited to,
stopping all work, or have a third party make the repairs at the expense of the applicant.
(d) Responsibility for signs, barricades and warning devices. The right-of-way user working in any right-ofway
is responsible for the safe movement of traffic, both pedestrian and vehicular, through the construction area.
The right-of-way user shall meet all requirements for barricading and traffic control as specified in the
TMUTCD.
(1) Only those individuals who are qualified by means of adequate training in safe traffic control
practices and have a basic understanding of the principles established by applicable standards and
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 540/684
regulations, including without limitation, those in TMUTCD, may place and maintain the traffic
control devices in a construction area.
(2) The right-of-way user must either: (i) subcontract the barricading to a firm specializing in
traffic control; or (ii) submit the qualifications and name of employees to the right-of-way user
manager for approval prior to the work commencing. The right-of-way user must also submit a traffic
control plan for review when required by this article. All signs and barricades must conform to the
requirements of the TMUTCD.
(3) All barricades, plates, and other traffic control equipment must conform to TMUTCD
specifications and must be inspected and maintained by the traffic control representative.
(4) All barricades, plates and other traffic control equipment must display accurate and sufficient
information including without limitation, the name of the right-of-way user.
(5) Noncompliance with the TMUTCD shall be cited in writing. In the event of noncompliance
after citation, the right-of-way manager may place the necessary devices as required, and the right-ofway
user shall reimburse the city for all such expenses as well as $500.00 for noncompliance. Failure
to comply with this provision may result in denial of application for future permits.
(6) All traffic control devices must be removed immediately upon completion of work.
(e) Duty to barricade. At all times during construction activity, the contractor and/or right-of-way user, as
applicable, shall place and maintain all necessary and proper barriers and other safeguards, including without
limitation, watchmen certified in accordance with the safety training described in this article, if necessary, upon
and around the work and for the prevention of accidents, and after daylight hours, shall place, maintain and keep
suitable sufficient lights, in accordance with the TMUTCD.
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(2.27), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-100 Inspection
The permittee shall make the work site accessible to the city, and others as authorized by law, for inspection at
all reasonable times during performance of the work. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(2.28), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-101 Materials testing
The department will require testing of materials used in construction in or near the right-of-way to determine
conformance with city construction specifications, including, but not limited to, compaction tests on backfill
materials, subgrade, aggregate base course, Portland concrete (rigid pavement), asphaltic concrete (flexible
pavement) and other construction materials as deemed necessary by the department. The right-of-way user shall,
at his expense, hire a testing laboratory with current accreditation by the American Association for Laboratory
Accreditation, American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) or another
nationally recognized accreditation agency that verifies compliance with ASTM E 329 and that demonstrates the
laboratory's capabilities to perform applicable ASTM or AASHTO test procedures, as may be required.
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(2.29), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-102 Duties of persons making excavations or creating obstructions
Any person who shall cause to be made any excavation or obstruction in any street or right-of-way shall not
allow the same to remain there beyond a time reasonably sufficient for the completion of the work and/or
removal of the obstruction, and shall repair the subject portion of such street and/or right-of-way so as to restore
the same to its condition previous to the making of such excavation or obstruction. It shall be the duty of such
excavators to protect the area while such condition exists and promptly to repair the same so as to leave the
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 541/684
street or right-of-way in as good condition as before the excavation. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(2.30), adopted
5/7/02)
Sec. 78-103 Emergency excavations
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent any person maintaining any pipe, conduit or duct in or under
any street, or right-of-way by virtue of any law, article or permit, from making such excavation as may be
necessary for compliance with law or for the preservation of life or property when the necessity arises, provided
that the person making the excavation shall notify the right-of-way manager within 24 hours. Except as
specifically provided otherwise in this article for excavations authorized by this section, permittee shall be
subject to all fees and requirements of this article. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(2.31), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-104 Excavation in streets
Except in case of an emergency there shall be no excavation in any street without the prior written approval of
the right-of-way manager. Any request for a permit to excavate a street shall include a description of the
proposed work and proposed restoration of the area, as well as a statement of clear and convincing evidence is
provided to the right-of-way manager as to why alternate procedures cannot or should not be used in lieu of
excavating a street. All pavement cuts and repairs shall be performed by a contractor with experience in street
repair work. Any damage to pavement outside the removal area shall also be repaired subject to approval of the
right-of-way manager.
(1) Excavation in Portland cement concrete (PCC) pavement surface. If the existing pavement is
PCC, the concrete shall be cut first with a saw to a depth of the full the thickness of the concrete, and
the full width of the trench, which shall also cut the reinforcing steel. A second cut shall be 12 inches
parallel to the first cut to full thickness of the concrete and excavated to undisturbed soil. Further
criteria is set forth in Figure 3 of the thoroughfare plan.
(2) Excavation in hot mix asphalt concrete (HMAC) pavement surface. If the existing pavement is
HMAC, the HMAC shall be cut first with a saw to a depth of the full thickness of the concrete, and
the full width of the trench, which shall also cut the reinforcing steel. A second cut shall be 12 inches
parallel to the first cut to full thickness of the concrete and excavated to undisturbed soil. Further
criteria is set forth in Figure 4 of the thoroughfare plan.
(3) Jacking and boring. Refer to specifications shown in Figure 5 of the thoroughfare plan.
(4) Responsibility of excavated area maintenance. A permittee or right-of-way user shall maintain
its repairs in the right-of-way for two years from the completion date of any repair.
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(2.32), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-105 Backfill of excavated area
(a) Open trenches may be temporarily backfilled for the convenience of the permittee or the public safety.
Traffic bearing plates can be used temporarily as shown in Figure 6 for pavement areas. At least one hour prior
to beginning permanent backfill operations, the permittee shall notify the right-of-way manager of the time the
backfill will begin.
(b) All excess water and mud shall be removed from the trench prior to backfilling. Any backfill placed during
a rainy period or at other times, where excess water cannot be prevented from entering the trench, will be
considered temporary and shall be removed as soon as weather permits. All disturbed base material or any base
that has been undermined shall be removed and discarded. Compaction of all backfill shall be 95 percent of
maximum density with a moisture content of zero percent to plus four percent of optimum moisture content as
determined by ASTM D698 under or near paved surfaces, future paved surfaces or otherwise as determined by
right-of-way manager. Outside of pavement surfaces, compaction of all backfill shall be 90 percent of maximum
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 542/684
density with a moisture content of minus two percent to plus four percent of optimum moisture content as
determined by ASTM D698.
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(2.33), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-106 Right-of-way restoration requirements
(a) The work to be done pursuant to the permit and any repair and/or subsequent restoration of the right-ofway
must be completed within the dates specified in the permit. In the event of circumstances beyond the control
of the permittee or when work is prohibited by unseasonable or unreasonable conditions, the right-of-way
manager may, in his sole discretion, extend the dates on receipt of a substantiated supplementary application for
a permit extension.
(b) All earth, materials, sidewalk, pavement, utilities, conduits, crossing, irrigation, landscaping, monuments,
manhole covers, valve covers, meter box lids or improvements of any kind, which are owned or possessed by the
city, and damaged, disturbed, or removed by a right-of-way user shall be fully repaired promptly by the right-ofway
user, at its sole expense, to the reasonable satisfaction of the right-of-way manager.
(c) After any excavation, the right-of-way user shall, at its expense, restore the right-of-way, trench envelope,
pavement structure and the surrounding area, to the same or better condition than it was prior to the excavation.
The restoration shall be made in accordance with specifications set forth herein, and the repair shall endure
without failure for two years from the completion date of any repair.
(d) In the event the right-of-way user fails to restore the right-of-way in the manner and to the condition
required herein, or fails to satisfactorily and/or timely complete all restoration, the city may, at its option, serve
written notice upon the right-of-way user that, unless within five days after serving of such notice a satisfactory
arrangement can be made for the proper restoration of the right-of-way by the right-of-way user, the city may
take over the work and prosecute same to completion, by contract or otherwise, at the sole expense of the rightof-
way user, and right-of-way user, and its surety, shall be liable to the city for any and all cost incurred by the
city by reason of such prosecution an completion including, without limitation, the applicable public
inconvenience penalty. Nothing contained herein shall limit any other remedies available to the city.
(e) If any excavation cannot be backfilled immediately, the right-of-way user shall securely and adequately
cover the excavation and maintain proper barricades, safety fencing and/or lights as required, from the time of
the opening of the excavation until the excavation is surfaced and opened for travel.
(f) In all right-of-way restoration, the right-of-way user guarantees its work and shall maintain it two years
from the date of completion of any restoration. During the period following completion, the right-of-way user
shall, in the event of any failure of the restoration, and upon notification from the right-of-way manager,
reimburse the city for pavement restoration costs as provided for in this article. Additionally, the right-of-way
user, in the event of such failure, shall within 48 hours of notice from the city, repair the subject trench envelope.
(g) The two-year guarantee period shall be applicable to, among others, failure of the pavement surface as
well as failure of the trench envelope. Notwithstanding remediation of the pavement structure by the city, the
right-of-way user retains repair responsibility at all times during the guarantee period for the trench envelope. In
locations where two or more right-of-way users have made repairs in the exact same location, the last right-ofway
user to excavate shall be responsible for the two-year guarantee in that location, unless the right-of-way
manager determines, in his sole discretion, that a failure was most likely a result of work performed by another
right-of-way user. That right-of-way user shall be responsible for the two-year maintenance period.
(h) All street excavations shall be perpendicular excavations, unless otherwise approved by the right-of-way
manager. Excavations in streets, which are not perpendicular excavations require block-to-block and curb-tocurb
pavement reconstruction, or other method of repair approved by the right-of-way manager. All repairs shall
be equal or better than that which existed prior to the commencement of any work.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 543/684
(i) No trench shall be opened for the purpose of laying pipes, conduits or ducts for a distance greater than can
be backfilled on the same workday before sunset. Any variance from this requirement must be granted in writing
from the right-of-way manager prior to work beginning.
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(2.34), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-107 Restoration of pavement
Unless otherwise specified in the permit, restoration of the pavement of any street, alley, right-of-way or other
public place shall be performed by the permittee.
(1) No trench shall be opened in any street for the purpose of laying pipes, conduits or ducts more
than 200 feet in advance of the pipe, conduit or ducts being placed in the trench, other than with the
prior written consent of the right-of-way manager.
(2) All excavations shall comply with the city construction standards, as amended, and
requirements of this article. Unless otherwise required by city standards, as amended, or if unusual
conditions are encountered, the right-of-way manager may require new standards for compaction,
backfill and pavement restoration.
(3) Any excavated pavement, debris and/or other rubble shall be removed, together with any
surplus material, within one working day from the time such material is placed upon the street. After
backfilling is completed, and prior to repaving the cut, the right-of-way user shall remove all loose
paving material and trim the edges of the excavation at the street surface to the satisfaction of the
right-of-way manager.
(4) Whenever any caving occurs in the sidewalks of any excavation, the pavements above such
caving shall be cut away, trench backfilled, compacted and sidewalk pavement restored. In no case
shall any side or lateral tamping fill any void under a pavement.
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(2.35), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-108 Permanent pavement repairs
The right-of-way user will maintain the excavated area until permanent pavement restoration of the excavated
area is complete. The right-of-way user shall make the final repairs within seven days on thoroughfares and
collector streets and within 30 days on residential, local and alley streets after the right-of-way manager makes
final inspection. Backfill failures shall remain the responsibility of the right-of-way user. (Ordinance 02-05-65,
sec. 3(2.36), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-109 Substandard repair of pavement of right-of-way
In case the pavement or the surface of the street, alley, or right-of-way in, over or near any excavation should
become depressed, cracked or broken at any time or fails in any way at any time after the excavation has been
made and during the two-year warranty, the right-of-way user shall comply with any applicable obligations of
this article, including, without limitation, reimbursement to the city of the cost to restore the street and/or rightof-
way. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(2.37), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-110 Failure to diligently pursue or complete work within specified time
In the event any work governed by this chapter is not completed or diligently pursued to completion by the rightof-
way user within the time required or in accordance with the specifications required herein or by the right-ofway
manager, the project or facilities that are the subject of the work shall be deemed to be abandoned facilities
and any permits issued under this chapter are subject to revocation. In such an event, the right-of-way manager
may cause such work to be performed as is necessary to secure the work area to a safe and passable condition.
The right-of-way user shall reimburse the city for the costs of securing the site. For purposes of this section, a
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 544/684
right-of-way user shall be considered to have diligently pursued completion of work requiring excavation of the
right-of-way when the right-of-way user does not cease or abandon such work for more than three (3) business
days, subject to reasonable delays due to inclement weather. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(2.38), adopted 5/7/02;
Ordinance 17-08-58, sec. 2, adopted 8/15/17)
Sec. 78-111 Removal and reconstruction where work is defective
All construction work in the streets, right-of-ways, sidewalks and public places of the city is declared to be
subject to the exclusive control of the city, and whenever, in the sole opinion of the right-of-way manager, any
such work shall not have been duly completed within a reasonable time or shall have been executed in a
defective manner, whether because of bad workmanship or materials or because not true to the lines or grades or
specification therefor given to him by the right-of-way manager, then upon written demand or notice from the
right-of-way manager, such right-of-way user or contractor shall promptly remedy, complete and/or remove and
reconstruct such incomplete or defective work all as the right-of-way manager may require, and these provisions
shall also apply to all repair and maintenance work. If the contractor or right-of-way user shall fail or refuse to
do so within a reasonable time to be specified by the right-of-way manager, then, if required by the right-of-way
manager, such work shall be completed or corrected or removed and wholly or partially reconstructed by the
city, in such a manner as in the opinion of the right-of-way manager may be necessary to make such work as
good as originally required, and such work may be done by contract or otherwise, under the direction of the
right-of-way manager, and the contractor or right-of-way user shall reimburse city for any and all cost incurred
by the city performing the work described in this subsection. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(2.39), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-112 Cleanup of right-of-way
In every case, and at all times, the work of removing from the right-of-way all obstructions, surplus materials,
debris and waste matter of every description caused by and/or accumulated from the excavation shall be the sole
responsibility of the right-of-way user. Streets shall be cleaned by use of a regenerative air or vacuum street
sweeper. The right-of-way user shall clean the surrounding area, as outlined above, within one day upon
completion and approval of all trench work and pavement restoration unless the right-of-way manager, sufficient
reason therefor having been given to his satisfaction, grants a written extension of time. (Ordinance 02-05-65,
sec. 3(2.40), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-113 Reporting
When the work under permit hereunder is completed, the permittee shall notify the city in accordance with the
requirements placed on the permit. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(2.41), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-114 Effect of article on persons engaged in construction
Any permit issued prior to the adoption of this article will remain subject to the terms and conditions of city
ordinances and requirements in effect at the time of issuance of the permit and is not affected by this article,
except that, upon expiration or conclusion of the permit, a new or renewal permit must be obtained in
accordance with this article. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(2.42), adopted 5/7/02)
Secs. 78-115–78-141 Reserved
ARTICLE IV. FEES, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
Sec. 78-142 Fees shall apply to all right-of-way users, unless governed by an existing agreement
(a) Permit application fee. There is a permit application fee of $25.00. Permits shall be issued or denied within
five days from the city's receipt of the application. There is an expedited application fee of $250.00 for permits,
which shall be issued or denied within two days. An applicant shall pay the fees when a permit is issued. The
fees are charged for administration and input of permit data. An expedited permit may be requested upon a
showing of good cause, including but not limited to, a pending order for service that cannot be met by means of
existing facilities of the right-of-way user.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 545/684
(b) Saturday inspection fee. The Saturday inspection fee shall be $150.00 per Saturday.
(c) Permit expiration fee. A fee of $30.00 will be charged for any permit that has not been extended before its
expiration date and for any permit wherein work has not been completed by the expiration date provided for in
the permit.
(d) Electronic maps submittal fee. A fee of $40.00 per hour will be charged for each hour of labor necessitated
by information submitted to the city in hard copy format in lieu of submittals to the city in electronic format.
There is a minimum of two hours.
(e) Registration fee. There is a fee of $35.00 per right-of-way user per year for processing registration
information fee, which will be collected by city upon registration.
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(3.1), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-143 Public inconvenience penalty
Public inconvenience penalties are assessed and calculated from the date of expiration of the permit until date of
completion of work or repair or of final backfill if turned over to the department for repair. This penalty shall not
exceed and is capped by statutory limits. Public inconvenience penalties are charged per day as follows:
Type of Facility Unit of Cost Penalty (Per day)
31-75 days 79-90 days 90-100 days >>100 days
Sidewalk Per square foot $0.0026 $0.0052 $0.0078 $0.0104
Driveway Per each $39.00 $78.00 $117.00 $156.00
Metered traffic lane *In addition to traffic lane fee
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(3.2), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-144 Clean up costs
The right-of-way user shall maintain the area on and around the excavation and related work in a clean, safe and
orderly fashion at all times during conduct of the excavation and shall clean the same area upon completion of
work. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(3.3), adopted 5/7/02)
Secs. 78-145–78-171 Reserved
ARTICLE V. INDEMNIFICATION, INSURANCE, BONDING AND LIABILITY
Sec. 78-172 Liability of right-of-way user
To the extent allowed by law, the right-of-way user shall be liable to the city for any damage or loss occasioned
by any act and/or omission occurring in connection with its excavation, and subject to state law, the right-of-way
user shall fully indemnify, hold harmless and defend the city, its councilmembers, officers, employees, agents,
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 546/684
representatives and volunteers from and against any and all suits, actions, judgments, losses, costs, demands,
claims, expenses (including attorney's fees), damages, and liabilities of every kind to which the city, its
councilmembers, officers, employees, agents, representatives and volunteers may be subjected for injury of any
type, death or property damage arising from or connected with any such act and/or omission. The city shall
promptly notify a permittee, or right-of-way user, at the address set forth in the permit, or last known address, of
any claim, suit or demand served upon the city and alleging negligent or wrongful conduct by the permittee or
right-of-way user in connection with an excavation. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(4.1), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-173 Insurance
(a) Right-of-way users shall furnish an original completed certificate of insurance to the department which
shall be completed by an agent authorized to bind the named underwriter and their company to the coverage,
limits, and termination provisions shown thereon, and which shall furnish and contain all required information
referenced or indicated thereon. The original certificate must have the agent's original signature, including the
signer's company affiliation, title and phone number, and be mailed directly from the agent to the city. The city
shall have no duty to perform under this article until such certificate has been delivered to the department.
(b) The city reserves the right to review the insurance requirements of this section to modify insurance
coverage and limits when deemed necessary and prudent by the city based upon changes in statutory law, court
decisions, or circumstances surrounding this article, but in no instance will the city allow modification
whereupon the city may incur increased risk.
(c) Subject to the right-of-way user's right to maintain reasonable deductibles in such amounts as are approved
by the city, right-of-way users shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect for the duration of the permit,
and any extension thereof, and/or duration of time it maintains facilities in the public right-of-way, at the rightof-
way user's sole expense, insurance coverage written on an occurrence basis, by companies authorized and
admitted to do business in the state and rated A- or better by A.M. Best Company and/or otherwise acceptable to
the city, in the following types and amounts:
Type Amount
1. Worker's compensation employer's
liability
Statutory
$500,000.00/$500,000.00/$500,000.00
2. Commercial general (public) liability
insurance to include coverage for the
following:
a. Premises/operations Bodily injury and property damage of
$2,000,000.00 per occurrence,
$5,000,000.00 general, aggregate or
its equivalent in umbrella or excess
liability coverage
b. Independent contractors
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 547/684
c. Products/completed operations
d. Contractual liability
e. Personal injury
f. Explosion, collapse, underground
g. Broad form property damage, to include
fire legal liability
*3. Business automobile liability: Combined single limit for bodily
injury and property damage of
$1,000,000.00 per occurrence or its
equivalent
a. Owned/leased vehicle
b. Nonowned vehicles
c. Hired vehicles
*4. Professional liability (claims made from) $1,000,000.00 per claim to pay on
behalf of the insured all sums which
the insured shall become legally
obligated to pay as damages by reason
of any act, malpractice, error or
omission in professional services
*5. Contractor's pollution liability coverage $1,000,000.00 written on a claims
made form with a two year extended
reporting period
*6. Pollution liability motor carrier and
trucker coverage endorsing the upset,
overturn and remediation of a load in
transport
Combined single limit for bodily
injury and property damage of
$1,000,000.00 per occurrence written
or an occurrence form
*If applicable.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 548/684
(d) The city shall be entitled, upon request and without expense, to receive copies of the policies and all
endorsements thereto as they apply to the limits required by the city, and may make a reasonable request for
deletion, revision, or modification of particular policy terms, conditions, limitations or exclusions (except where
policy revisions are established by law or regulation binding upon any party to the policy or the underwriter of
such policy). Upon such request by the city, the right-of-way user shall exercise reasonable effort to accomplish
such changes in policy coverage, and shall pay the cost thereof.
(e) Right-of-way users shall ensure that all insurance contracts and certificate of insurance contain the
following required provisions:
(1) Name the city and its councilmembers, officers, employees, volunteers, agents and
representatives as additional insured with respect to the operations and activities of, or on behalf of,
the named insured performing in the right-of-way under provision of this article, with the exception
of the professional liability, workers' compensation and liability policy;
(2) Right-of-way user's insurance shall be deemed primary with respect to any insurance or selfinsurance
carried by the city;
(3) Provide for an endorsement that the “other insurance” clause shall not apply to the city of the
city where the city is an additional insured shown on the policy;
(4) Workers' compensation and employers' liability will provide for a waiver of subrogation in
favor of the city.
(f) Right-of-way user shall notify the city in the event of any notice of cancellation, nonrenewal or material
change in coverage and shall give such notices not less than 30 days prior to the change, or ten days notice for
cancellation due to nonpayment of premiums, which notice must be accompanied by a replacement certificate of
insurance. All notices shall be given to the city at the following address:
Right-of-Way Manager
Department of Public Works
City of Frisco
6726 Walnut
Frisco, Texas 75034
(g) Nothing herein contained shall be construed as limiting in any way the extent to which the right-of-way
user may be held responsible for payments of damages to persons (including death) or property resulting from
the right-of-way user's, or its subcontractors', performance of the work performed in the public right-of-way.
(h) The city owned utilities shall not be required to provide the insurance specified herein.
(i) With respect to the right-of-way user's obligation to comply with the requirements for commercial general
(public) liability insurance coverage to include pollution coverage, the city may allow the right-of-way user to
self-insure upon annual production of evidence that is satisfactory to the city. With respect to the right-of-way
user's obligation to comply with the requirements for automobile liability insurance and for worker's
compensation insurance, a right-of-way user may self-insure, provided the right-of-way user tenders satisfactory
evidence of self-insurance as contemplated by the State Motor Vehicle Financial Responsibility Law, V.T.C.A.,
Transportation Code sec. 601.124, and the Texas Workers' Compensation Act, V.T.C.A., Labor Code sec.
407.001 et seq., as amended.
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(4.2), adopted 5/7/02)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 549/684
Sec. 78-174 Performance/assurance bond
Before a permit shall be issued, the applicant shall execute and deliver to the city, to be kept on file with the city,
a good and sufficient bond of performance or assurance, in the sum of $10,000.00 to be approved by the city and
conditioned that the person making the application shall promptly adjust, pay and settle all legitimate claims for
damages that may result by reason of carelessness or negligence in the manner of performing such work or by
reason of any defects therein caused or arising from careless, negligent or imperfect construction thereof, and to
hold the city, its councilmembers, officers, employees, volunteers, agents, and representatives, free and harmless
from liability on all such claims for damages to the performance or assurance bond which shall cover the cost of
repairs in or upon the street, sidewalk or other public place where the work is to be done that may become
necessary by reason of such cut or excavation having been made. The bond shall be maintained until the work is
accepted by the city. With respect to the right-of-way user's obligation to comply with the requirements for a
performance/assurance bond, the city may, in the city's sole discretion, allow the right-of-way user to self-insure
such obligation upon production of evidence that is satisfactory to the city. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(4.3),
adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-175 Optional continuing bond and deposit
In lieu of a bond of performance or assurance required for each permit issued under the performance/assurance
bond section of this article, the applicant may maintain a one-time bond of performance or assurance with the
right-of-way manager in the sum of $100,000.00 for the purposes specified in section 78-174, and shall have on
file, with the city, an approved bond of performance or assurance in like amount, being then in full force and
effect, against which claims shall not have been presented aggregating more than $100,000.00; provided, further,
that section 78-174 shall not apply to applications for permits to make cuts, openings or excavations in any
street, plaza or other public place paved under contract with the city, unless the contract of maintenance and the
maintenance bond therefor shall have expired. The bond shall be maintained until the applicant is no longer
working in or on the right-of-ways. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(4.4), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-176 Liability of contractor and sureties for maintenance and repair work
Any defects of workmanship or material relating to work done by an excavator during the initial project or
becoming known, or which should have been known, during the guarantee period (the two years) shall be known
as maintenance or repair work, and both the excavator and the sureties and/or the contractor's bond shall be fully
liable for any default of such contractor under this section. In the event of a failure in the restoration of an
excavation, the right-of-way user shall, at its sole expense, have one opportunity to repair, in a timely manner,
the section of the restoration that has failed, which repair shall be in accordance with the standards set forth in
this article. In the event of any subsequent failure of that section of the restoration, the city retains the right and
option to terminate the right-of-way user's guaranty, upon written notice to the right-of-way user. In such event,
the right-of-way user shall reimburse the city for its direct costs associated with the repair of the failure of the
restoration work. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(4.5), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-177 When additional security required
In the event the right-of-way manager reasonably believes the contractor's or right-of-way user's solvency is
threatened, the right-of-way manager may, at any time, make written demand on a contractor and/or right-of-way
user for bonds, and the contractor and/or right-of-way user shall immediately furnish such additional bond or
bonds to the city. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(4.6), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-178 Decision of right-of-way manager binding on contractor, row user and sureties
If any question arises as to when any work was actually begun or other specific dates, the decision of the rightof-
way manager shall be conclusive on the contractor, right-of-way user, and the sureties on all such bonds.
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(4.7), adopted 5/7/02)
Secs. 78-179–78-209 Reserved
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 550/684
ARTICLE VI. VARIANCES AND EXEMPTIONS
Sec. 78-210 Variance/exemptions
A permittee or right-of-way user may request a variance from any of the requirements of this article by filing a
written request with the right-of-way manager stating the requirement and the basis for the variance. The rightof-
way manager may reject incomplete variance requests. The applicant shall bear its own expenses of the
application process.
(1) Any request for a variance from any right-of-way restoration requirement shall be made in
writing, in advance of any contemplated work and shall be accompanied by digitally formatted
detailed plans of the substituted reconstruction and/or repair of the excavated area, if applicable.
(2) Any request for an exemption and/or variance from any penalty and/or fee, other than as
provided in this article, shall be made in writing, and shall be accompanied by a written detailed
request stating the reasons therefor.
(3) Any request for an exemption and/or variance from any permit, or any other requirement of this
article shall be made in writing, stating in detail all reasons for the requested exemption and/or
variance.
(4) The department shall grant or deny an application for a variance and/or exemption within ten
days of receipt of the application for variance and/or exemption.
(5) Denial of the variance may be appealed in accordance with section 78-43.
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(5.1), adopted 5/7/02)
Secs. 78-211–78-228 Reserved
ARTICLE VII. CERTIFIED TELECOMM PROVIDERS
Sec. 78-229 Certificated telecommunications providers authority required/nonexclusive use
A CTP must provide evidence that the CTP has acquired authorization from the PUCT pursuant to state law,
prior to obtaining a permit to use public right-of-way. The CTP's right to use and occupy the public right-of-way
shall not be exclusive, and the city shall have the right to exercise its police powers and manage its public rightof-
way, based on the Act and all other state or federal laws. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(6.1), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-230 Additional authority required
The CTP, and any of its affiliates, are not authorized to provide cable television service as a cable operator or to
operate an open video system in the city, but must first obtain a separate franchise agreement from the city for
that purpose, under such terms and conditions as may be required by law. This section does not preclude the
CTP from providing its services to cable television companies. Unless a cable television operator shows proof of
appropriate city authorization, nothing herein shall authorize the CTP to license, sublicense, lease, sublease or by
any instrument authorize any cable television operator the right to use or utilize the transmission media or
facilities of the CTP. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(6.2), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-231 Transfer and notice
A CTP shall notify the right-of-way manager of any sale, transfer, merger or assignment of the ownership or
control of a CTP's business within 30 days of such sale, transfer, merger or assignment. A CTP shall also
maintain and provide current point-of-contact information with the right-of-way manager at all times during
which the CTP uses the right-of-way. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(6.3), adopted 5/7/02)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 551/684
Sec. 78-232 Exemption from fees
CTPs are exempted from the following fees provided for in this article:
(1) Permit application fee, including expedited application fee and permit expiration fee;
(2) Additional permit fee;
(3) Saturday inspection fee;
(4) Registration fee.
(Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(6.4), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-233 Waiver bonds
Unless determined otherwise by the right-of-way manager a CTP will be exempt from the bonding requirements
of this article, including sections 78-174 and 78-175, however, in the event that the right-of-way manager
determines, based upon reasonable grounds, that a bond is necessary to protect the public assets, and/or the
health and safety of the public, then the right-of-way manager may require that a CTP post a reasonable bond
not to exceed $100,000.00. Factors to be considered in determining reasonable grounds may include, but are not
limited to, a conviction for violation of this article, a general pattern of substandard adherence to the provisions
of this article or the failure to comply with this article. If three years pass from the date that the right-of-way
manager requires a bond of a CTP and it has not been necessary for the city to seek performance under the bond,
then a bond will no longer be required pursuant to this section. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(6.5), adopted 5/7/02)
Sec. 78-234 CTP indemnity
A CTP shall indemnify the city as specified by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code sec. 283.057, as may be
amended. A CTP shall be exempt from all indemnity requirements of this article that are inconsistent with
V.T.C.A., Local Government Code sec. 283.057, as amended. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(6.6), adopted 5/7/02)
Secs. 78-235–78-261 Reserved
ARTICLE VIII. MISCELLANEOUS
Sec. 78-262 Bridge weight limit violation
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to drive, haul, push or tow, wholly or partially, any load upon
a posted weight limited bridge, which collectively exceeds the officially designated and posted maximum bridge
weight, whether or not all load bearing wheels travel on the bridge. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(7.1), adopted
5/7/02)
Sec. 78-263 Penalty provision
This is not a traffic ordinance authorized under the Texas Motor Vehicle Statutes, and is not governed by the
penal provision hereunder. Any person, firm, corporation or business entity violating this article shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of $500.00,
unless the violation relates to fire safety or public health and sanitation, including dumping and refuse, in which
the fine shall not exceed the sum of $2,000.00. Each continuing day's violation under this article shall constitute
a separate offense. The penal provisions imposed under this article shall not preclude the city from filing suit to
enjoin the violation. The city retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and
federal law. (Ordinance 02-05-65, sec. 3(7.3), adopted 5/7/02)
Secs. 78-264–78-289 Reserved
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 552/684
ARTICLE IX REGULATIONS CONCERNING MUNICIPAL FACILITIES
Sec. 78-290 Council authority to prescribe regulations; nonliability for lost property
(a) The city council shall have the right, power and authority by resolution or otherwise to prescribe additional
reasonable rules and regulations or appeal regulations for the maintenance and operation of park and recreation
areas.
(b) The city shall not be liable or bound for any loss or damage claimed by reason of the lost or damaged
personal property taken nor in any way on account of any personal injury of or death to any person entering the
premises.
(Ordinance 90-10-01, sec. 6, adopted 10/2/90)
ARTICLE X. MEDIANS WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Sec. 78-321 Definitions
Emergency as used herein shall mean a serious unexpected and dangerous situation that poses an immediate risk
to health, life, property or environment, which a reasonable person would determine requires immediate action
and/or urgent intervention to prevent a worsening of the situation.
Emergency personnel as used herein shall mean all persons who are trained emergency medical service
providers, police, fire or other public safety persons or a physician responding to a situation whereby such
individual's training and professional experience could mitigate a situation which, in the individual's reasonable
opinion, rises to the level of an emergency.
Median as used herein shall mean the strip of land between the lanes of apposing traffic on a divided public
right-of-way.
Motor vehicle as used herein shall mean a self-propelled vehicle and/or device for transporting persons or
property designed for use on a public right-of-way.
Public right(s)-of-way as used herein shall mean any public street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway,
road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place, or however otherwise designated, as an access way for vehicular traffic and
other public uses, located in the city.
(Ordinance 14-03-20, sec. 2, adopted 3/18/14)
Sec. 78-322 Purpose and intent
This article provides regulations relating to prohibiting the stopping, standing, walking, running and/or
otherwise entering in and/or upon, in any other way whatsoever, medians within public right-of-way so as to
promote the health, safety and welfare of pedestrians, motorists and other persons located in the city by, among
other things:
(1) Assisting in avoiding the creation of traffic hazards and distraction of pedestrians, motorists
and other persons using public rights-of-way;
(2) Alleviating possible nuisances to pedestrians, motorists and other persons using public rightsof-
way; and
(3) Alleviating potential dangers to pedestrians, motorists and other persons using public rights-ofway.
(Ordinance 14-03-20, sec. 2, adopted 3/18/14)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 553/684
Sec. 78-323 Prohibition of stopping, standing, walking, running and/or otherwise entering in and/or
upon a median within public rights-of-way
(a) A person commits an offense in violation of this article and section if he stops, stands, walks, runs and/or
otherwise enters in and/or upon, in any other way whatsoever, regardless of his intent to remain, any median
within a public right-of-way.
(b) It shall be a defense to prosecution under this article and section if:
(1) The person was stopping, standing, walking, running and/or otherwise in and/or upon the
median within a public right-of-way in response to or as a result of an emergency;
(2) The person stopping, standing, walking, running and/or otherwise in and/or upon the median
was emergency personnel;
(3) The person was crossing a public right-of-way, at a location authorized by law and in
accordance with all applicable rules of the road, and is required to pause in and/or upon the median
so as to avoid traffic;
(4) The person is in and/or upon the median performing duties delegated to him by a governmental
entity, or its authorized designee or agent, responsible for, among other things, maintenance of the
median;
(5) The person in and/or upon the median was performing duties and/or work associated with
franchise utilities and/or under the authority of city's right-of-way management Ordinance No. 08-08-
77 (section 78-3 of this code), as amended, or any other applicable ordinance, as they exist, may be
amended or in the future arising, of city pertaining to authority to enter in and/or upon the median for
a particular purpose; or
(6) The person is in and/or upon the median pursuant to a lawful order of a peace officer.
(Ordinance 14-03-20, sec. 2, adopted 3/18/14)
Sec. 78-324 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof shall be fined a sum not to exceed five hundred and no/100 dollars ($500.00). Each
continuing day's violation under this article shall constitute a separate offense. (Ordinance 14-03-20, sec. 2,
adopted 3/18/14)
Sec. 78-325 Injunctive relief
In addition to and accumulative of all other penalties, the city shall have the right to seek injunctive relief for any
and all violations of this article. (Ordinance 14-03-20, sec. 2, adopted 3/18/14)
Secs. 78-326–78-399 Reserved
ARTICLE XI. DESIGN MANUAL FOR THE INSTALLATION OF NETWORK NODES AND NODE
SUPPORT POLES
Sec. 78-400 Purpose and applicability
(a) Purpose.
(1) The standards and procedures provided in this article are adopted to protect the health, safety,
and welfare of the public by minimizing and reducing impacts to public safety within the city's public
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 554/684
right-of-way and to minimize and reduce impacts to the city, its residents, and visitors and to give
assistance and guidance to wireless telecommunications providers to assist providers in the timely,
efficient, safe, and aesthetically pleasing installation of technologically competitive equipment.
(2) Due, in part, to the increasing number of facilities in the city's public right-of-way, the city has
adopted chapter 78 (streets, sidewalks and other public property) of this code, which is applicable to
all public service providers, including wireless service providers or network providers (collectively,
“providers”) as defined by chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code.
(3) In addition, the city has adopted this article to provide technical criteria and details necessary
for providers seeking to install, operate, maintain, repair, modify and replace network nodes and node
support poles in the city's public right-of-way.
(b) Applicability.
(1) Providers shall adhere to the requirements found in this chapter 78 (streets, sidewalks and other
public property) of this code, including the requirements in this article, for the installation, operation,
maintenance, repair, modification, and replacement of wireless facilities within the city's public rightof-
way.
(2) This article governs siting and criteria for the installation of wireless facilities, including micro
network nodes, network nodes, node support poles, and related ground equipment, being installed
pursuant to chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code. This article shall apply to any sitings,
installations, collocations in, on, over or under the public rights-of-way of such wireless facilities,
whether they are installed pursuant to chapter 284, or installed pursuant to an agreement with the city
in its discretion, or installed as may otherwise be allowed by state law.
(3) To the extent that the provisions of chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code; this
chapter 78 (streets, sidewalks and other public property) of this code; or other applicable laws,
ordinances, codes, rules and regulations of the city are in conflict with provisions of this article or
each other, the provisions of chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code; this article; this
chapter 78 (streets, sidewalks and other public property) of this code; or other applicable laws,
ordinances, codes, rules and regulations of the city shall prevail and control with regard to a provider
in that order.
(Ordinance 17-08-58, sec. 3, adopted 8/15/17)
Sec. 78-401 Definitions
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth herein. When not inconsistent
with the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the plural number include the
singular number, and words in the singular include the plural. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not
merely permissive. Terms used but not defined herein shall have the meanings set forth in chapter 284 of the
Texas Local Government Code to the extent such terms are defined therein.
Abandon. Its derivatives means the facilities installed in the public right-of-way (including by way of example
but not limited to: poles, wires, conduit, manholes, handholes, cuts, network nodes and node support poles, or
portion thereof) that have been left by a provider in an unused or non-functioning condition for more than 120
consecutive calendar days unless, after notice to provider, provider has established to the reasonable satisfaction
of the city that the applicable wireless facilities, or portion thereof, are still in active use.
Antenna. Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in
the provision of wireless services.
Chapter 284. Chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code, as it exists or may be amended.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 555/684
City. The City of Frisco, Texas and its officers and employees.
Collocate and collocation. The installation, mounting, maintenance, modification, operation, or replacement of
network nodes in a public right-of-way on or adjacent to a pole.
Concealed, concealment and camouflaged. Any wireless facility or pole that is covered, blended, painted,
disguised, camouflaged, or otherwise concealed such that the wireless facility blends into the surrounding
environment and is visually unobtrusive as allowed as a condition for city approval under section 284.105 of
chapter 284 in historic districts or design districts. A concealed or camouflaged wireless facility or pole also
includes any wireless facility or pole conforming to the surrounding area in which the wireless facility or pole is
located and may include, but is not limited to any wireless facility or pole hidden beneath a facade, blended with
surrounding area design, painted to match the supporting area, or disguised with artificial tree branches.
Decorative pole. A streetlight pole specially designed and placed for aesthetic purposes and on which no
appurtenances or attachments, other than specially designed informational or directional signage or temporary
holiday or special event attachments, have been placed or are permitted to be placed according to
nondiscriminatory city laws, ordinances, codes, rules or regulations.
Design district. An area that is zoned, or otherwise designated by city ordinance, and for which the city
maintains and enforces unique design and aesthetic standards on a uniform and nondiscriminatory basis.
Distributed antenna system or DAS. Shall be included as a type of network node.
Historic district. An area that is zoned or otherwise designated as a historic district under municipal, state, or
federal law.
Location. The city-approved and lawfully permitted location of a network node or other wireless facility.
Macro tower. A guyed or self-supported pole or monopole greater than the height parameters prescribed by
section 284.103 of chapter 284 and that supports or is capable of supporting antennas.
Micro network node. A network node that is not larger in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width,
and 12 inches in height, and that has an exterior antenna, if any, not longer than 11 inches.
Municipal park. The various properties under the direction, control, or supervision of the director of the city's
parks and recreation department pursuant to authority granted by the city council and the city charter or city
ordinances or resolutions.
MUTCD. The manual of uniform traffic-control devices.
Network node. Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and
a communications network. The term:
(1) Includes:
(A) Equipment associated with wireless communications;
(B) A radio transceiver, an antenna, a battery-only backup power supply, and comparable
equipment, regardless of technological configuration; and
(C) Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is immediately adjacent to and directly associated with a
particular collocation; and
(2) Does not include:
(A) An electric generator;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 556/684
(B) A pole; or
(C) A macro tower.
Network provider or provider.
(1) A wireless service provider; or
(2) A person that does not provide wireless services and that is not an electric utility but builds or
installs on behalf of a wireless service provider:
(A) Network nodes; or
(B) Node support poles or any other structure that supports or is capable of supporting a
network node.
Node support pole. A pole installed by a network provider for the primary purpose of supporting a network
node.
Permit. A document issued by the city authorizing installation, removal, modification and other work for
provider's wireless facilities in accordance with the approved plans and specifications.
Private easement. An easement or other real property right that is only for the benefit of the grantor and grantee
and their successors and assigns.
Provider. Has the same meaning as “network provider.”
Public right-of-way and right-of-way. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public
sidewalk, alley, waterway, city easement or utility easement in which the city has an interest. The term does not
include a private easement or the airwaves above a public right-of-way with regard to wireless
telecommunications.
Service pole. A pole, other than a municipally owned utility pole, owned or operated by the city and located in a
public right-of-way, including:
(1) A pole that supports traffic-control functions;
(2) A structure for signage;
(3) A pole that supports lighting, other than a decorative pole; and
(4) A pole or similar structure owned or operated by the city and supporting only network nodes.
Small cell. Shall be included as a type of “network node.”
Stealth. Has the same meaning as “concealed.”
Street. Only the paved portion of the public right-of-way used for vehicular travel, being the area between the
inside of the curb to the inside of the opposite curb, or the area between the two parallel edges of the paved
roadway for vehicular travel where there is no curb. It does not include the median. A “street” is generally part
of, but smaller in width than the width of the entire public right-of-way; while a public right-of-way may include
sidewalks and utility easements, a “street” does not. A “street” does not include the curb or the sidewalk, if
either are present at the time of a permit application or if added later.
Traffic signal. Any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated by which traffic is
alternately directed to stop, to slow down or alter current speed and to proceed.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 557/684
Transport facility. Each transmission path physically within a public right-of-way, extending with a physical line
from a network node directly to the network, for the purpose of providing backhaul for network nodes.
Underground requirement area. An area where poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead or aboveground
structures have been removed and buried or have been approved for burial underground pursuant to municipal
ordinances, zoning regulations, state law, private deed restrictions, and other public or private restrictions, that
prohibit installing aboveground structures in a public right-of-way.
Utility pole. A pole that provides:
(1) Electric distribution with a voltage rating of not more than 34.5 kilovolts; or
(2) Services of a telecommunications provider, as defined by chapter 284 or section 51.002 of the
Texas Utilities Code.
Wireless facilities. “Micro network nodes,” “network nodes,” and “node support poles,” as those terms are
defined in chapter 284, and related ground equipment.
Wireless service. Any service, using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of wi-fi,
whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using a network node.
Wireless service provider. A person that provides wireless service to the public.
(Ordinance 17-08-58, sec. 3, adopted 8/15/17)
Sec. 78-402 Permitting
(a) Attachments to existing poles or structures. A provider shall not install, modify or relocate a network node
on an existing pole or structure or modify or relocate an existing node support pole within the public right-ofway
without first obtaining a right-of-way permit from the city. Prior to installation, modification or relocation
of a network node on an existing pole or structure or modification or relocation of an existing node support pole,
provider shall complete and submit to the city a commercial building (electrical) permit application and a rightof-
way permit application in the form provided by the city, along with standard required documents and the
following items:
(1) Payment of the permit application fee and all other fees required under chapter 284, including
but not limited to annual fees set forth in section 284.053(a) of chapter 284, as such fees may be
adjusted from time to time pursuant to section 284.054 of chapter 284, and fees set forth in section
284.055 and section 284.056 of chapter 284, as applicable;
(2) An aerial map showing the location of the existing pole or structure to which the network node
is proposed to be attached, and a street view image of the same;
(3) Construction and engineering drawings prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the
state, and for wireless facilities proposed to be attached to a service pole, a decorative pole or other
city-owned or -controlled structure, a certification from the engineer that the existing pole or
structure and its foundations have sufficient structural stability to support the proposed network node
and can bear the wind load without pole modification, or in the event the installation will require pole
re-enforcement, that such re-enforced pole will have sufficient structural stability to support the
proposed network node and can bear the wind load without further pole modification. Such
construction and engineering drawings must also address the design of the connection of any item to
the pole. If pole re-enforcement is necessary, provider shall provide construction and engineering
drawings for the proposed alteration to the existing pole. Any re-enforcement or replacement of a
pole shall match the color of the existing pole. Any pole re-enforcement or replacement shall be at
provider's sole cost;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 558/684
(4) Geographic information system (GIS) data for the location of each proposed wireless facility in
the form required by the city;
(5) Detailed drawings, with calculations, showing strict conformity to the size limitations as set
forth in chapter 284, in accordance with, but not limited to section 284.002, (relating to size of a
micro network node), section 284.003 (relating to size of network nodes), and section 284.103
(relating to maximum pole height), as applicable;
(6) A certificate that the network node complies with applicable regulations of the Federal
Communications Commission;
(7) Certification that the proposed network node will be placed into active commercial service by
or for a provider not later than the sixtieth (60th) day after the date the construction and final testing
of the network node is completed;
(8) Documentation identifying the frequency on which the proposed network node will operate and
a certification that the proposed network node shall not cause any interference with the city's traffic
signal system, public safety radio system, private police cell system, or other city communications
infrastructure;
(9) The names and telephone numbers of at least two persons serving as emergency contacts for
the provider who can be reached by telephone 24 hours a day, seven days a week, in the event of an
emergency;
(10) Sealed engineering drawings for the electrical service providing power to the proposed
network node, which must include the conduit size, circuit size, calculations for amp, and distances
running. Provider shall use 120 voltage when connecting to any city service pole or decorative pole
and shall provide a key to meter upon inspection. The city is entitled to disconnect power to the
network node or other wireless facilities in emergency situations;
(11) Scaled dimensional drawings or pictures of the proposed attachments of the network node to
the existing poles or structures as well as any other proposed wireless facility, indicating the spacing
from existing curbs, driveways, sidewalks, and other existing poles. This shall include a before-andafter
image of the pole and all proposed attachments thereto and associated standalone equipment;
(12) Scaled dimensional construction and engineering drawings indicating the current public rightof-
way line and showing any proposed underground conduit and equipment and its spacing from the
city's existing utility facilities. Such drawings shall also show a sectional profile of the public rightof-
way and identify all existing utilities and existing utility conflicts;
(13) Where required by the city based on the proposed scope of work, provider shall submit a
traffic-control plan, stormwater pollution prevention plan, and/or trench safety plan;
(14) If the work proposed in the right-of-way permit application involves more than five hundred
(500) feet of continuous trenching or boring or the installation of more than three (3) new node
support poles or more than three (3) electrical meter pedestals or ground boxes, then the provider
shall submit to the city daily work location information, on the form provided by the city, each day
before work can begin;
(15) If the location of the proposed wireless facility lies within right-of-way adjacent to a state or
federal highway, the provider must provide evidence of a permit from the state or federal
government; and
(16) All other information required to be submitted by a right-of-way user in connection with a
right-of-way permit application under this chapter 78 (streets, sidewalks and other public property) of
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 559/684
this code or other applicable laws, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations of the city.
(b) Installation of network nodes on new poles. A provider shall not install or modify a new node support pole
or a network node on a new node support pole within the public right-of-way without first obtaining a right-ofway
permit from the city. Prior to installation or modification of a new node support pole or a network node on a
new node support pole, provider shall complete and submit to the city a commercial building (electrical) permit
application and a right-of-way permit application in the form provided by the city, along with standard required
documents and the following items:
(1) Payment of the permit application fee and all other fees required under chapter 284, including
but not limited to annual fees set forth in section 284.053(a) of chapter 284, as such fees may be
adjusted from time to time pursuant to section 284.054 of chapter 284, and fees set forth in section
284.055 and section 284.056 of chapter 284, as applicable;
(2) An aerial map showing the location of the proposed new node support pole and a street view
image of the same;
(3) Geographic information system (GIS) data for the location of each proposed new node support
pole in the form required by the city;
(4) Certification that the proposed new node support pole is spaced apart from existing utility poles
or node support poles at the same distance as the spacing between existing utility poles in the
immediate proximity, but no less than a minimum of three hundred (300) feet from an existing utility
pole or another node support pole, or the submission of evidence or other materials supporting a
provider's claim that such requirement would have the effect of prohibiting the placement of new
node support poles in the subject area;
(5) Scaled dimensional drawings or pictures of the proposed node support pole and any other
proposed wireless facilities to be installed in connection with the proposal, indicating the spacing
from existing curbs, driveways, sidewalks, and other existing poles. This shall include a before-andafter
street view image of the pole and all proposed attachments and associated standalone
equipment;
(6) Scaled dimensional construction and engineering drawings indicating the current public rightof-
way line and showing any proposed underground conduit and equipment and its spacing from the
city's existing utility facilities. Such drawings shall also show a sectional profile of the public rightof-
way and identify all existing utilities and existing utility conflicts;
(7) Where required by the city based on the proposed scope of work, provider shall submit a
traffic-control plan, stormwater pollution prevention plan, and/or trench safety plan;
(8) Documentation identifying the frequency on which the proposed network node will operate and
a certification that the proposed network node shall not cause any interference with the city's traffic
signal system, public safety radio system, private police cell system, or other city communications
infrastructure;
(9) The names and telephone numbers of at least two persons serving as emergency contacts for
the provider who can be reached by telephone 24 hours a day, seven days a week, in the event of an
emergency;
(10) Sealed engineering drawings for the electrical service providing power to the proposed
network node, which must include the conduit size, circuit size, calculations for amp, and distances
running. Provider shall use 120 voltage when connecting to any city service pole or decorative pole
and shall provide a key to meter upon inspection. The city is entitled to disconnect power to the
network node or other wireless facilities in emergency situations;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 560/684
(11) If the work proposed in the right-of-way permit application involves more than five hundred
(500) feet of continuous trenching or boring or the installation of more than three (3) new node
support poles or more than three (3) electrical meter pedestals or ground boxes, then the provider
shall submit daily work location information, on the form provided by the city, before work can
begin;
(12) If the location of the proposed new node support pole lies within right-of-way adjacent to a
state or federal highway, the provider must provide evidence of a permit from the state or federal
government; and
(13) All other information required to be submitted by a right-of-way user in connection with a
right-of-way permit application under this chapter 78 (streets, sidewalks and other public property) of
this code or other applicable laws, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations of the city.
(c) Installation of transport facilities.
(1) A provider shall not install or modify a new transport facility within the public right-of-way
without first obtaining a right-of-way permit from the city. Before beginning excavation in any public
right-of-way, provider shall be responsible for complying with all laws relating to verifying the
location of existing utility lines and facilities and avoiding encroachment thereon, including the
requirements of this chapter 78 (streets, sidewalks and other public property) of this code.
(2) Transport facilities shall be underground. Aerial power and fiber connections shall not be
permitted. If the work proposed in the right-of-way permit application involves more than five
hundred (500) feet of continuous trenching or boring or the installation of more than three (3) new
node support poles or more than three (3) electrical meter pedestals or ground boxes, then the
provider shall submit daily work location information, on the form provided by the city, before work
can begin.
(d) Electrical supply. Provider shall be responsible for obtaining any required electrical power service to the
provider's wireless facilities. Provider's electrical supply shall be separately metered from the city and must
match city infrastructure voltage. The city shall not be liable to the provider for any stoppages or shortages of
electrical power furnished to the wireless facilities, including without limitation, stoppages or shortages caused
by any act, omission, or requirement of the public utility serving the wireless facility structure or the act or
omission of any other tenant or provider of the wireless facility structure, or for any other cause beyond the
control of the city.
(e) Appeal. A provider who has been denied a permit required under this article or who believes that fees
imposed under this article are invalid or that the city has violated this article or chapter 284 may appeal such
denial, fee imposition or alleged violation pursuant to section 78-43 (appeal) of this code.
(Ordinance 17-08-58, sec. 3, adopted 8/15/17)
Sec. 78-403 Network node and node support pole requirements
(a) Installation. Provider shall, at its own cost and expense, install all wireless facilities in a good and
workmanlike manner and in accordance with the requirements promulgated by this article, other provisions of
this chapter 78 (streets, sidewalks and other public property) of this code, chapter 284 of the Texas Local
Government Code, and all other applicable laws, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations of the city, the state,
and the United States (collectively, “laws”), as such may be amended from time to time. Provider's work shall be
subject to the regulation of the city. All work done in connection with the installation, operation, maintenance,
repair, modification, and/or replacement of wireless facilities shall be in compliance with all applicable laws.
The following requirements apply to the installation, operation, maintenance, repair, modification, and/or
replacement of wireless facilities:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 561/684
(1) Wireless facilities shall be concealed or enclosed as much as possible in an equipment box,
cabinet or other enclosure that may include ventilation openings. External cables and wires hanging
off a pole shall be sheathed or enclosed in a conduit, so that wires are protected and not visible or
visually minimized to the extent possible in strict accordance with this chapter 78 (streets, sidewalks
and other public property) of this code and other applicable ordinances, except to the extent not
consistent with chapter 284;
(2) No wireless facility shall be located or placed in a manner that encroaches on existing or
proposed city corner visibility triangles or sight line triangles, as defined by applicable law, including
section 2.07 of the city's engineering standards, as it exists or may be amended;
(3) Electrical meters shall not be mounted on a service pole, decorative pole or other city-owned or
-controlled structure. Standalone electrical meters shall be located on or within a pad-mounted
pedestal that shall be powder coated traffic black (RAL 9017). Provider shall provide a key (#2195)
to each meter upon inspection by city. All electrical meters serving network nodes must display the
provider's name and contact information;
(4) All power to a network node located on or attached to a service pole, decorative pole or other
city-owned or -controlled structure must be able to be disconnected to provide a safe working
environment;
(5) Use of city conduits for a provider's wireless facilities is prohibited;
(6) A provider shall not use more than ten percent (10%) of the inside diameter of a service pole or
decorative pole, measured at the pole's narrowest point, for the installation of wiring or other
equipment associated with a network node;
(7) Network node attachments to a pole shall be installed at least eight (8) feet above the ground in
accordance with section 284.108 of chapter 284;
(8) In accordance with section 284.003(a)(1)(C), section 284.003(a)(2)(C) and section 284.003(a)
(3)(B) of chapter 284, no protrusion from the outer circumference of the existing structure or pole to
which a network node is attached shall be more than two (2) feet;
(9) The color of network nodes shall match the color of the poles or structures to which they are
attached such that the network nodes blend with the color of the poles or structures;
(10) Before beginning excavation in any public right-of-way, provider shall be responsible for
complying with all laws relating to verifying the location of existing utility lines and facilities and
avoiding encroachment thereon, including the requirements of this chapter 78 (streets, sidewalks and
other public property) of this code;
(11) A pre-construction meeting is required before any work is commenced that involves installing
a network node on an service pole or other city pole or structure;
(12) Wooden node support poles are prohibited in the public right-of-way. All new node support
poles located within the public right-of-way must be installed on breakaway supports that meet the
requirements contained in the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials'
(AASHTO) Manual and must be powder-coated traffic black (RAL 9017) unless otherwise approved
by the city in writing; and
(13) Unless otherwise approved by city in writing, new node support poles shall be spaced apart
from existing utility poles or node support poles at the same distance as the spacing between utility
poles in the immediate proximity, but no less than at a minimum of three hundred (300) feet from a
utility pole or another node support pole to minimize the hazard of poles adjacent to roadways and to
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 562/684
minimize the effect on property values and aesthetics in the area. Should a provider seek an exception
to this requirement on the ground that it would have the effect of prohibiting the placement of new
node support poles in the subject area, the provider shall submit to the city evidence or other
materials supporting its claim.
(b) Inspections.
(1) The city may perform visual inspections of any wireless facilities located in the public right-ofway
as the city deems appropriate without notice. If the inspection requires physical contact with any
wireless facilities, the city shall provide written notice to the provider within five (5) business days of
the planned inspection. Provider may have a representative present during such inspection.
(2) In the event of an emergency situation, the city may, but is not required to, notify provider of an
inspection. The city may take all actions necessary to remediate the emergency situation and the city
shall notify provider as soon as practicable after remediation is complete.
(c) Placement.
(1) Municipal parks. A provider shall neither allow the installation of nor install a new node
support pole in any municipal park without the prior written consent of the city. Each permit
application shall disclose whether the proposed location of a wireless facility is within a municipal
park.
(2) City property. A provider shall neither allow the installation of nor install wireless facilities on
any city property that is not public right-of-way without the prior written consent of the city. Each
permit application shall disclose whether the proposed location of a wireless facility is on any city
property that is not public right-of-way.
(3) Residential areas. A provider shall neither allow the installation of nor install a new node
support pole in public right-of-way that is adjacent to a street that is not more than fifty (50) feet wide
and adjacent to single-family residential lots or other multifamily residences or undeveloped land that
is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions. Each permit application shall disclose
whether the proposed location of a wireless facility is within such residential areas.
(4) Historic districts. A provider shall neither allow the installation of nor install wireless facilities
in public right-of-way that is located within a historic district without the prior written consent of the
city. Each permit application shall disclose whether the proposed location of a wireless facility is
within a historic district.
(5) Design districts. A provider shall neither allow the installation of nor install wireless facilities
in public right-of-way that is located within a design district without the prior written consent of the
city. Each permit application shall disclose whether the proposed location of a wireless facility is
within a design district.
(6) Historic district and design district conditions. As a condition for approval of wireless facilities
in design districts or historic districts, the city shall require reasonable design or concealment
measures for the wireless facilities. Therefore, any request for installation in a design district or
historic district must be accompanied with proposed concealment measures in the permit application.
The city requests that a provider explore the feasibility of using camouflage measures to improve the
aesthetics of the wireless facilities, or any portion thereof, to minimize the impact to the aesthetics in
design districts or historic districts. Provider shall comply with and observe all applicable laws
relating to historic preservation.
(7) Decorative poles. Provider shall neither allow the installation of nor install wireless facilities on
a decorative pole without the prior written consent of the city. Each permit application shall disclose
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 563/684
whether the proposed location of a wireless facility is on a decorative pole.
(8) Public right-of-way. To minimize any obstruction, impediment, or hindrance to the usual travel
or public safety on a public right-of-way, node support poles shall be placed within three (3) feet of
the outer edge of the public right-of-way line or as close as possible thereto. Wireless facilities shall
not obstruct, impede, or hinder pedestrian or vehicular traffic in the public right-of-way or obstruct or
interfere with the legal use of a public right-of-way by other utility providers. Provider shall promptly
remove wireless facilities that are installed in a location that is not in accordance with the plans
approved by the city, that obstruct, impede, or hinder pedestrian or vehicular traffic, that obstruct or
interfere with the legal use of a public right-of-way by other utility providers, that do not comply
with applicable laws, or that otherwise render the public right-of-way non-compliant with applicable
laws, including but not limited to the American Disabilities Act.
(9) Existing telephone or electrical lines between existing utility poles. Micro network nodes shall
only be lashed on existing telephone or electrical lines between existing utility poles (electric poles or
telephones poles), with notice to the pole owner as required by the Federal Pole Attachment Act, and
not placed on utility poles, node support poles or service poles.
(10) Notice to remove unauthorized wireless facilities and penalty. If a provider fails to remove
any unauthorized wireless facility or any wireless facility that is located in an improper location
within the earlier of thirty (30) days after receiving written notice or the date required by the city the
provider shall be subject to a penalty of $500.00 per day until the wireless facility is removed or
relocated to the correct area within the permitted location, regardless of whether the provider's
contractor, subcontractor, or vendor installed the wireless facility in strict conformity with this
chapter 78 (streets, sidewalks and other public property) of this code or other applicable laws
concerning improperly located facilities in the public right-of-way.
(d) Fiber connection. Provider shall be responsible for obtaining access and connection to fiber optic lines or
other backhaul solutions that may be required for its wireless facilities.
(e) Generators. Provider shall not allow or install generators or back-up generators in the public right-of-way.
(f) Equipment dimensions. Provider's node support poles and network nodes shall comply with the
dimensions set forth in chapter 284.
(g) Tree maintenance. Provider and/or its contractors or agents shall obtain written permission from the city
before trimming trees hanging over the provider's wireless facilities to prevent branches of such trees from
contacting the provider's wireless facilities. When directed by the city, provider shall trim such trees under the
supervision and direction of the parks director. The city shall not be liable for any damages, injuries, or claims
arising from provider's actions under this section.
(h) Signage.
(1) Provider shall post its name, location identifying information, and emergency telephone
number in an area on the cabinet of the node support poles and network nodes that is visible to the
public. Signage required under this section shall not exceed 4" x 6", unless otherwise required by law
(e.g. RF ground notification signs) or the city.
(2) Except as required by applicable laws or by the utility pole owner, provider shall not post any
other signage or advertising on the node support poles and network nodes, or utility pole.
(i) Underground requirement areas.
(1) In an underground requirement area, provider shall neither allow nor install overhead lines
connecting to node support poles or other poles. All overhead lines connecting to a node support pole
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 564/684
or other pole where other overhead telecommunications or utility lines are or are planned to be buried
below ground as part of a project shall be buried below ground. A provider shall comply with all
other requirements applicable to the underground requirement area with respect to the installation of
aboveground structures. Areas may be designated from time to time by the city as underground
requirement areas in accordance with filed plats, and/or conversions of overhead to underground
areas, as may be allowed by law. Each permit application shall disclose if it is within an underground
requirement area.
(2) If a location is designated by the city to transition to be an underground requirement area, then
a provider's permit for the location of the micro network node, network node, node support pole, and
related ground equipment at such location will be revoked ninety (90) days after the designation, with
removal of said micro network node, network node, node support pole, and related ground equipment
at such location within ninety (90) days of such designation, or as otherwise allowed by the city for
the transition of other overhead facilities.
(j) Repair. Whenever the installation, placement, attachment, repair, modification, removal, operation, use, or
relocation of wireless facilities, or any portion thereof, is required and such installation, placement, attachment,
repair, modification, removal, operation, use, or relocation causes any property of the city to be damaged or to
have been altered in such a manner as to make it unusable, unsafe, or in violation of any laws, provider, at its
sole cost and expense, shall promptly repair and return such property to its original condition. If provider does
not repair such property or perform such work as described in this section, then the city shall have the option,
upon seven (7) days' prior written notice to provider or immediately if there is an imminent danger to the public,
to perform or cause to be performed such reasonable and necessary work on behalf of provider and to charge
provider for the reasonable and actual costs incurred by the city. Provider shall promptly reimburse the city for
the costs.
(k) Graffiti abatement. Provider shall remove all graffiti on any of its wireless facilities located in the public
right-of-way as soon as practical, but not later than seven (7) days from the date provider receives notice thereof.
(l) Inventory.
(1) Provider shall maintain a list of its wireless facilities located in the city and provide city an
inventory of the location of each such wireless facility within ten (10) days of installation. The
inventory of wireless facilities shall include GIS coordinates, date of installation, city pole ID number
(if applicable), type of pole used for installation, pole owner, and description/type of installation for
each wireless facility.
(2) Upon city's written request, provider shall provide a cumulative inventory within thirty (30)
days of city's request. With respect to wireless facilities that become inactive, the inventory shall
include the same information as active installations in addition to the date the wireless facility was
deactivated and the date the wireless facility was removed from the public right-of-way. City may
compare the inventory to its records to identify any discrepancies.
(3) In the event provider's contact information changes and differs from the information provided
on a permit application, provider shall promptly provide updated contact information to the city for
emergency purposes.
(m) Ground equipment.
(1) Ground equipment near street corners and intersections. Ground equipment shall be minimal
and the least intrusive. Unless otherwise approved by city in writing, ground equipment may not be
installed within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a street corner or a street intersection when no other
ground equipment is present in such location to minimize any obstruction, impediment, or hindrance
to the usual travel or public safety on a public right-of-way; to provide the maximum line of sight
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 565/684
required to facilitate the safe travel of vehicular and pedestrian traffic; to maximize that line of sight
at street corners and intersections; and to minimize hazards at those locations.
(2) Ground equipment density. To enhance the safety requirements of line of sight of pedestrians,
particularly small children, the city may deny a request for a proposed location if the provider seeks
to install ground equipment where existing ground equipment within three hundred (300) feet already
occupies a footprint of twenty-five (25) square feet or more.
(n) Municipal service poles. Installation of wireless facilities on a service pole shall be in strict conformance
with the agreement applicable to each such installation pursuant to section 285.056 and section 284.101(a)(3)
and (b) of chapter 284.
(o) Installations on traffic signals or lighting structures.
(1) Installations of wireless facilities on a traffic signal structure or lighting structure must not
interfere with the integrity of the structure in any way that may compromise the safety of the public
and must be in strict conformance with an agreement applicable to each such installation pursuant to
section 285.056 and section 284.101(a)(3) and (b) of chapter 284. Installation of wireless facilities on
any traffic signal structure shall:
(A) Be encased in a separate conduit than the traffic signal or lighting electronics;
(B) Have a separate electric power connection than the traffic signal or lighting structure; and
(C) Have a separate access point than the traffic signal or lighting structure; and
(2) Provider shall provide the city a key to each electrical meter providing power to a wireless
facility at the time of inspection and shall have the ability to temporarily cut-off electricity to its
wireless facilities for the safety of maintenance personnel. In the event of failure of components of
the traffic signal system for whatever reason, including damage resulting from vehicular collisions,
weather-related events, or malicious attacks, city will respond to restore traffic signal operations as a
matter of public safety. Should the events that result in damage or failure of the traffic signal system
also affect provider's wireless facilities, provider shall have the sole responsibility to repair or replace
its wireless facilities and shall coordinate its own emergency efforts with the city.
(p) Installations on street signage or other traffic-control structures. Installations of wireless facilities on a
street signage or traffic-control structure must not interfere with the integrity of the structure in any way that
may compromise the safety of the public and must be in strict conformance with an agreement applicable to
each such installation pursuant to section 285.056 and section 284.101(a)(3) and (b) of chapter 284. Installation
of wireless facilities on any street signage or traffic-control structure that has electrical power shall:
(1) Be encased in a separate conduit than any city signage or traffic-control electronics;
(2) Have a separate electric power connection than the signage or traffic-control structure; and
(3) Have a separate access point than the signage or traffic-control structure.
(q) Reservation of rights.
(1) The city reserves the right to install, and permit others to install, utility facilities in the public
right-of-way. In permitting such work to be done by others, the city shall not be liable to provider for
any damage caused by those persons or entities.
(2) The city reserves the right to locate, operate, maintain, and remove city traffic signal poles in
the manner that best enables the operation of its traffic signal system and protects public safety.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 566/684
(3) The city reserves the right to locate, operate, maintain, and remove any city pole or structure
located within the public right-of-way in the manner that best enables the city's operations and
protects public safety.
(Ordinance 17-08-58, sec. 3, adopted 8/15/17)
Sec. 78-404 Interference with operations
(a) No liability.
(1) The city shall not be liable to a provider for any damage caused by other providers with
wireless facilities sharing the same pole or for failure of provider's wireless facilities for whatever
reason, including damage resulting from vehicular collisions, weather-related events, or malicious
attacks.
(2) The city shall not be liable to a provider by reason of inconvenience, annoyance, or injury to
the provider's wireless facilities or activities conducted by provider related thereto, arising from the
necessity of repairing any portion of the public right-of-way, or from the making of any necessary
alterations or improvements in, or to, any portion of the public right-of-way or in, or to, city's
fixtures, appurtenances, or equipment. The city will use reasonable efforts not to cause material
interference to provider's operation of its wireless facilities.
(b) Signal interference with city's communications infrastructure prohibited.
(1) No interference. In the event that provider's wireless facilities interfere with the city's traffic
signal system, public safety radio system, private police cell system, or other city communications
infrastructure operating on spectrum where the city is legally authorized to operate, provider shall
promptly cease operation of the wireless facility causing such interference upon receiving notice
from the city and refrain from operating such wireless facility in the future. Provider shall respond to
the city's notice to address the source of the interference as soon as practicable, but in no event later
than twenty-four (24) hours of receiving notice. Documentation shall be submitted with the provider's
permit application that identifies the frequency on which the wireless facility will operate, which
must not interfere with the city's traffic signal system, public safety radio system, private police cell
system, or other city communications infrastructure. Wireless facilities shall not be located or
collocated on the city's public safety radio infrastructure.
(2) Protocol for responding to event of interference. For each event of prohibited interference,
provider shall provide the city an interference remediation report that includes the following items:
(A) Remediation plan. Provider shall devise a proposed remediation plan to stop the event of
inference;
(B) Time frame for execution. Provider shall provide the expected time frame for execution
of the remediation plan; and
(C) Additional information. Provider shall include any additional information relevant to the
execution of the remediation plan.
In the event that interference with city facilities, services, or operations cannot be eliminated,
provider shall shut down the interfering wireless facility and remove or relocate the wireless
facility that is the source of the interference as soon as possible to a suitable alternative location
approved by city.
(3) Following installation or modification of a network node, the city may require provider to test
the network node's radio frequency and other functions to confirm it does not interfere with the city's
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 567/684
facilities, services, or operations.
(Ordinance 17-08-58, sec. 3, adopted 8/15/17)
Sec. 78-405 Abandonment, relocation and removal
(a) Abandonment of wireless facilities. Provider shall remove wireless facilities when such facilities are
abandoned regardless of whether provider receives notice from the city. Unless the city sends notice that
removal must be completed immediately to ensure public health, safety, or welfare, the removal must be
completed within the earlier of ninety (90) days of the wireless facilities being abandoned or within ninety (90)
days of receipt of written notice from the city. When provider removes or abandons permanent structures in the
public right-of-way, the provider shall notify the city in writing of such removal or abandonment and shall file
with the city the location and description of each wireless facility removed or abandoned. The city may require
the provider to complete additional remedial measures necessary for public safety and to protect the integrity of
the public right-of-way.
(b) Relocation and removal at provider's expense.
(1) Provider shall remove and relocate a wireless facility at its own expense to an alternative
location not later than one hundred twenty (120) days after receiving written notice that removal,
relocation, and/or alteration of the wireless facility is necessary due to:
(A) Construction, completion, repair, widening, relocation, or maintenance of, or use in
connection with, any city construction or maintenance project or other public improvement
project;
(B) Maintenance, upgrade, expansion, replacement, removal or relocation of the city's pole or
structure upon which provider's network nodes are attached;
(C) The wireless facility, or portion thereof, is adversely affecting proper operation of traffic
signals, streetlights, or other city property;
(D) Closure of a street or sale of city property;
(E) Projects and programs undertaken to protect or preserve the public health, safety or
welfare;
(F) Activities undertaken to eliminate a public nuisance;
(G) Provider's failure to obtain all applicable licenses, permits, and certifications required by
law for its wireless facility; or
(H) Duty otherwise arising from applicable law.
(2) Provider's duty to remove and relocate its wireless facility at its expense is not contingent on
the availability of an alternative location acceptable for relocation. city may make reasonable efforts
to provide an alternative location within the public right-of-way for relocation, but regardless of the
availability of an alternative site acceptable to provider, provider shall comply with the notice to
remove its wireless facility as instructed.
(3) The city may remove the wireless facility if provider does not remove the wireless facility
within one hundred twenty (120) days. In such event, provider shall reimburse city for the city's
actual cost of removal of provider's wireless facility within thirty (30) days of receiving an invoice
from the city.
(c) Removal or relocation by provider.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 568/684
(1) If the provider removes or relocates a wireless facility at its own discretion, it shall notify the
city in writing not less than ten (10) days prior to removal or relocation. Provider shall obtain all
permits required for relocation or removal of its wireless facilities prior to relocation or removal.
(2) The city shall not issue any refunds for any amounts paid by provider for wireless facilities that
have been removed.
(d) Restoration. Provider shall repair any damage to the public right-of-way and the property of any third
party resulting from provider's removal or relocation activities or any other of provider's activities within ten
(10) days following the date of such removal, relocation, or activity, at provider's sole cost and expense,
including restoration of the public right-of-way and such other property to substantially the same condition as it
was immediately before the date provider was granted a permit for the applicable location, including restoration
or replacement of any damaged trees, shrubs, or other vegetation. Such repair, restoration and replacement shall
be subject to the sole approval of the city.
(e) Provider responsible. Provider shall be responsible and liable for the acts and omissions of provider's
employees, temporary employees, officers, directors, consultants, agents, affiliates, subsidiaries, sublessees, and
subcontractors in connection with the performance of activities within the city's public right-of-way, as if such
acts or omissions were provider's acts or omissions.
(Ordinance 17-08-58, sec. 3, adopted 8/15/17)
CHAPTERS 79–81
RESERVED
CHAPTER 82
SUBDIVISIONS*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
DIVISION 1. REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Sec. 82-1 Subdivision ordinance saved from repeal
At the time of adoption of this Code the provisions of Ordinance No. 94-08-19, and all amendments thereafter
adopted are by reference and incorporated as if set forth herein as it exists or may be amended.
CHAPTERS 83–85
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 569/684
RESERVED
CHAPTER 86
TAXATION*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 86-1 Due date of taxes
The taxes assessed and levied by the city are payable anytime after the approval and publication of the ordinance
establishing the tax rate and not later than January 31 of the year following the year in which the taxes are
assessed. The penalties and interest provided for herein shall accrue after January 31 of the year following the
year in which the taxes are assessed. However, if the entire taxes due as provided herein are paid in full by
January 31 of the year following the year in which the taxes are assessed, no penalty or interest shall be due.
Sec. 86-2 Penalties and interest
(a) A delinquent tax shall incur the maximum penalty and interest authorized by V.T.C.A., Tax Code sec.
33.01, to-wit: a penalty of six percent of the amount of the tax for the first calendar month it is delinquent, plus
one percent for each additional month or portion of a month the tax remains unpaid prior to July 1 of the year in
which it becomes delinquent.
(b) Provided, however, a tax that is delinquent on July 1 of the year in which it becomes delinquent shall incur
a total penalty of 12 percent of the amount of the delinquent tax without regard to the number of months the tax
has been delinquent. A delinquent tax shall also accrue interest at a rate of one percent for each month or portion
of a month the tax remains unpaid. Taxes that remain delinquent on July 1 of the year in which they become
delinquent shall incur an additional penalty of 15 percent of the amount of taxes, penalty and interest due; such
additional penalty is to defray the costs of collection as authorized by V.T.C.A., Tax Code sec. 6.30.
(c) A tax imposed on tangible personal property that is delinquent on or after February 1 of the year in which
it becomes delinquent shall incur an additional penalty of 60 days after the date the tax becomes delinquent. The
tangible personal property taxes that remain delinquent on April 1 of the year in which they become delinquent
shall incur an additional penalty of 15 percent of the amount of taxes, penalty and interest due; such additional
penalty is to defray the costs of collection as authorized by V.T.C.A., Tax Code sec. 33.11.
(Ordinance 07-12-67, sec. 2, adopted 12/4/07)
Sec. 86-3 Place of payment; collection
Taxes are payable at the office of the city tax assessor-collector. The city shall have available all rights and
remedies provided by law for the enforcement of the collection of taxes levied under the subject ordinance.
Sec. 86-4 Rollback taxes
All rollback taxes collected during any fiscal year shall be deposited only in the general fund of the city and said
funds shall not be allocated, in whole or in part, to the debt service fund of the city.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 570/684
Sec. 86-5 Exemption of taxation of travel trailers
The city hereby declares that, pursuant to V.T.C.A., Tax Code sec. 11.142, travel trailers are exempt from
taxation. (Ordinance 01-12-95, sec. 2, adopted 12/18/01)
Sec. 86-6 Continuation of ad valorem taxation of leased vehicles
The city hereby declares that it will continue ad valorem taxation of leased motor vehicles which, according to
V.T.C.A., Tax Code sec. 11.252, might otherwise be exempted after January 1, 2002. (Ordinance 01-12-96, sec.
2, adopted 12/18/01)
Sec. 86-7 Tax assessor collector
(a) The City of Frisco, hereby designates the Tax Assessor Collector of Collin County, Texas, in compliance
with V.T.C.A., Tax Code sec. 6.22(c), hereafter be authorized and required to assess and collect taxes for the
City of Frisco, and to perform all the duties relating to the assessment and collection of such taxes provided by
the laws of the State of Texas.
(b) All taxes collected by the County Tax Assessor Collector for the City of Frisco, including and penalties or
interest which may be due thereof, and less any fees for such collection due the county, be remitted to them
weekly.
(c) The City of Frisco shall provide the county tax assessor collector the current certified tax roll for the taxing
unit on or about the first day of September of each year this section is in effect, including the ad valorem tax rate
and any special tax assessments to be collected for the City of Frisco.
(d) The City of Frisco, shall transfer to the possession and control of the county tax assessor collector copies
of all records necessary for the performance of the duties and responsibilities for the collection of ad valorem
taxes, specifically including the delinquent tax roll which includes sufficient detail to be able to prepare a tax bill
in accordance with V.T.C.A., Tax Code sec. 31.01.
(e) In accordance with V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 6.27(b), the tax assessor collector shall be entitled to a
reasonable fee for assessing and collecting such taxes, and that a fee of $1.00 per parcel of property on the
current tax roll is authorized to be deducted from December monies before forwarding to the city.
(Ordinance 06-07-72, sec. 1, adopted 7/6/06)
Sec. 86-8 Taxation on goods-in-transit
The goods-in-transit, as defined in V.T.C.A., Tax Code sec. 11.253(a)(2), as adopted by Senate Bill 1 and
enacted by the 82nd Texas Legislature in the First Special Session, shall remain subject to ad valorem taxation
by the City of Frisco, Texas. (Ordinance 07-12-66, sec. 2, adopted 12/4/07; Ordinance 11-12-57, sec. 2, adopted
12/6/11)
Secs. 86-9–86-20 Reserved
ARTICLE II. EXEMPTIONS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 86-21 Increase of exemption to ad valorem property taxes for residence homesteads of elderly and
disabled individuals
The exemption to ad valorem property taxes imposed by the city on the residence homesteads of elderly and
disabled individuals is hereby increased to the amount of eighty thousand and no/100 dollars ($80,000.00). A
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 571/684
person may not receive an exemption for more than one residence homestead, no matter where located, in the
same year. (Ordinance 04-11-78, sec. 2, adopted 11/16/04; Ordinance 07-11-62, sec. 2, adopted 11/6/07;
Ordinance 11-12-58, sec. 2, adopted 12/6/11; Ordinance 15-12-90, sec. 2, adopted 12/1/15; Ordinance 16-12-
104, sec. 2, adopted 12/6/16)
Sec. 86-22 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Disabled means the same as set forth in V.T.C.A., Tax Code sec. 11.13(m)(1), as it currently exists or may be
amended.
Elderly means an adult who is 65 years of age or older.
Residence homestead means the same as set forth in V.T.C.A., Tax Code sec. 11.13(j)(1), as it currently exists or
may be amended.
(Ordinance 04-11-78, sec. 3, adopted 11/16/04)
Sec. 86-23 Effective date of exemption
This exemption shall become effective beginning with the 2005 tax year, and shall remain effective for each
successive tax year until otherwise amended or repealed by the city council or other appropriate authority.
(Ordinance 04-11-78, sec. 4, adopted 11/16/04)
Sec. 86-24 Freeport goods exempt from taxation
(a) Definition. The term “freeport goods” means property that under article VIII, section 1-j, of the Texas
Constitution is not taxable.
(b) Exemption. A person or entity is entitled to an exemption from taxation of the appraised value of that
portion of the person or entity's inventory or property consisting of freeport goods. The exemption provided in
this section is subtracted from the market value of the inventory or property determined under the Texas Tax
Code to determine the taxable value of the inventory or property.
(c) Qualification. Qualification and implementation of the freeport goods tax exemption shall be in
accordance with the Texas Tax Code as it exists or may be amended.
(Ordinance 96-11-16, sec. 3, adopted 11/19/96)
Sec. 86-25 Residential homestead ad valorem (property) tax exemption
In addition to any other exemption provided by state law or city ordinance, the owner of a residence homestead
shall be entitled to an exemption from the city ad valorem taxation in an amount equal to the greater of five
thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or 10 percent (10%) of the appraised value of the residence homestead, subject to
the limitations set forth in state law, including section 11.13(n) of the Texas Tax Code, as it exists or may be
amended. (Ordinance 17-06-49 adopted 6/20/17; Ordinance 18-06-38 adopted 6/29/18)
DIVISION 2. HISTORIC PRESERVATION TAX INCENTIVE PROGRAM
Sec. 86-26 Adoption of historic preservation tax incentive program; purpose; goals
(a) Establishment of the program. The city's historic preservation tax incentive program (the “program”) is
hereby established and shall operate as described in this division.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 572/684
(b) Purpose of the program. To provide incentives to owner-occupied residential households in the original
town residential (“OTR”) zoning district who own and reside in a historic home receiving eligible property
designation (as defined herein).
(c) Goals of the program.
(1) To encourage additional investment in the historic homes in the OTR zoning district.
(2) To generate additional economic activity in the downtown area by attracting tourism and
commercial development.
(3) To encourage homeowners to invest more of their personal resources in maintaining and
restoring historically significant resources in the city.
(Ordinance 19-11-95 adopted 11/5/19)
Sec. 86-27 Eligible property designation; levels of incentives
(a) Eligible property designation. All properties that are listed in the appendix titled “Frisco Old Town
Historic Resource Survey for the National Register of Historic Places,” an appendix to the 1998 City of Frisco
Historic Downtown Master Plan, shall receive upon request a certificate from the city stating they are eligible to
apply for the program. The homeowner of those homes that receive a certificate of eligibility from the city may
apply for a tax exemption related to the investment made for eligible preservation or restoration expenses or an
historic landmark incentive as provided herein. The eligible property designation is designed:
(1) To acknowledge incentive program eligibility.
(2) To provide the eligibility documentation required by the county for county incentives.
(b) Levels of incentives. The program provides for three different types of incentives designed for
homeowners who are working at various levels of restoration and preservation within the OTR zoning district:
the restoration incentive, the preservation incentive and the historic landmark incentive. The maximum
exemption allowed for any type of incentive, or combination of incentive types, is one hundred percent (100%)
of the assessed value of the structure. Incentives may not be applied to exempt from taxation any portion of the
value of the lot on which the structure is located.
(1) Restoration incentive.
a. Homeowners who incur eligible expenses for restoration of the home as set forth herein
may apply for the restoration incentive (“restoration incentive”). For every dollar spent on
eligible expenses, the homeowner may receive an exemption equal to six dollars (a 6:1 ratio)
off the assessed value of the structure, but not the lot, for city ad valorem tax purposes. The
maximum exemption would be one hundred percent (100%) of the assessed value of the
structure. This exemption would remain effective for up to ten (10) years, as determined by the
city. The structure must remain owner-occupied and in good condition to be eligible for and
remain eligible for the exemption.
b. Pre-approval with the city is required before eligible expenses are incurred. Formal
requests for pre-approval may be submitted throughout the year.
c. The restoration incentive is available for homeowners investing amounts in excess of five
percent (5%) of the property value (combined lot and structure) in a major rehabilitation
project.
(2) Preservation incentive.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 573/684
a. Homeowners who have completed a minor restoration on their primary residence may
submit receipts for eligible expenses every two (2) years for ongoing preservation costs, set
forth herein, as eligible program expenses (“preservation incentive”). This exemption shall be
calculated in the same manner as the restoration incentive except that pre-approval is not
required. Homeowners are only eligible to apply for this incentive once every two (2) years.
Applications must be submitted between February 1st and April 30th of each year. The
preservation incentive may be used in conjunction with the restoration incentive. The structure
must remain owner-occupied and in good condition to be eligible for and remain eligible for the
exemption.
b. The preservation incentive is available for homeowners investing amounts less than five
percent (5%) of the property value (combined lot and structure) in a minor rehabilitation and/or
preservation project.
(3) Historic landmark incentive.
a. Homeowners who have completed major restoration work on their primary residence and
wish to commit to protecting the property as a permanent historic resource for the city may
receive an automatic annual fifty percent (50%) exemption off of the assessed value of the
structure, but not the lot, for ad valorem tax purposes as long as the home remains owneroccupied
and in good condition and complies with the standards established by the historic
landmark district zoning designation of the city (“historic landmark incentive”).
b. In order to be eligible to apply for the historic landmark incentive, the homeowner must
request a historical marker for the home from the Heritage Association of Frisco and pay fees
associated with requesting and receiving the marker (if applicable). Additionally, the city's
grants coordinator shall approve the request based on recommendation of the ad hoc historical
preservation advisory committee and other regulations set forth in this division. If the historical
marker is revoked, or other conditions of approval change, the tax exemption shall be revoked.
c. The historic landmark incentive is designed for:
(i) Homeowners who wish to achieve the highest level of historic preservation and to
protect the historic home as an asset to the city for the future; and
(ii) Homeowners who are willing to share their home as a community resource through
the exterior restoration and historical documentation in the placement of a historic marker.
(Ordinance 19-11-95 adopted 11/5/19)
Sec. 86-28 Historic preservation tax incentive program guidelines
The property, qualifying expenses and construction are subject to the following conditions and guidelines:
(1) Property eligibility. In order for a homeowner to be eligible to apply for any of the program
incentives described in section 86-27, the homeowner must meet all of the following requirements:
a. The homeowner must be the owner of record of the home for which tax incentive are being
requested as of January 1st of the year of application.
b. The home for which tax incentives are being requested must be one of the 107 residential
homes listed as contributing properties in the appendix titled “Frisco Old Town Historic
Resource Survey for the National Register of Historic Places,” an appendix to the 1998 City of
Frisco Historic Downtown Master Plan. The home/structure must be the same home/structure
that was on the property when the survey was completed in 1997.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 574/684
c. The home must serve as the homeowner of record's primary residence, which shall be
evidenced by an approved homestead exemption.
d. The total ad valorem taxes owed to the city must be current and paid on time (on or before
January 31st of the year of application).
e. The home must retain the historic integrity as established in the city's downtown
architectural design standards; OTC and OTR zoning district.
(2) Preservation/restoration expense eligibility. In order for an expense to be eligible for any type
of tax incentive for the program, the expense must fall into at least one of the following categories:
a. Preservation expenses. Applying measures to sustain the original historic form, integrity or
material of a building or structure.
b. Restoration expenses. Accurately recovering the form and/or details of a property and its
setting as it originally appeared by removing later work or replacing/replicating earlier work;
returning a property to a state of utility through repair or alteration which makes possible an
efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions of the property which are significant
to its historical, architectural and cultural values; or recreating a portion of the building in all
new materials based on factual evidence, such as photographs.
(3) Expenses eligible for reimbursement. The following preservation/restoration-related expenses
are considered eligible expenses for reimbursement under the program:
a. Structural work. Only projects that retain or restore the historic integrity of the home
through the use of proper design qualify for the program. Structural work that removes defining
characteristics of a home such as porches, columns or dormers does not qualify for the
incentive.
b. Foundation repair.
c. Restoration, repair, or replacement of siding and/or trim, windows and/or doors (painting
included). Only projects that retain or restore the historic integrity and characteristics of the
home through the use of proper materials and design qualify for the incentive. For example,
replacing wood siding with aluminum or vinyl siding or the replacement of historic wood
windows with vinyl or metal windows do not qualify. However, the costs of age-appropriate
screen doors, shutters, fencing, and window screens and sturdy materials such as hardiplank
siding which replicates the original historic look of the property may be considered as eligible
expenses.
d. Restoration of existing historic porches and porticos, including rebuilding porches that
were original on the house but have since been removed.
e. Plumbing and electrical repairs associated with structural work.
f. Labor costs. For in-kind or donated costs to be included as labor costs, the applicant must
submit two written bids from reputable contractors showing estimated labor costs for the
project in order to include such labor as a qualified cost. The low bid for the labor shall be used
to determine the value of the in-kind or donated labor.
g. Applicants may use donated materials towards the qualifying costs as long as the value of
all donated materials is reasonable and documented.
h. Design costs including architectural fees, consulting fees related to retaining the historical
character of the home and construction permits for projects with eligible expenses.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 575/684
i. Historic marker application and documented research costs.
j. Roof repairs associated with structural work or major rehabilitation projects. Regular
replacement of shingles or other routine maintenance not related to preservation of the historic
nature of the home does not qualify.
k. Exterior painting. Expenses for the exterior painting of historic homes qualifies so long as
the expenses meet the threshold amount and comply with the downtown architectural standards;
OTC and OTR. Touch up paint or unnecessary cosmetic changes do not qualify for the
incentive.
l. Limited interior restoration may be eligible to the extent that the applicant can document
that the restoration involves restoring or reconstructing original features of the home and that
the modifications are age appropriate. Also, the applicant must certify that the home would be
made available for heritage tours as reasonably requested by the city and/or the Heritage
Association of Frisco. Pre-approval of interior restoration expenses should be received from the
city prior to proceeding with the project for the expense to be eligible under the program.
(4) Compliance with city ordinances. All work must be completed in accordance with the
requirements and standards set forth in the zoning ordinance, applicable building and fire codes and
all other applicable ordinances of the city. Approved facade plans must be submitted on all exterior
work in order to have such expenses considered for tax exemption under the program. If city staff
determines that required permits have not been requested and/or inspections have not been
conducted, then eligible expenses may be deemed ineligible for the program.
(5) Administrative procedures.
a. The city manager or his/her designee may approve administrative procedures and
guidelines to be used for the purposes of implementing and/or administering the program and
for city staff and/or applicants to follow when making determinations hereunder. An ad hoc
historical preservation advisory committee shall assist city staff with recommendations of
program approvals. The city manager or his/her designee shall appoint and convene ad hoc
advisory committee as necessary to review and provide recommendations of formal requests.
The ad hoc committee shall be composed of the following.
(i) Building inspection staff member;
(ii) City planner;
(iii) Heritage Association of Frisco designee; and
(iv) Two (2) public designees.
b. The purpose of the ad hoc advisory committee is to provide coordinated technical expertise
of historical nature and other architectural considerations important to the intent and application
of the program.
(Ordinance 19-11-95 adopted 11/5/19)
Sec. 86-29 Restoration incentive and preservation incentive program process
(a) Restoration incentive (in excess of 5% of the home value). The restoration incentive is designed to
encompass major restoration projects and significant investment to reconstruct, preserve the historical character
of the home and the historic character of the downtown historic district. Projects and ongoing expenses which
equal or exceed five percent (5%) of the value of the property (combined lot and structure) threshold shall be
evaluated under this incentive.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 576/684
(1) Step 1: Pre-approval shall be obtained before eligible expenses are incurred. The homeowner
shall submit a formal request, and it shall be signed and sworn by the owner of the property.
Information necessary for evaluation of request shall include the following.
a. A letter of intent outlining the proposed restoration project;
b. Legal description of the property proposed for certification;
c. Cost estimates indicating the qualified restoration, repair and rehabilitation costs equal or
exceed five percent (5%) of the entire value of the property (combined lot and structure), as
determined by the county appraisal district at the time of application. It shall be city staff
discretion to determine reasonable costs for qualifying expenses;
d. A statement from the city stating taxes have been paid to date on the property as of January
31st;
e. Picture(s) of all sides of the property evidencing maintenance of the property's historical
character and compliance with the downtown architectural standards; OTC and OTR; and
Any additional relevant information to demonstrate compliance with the program and eligibility
of expenses.
(2) Step 2: Advisory committee recommendation and city approval of the formal request for
restoration incentives. Upon receipt of a request, the city's grants coordinator will forward all
information for review and recommendation of the ad hoc historical preservation advisory
committee. Based on this recommendation and other staff considerations, the city's grants coordinator
will review the proposed project plan and pre determine eligible expenses. A letter will be issued by
the city outlining the eligible expenses and stating the period of time in which the homeowner has to
implement the project plan in order to receive a tax exemption certificate for the value of the eligible
expenses.
Any changes to the plan or project during the construction must be submitted for review and
approved by the Grants Coordinator prior to implementation. Failure to do so may void any
prior approvals of pre determined eligible expenses and the homeowner may not receive any
historic tax exemption for the structure.
(3) Step 3: Completion of the project plan. At completion of the pre-approved project plan, the
homeowner shall submit an application for a historic tax incentive. City staff will evaluate the project
for completion and provide recommendation to the grants coordinator.
(b) Preservation incentive (less than 5% of the property value).
(1) The preservation Incentive is designed to encompass minor restoration projects and ongoing
preservation expenses necessary for the upkeep of older homes and for homeowners who might not
otherwise be able to afford major restoration projects but wish to preserve the historical character of
their home and the historic character of the downtown historic district. Projects and ongoing expenses
which do not meet the five percent (5%) of the value of the property (combined lot and structure)
threshold shall be evaluated under this incentive.
(2) Homeowners wishing to apply for a preservation incentive exemption under the program are
not required to have a pre-approved project plan. An application shall be submitted summarizing the
work completed and receipts for eligible expenses (as outlined in section 86-28) between February
1st and April 30th. Eligible expenses must not exceed a two (2) year time frame and expenses may
only be submitted once every two (2) years. If a homeowner is submitting expenses that exceed 5%
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 577/684
of the structure's value, as determined by the county appraisal district at the time of submission, over
the two (2) year period, they must follow the restoration incentive pre-approval process.
(c) Process for submitting applications for completed pre-approved restoration or preservation incentives.
(1) Step 1: All applications shall be submitted to:
Attn: Grants Coordinator
City of Frisco
6101 Frisco Square Blvd., 4th Floor
Frisco, Texas 75034
(2) Step 2:
a. City staff will review initially the applications for a restoration or preservation incentive.
Complete applications for restoration will be forward for ad hoc advisory committee
recommendation.
b. Applications shall be reviewed on the following criteria:
(i) Does the home for which tax exemption is being requested meet all of the eligibility
tests set forth in this division and did the construction work comply with the pre-approved
project plan, if applicable?
(ii) Are the expenses for which an exemption is being requested defined as eligible
expenses in this division?
(iii) Is the required documentation attached to the submission in compliance with this
division and/or any administrative procedures adopted by city staff to implement the
project?
(iv) Is the exterior of the home in compliance with the downtown architectural
standards; OTC and OTR?
(v) Are all code enforcement concerns resolved with regards to the subject property?
(vi) Has the homeowner submitted documenting evidence of ownership, date of
purchase and proof of an approved homestead exemption?
c. Any property that complies with and meets the requirements of the program shall have
exempted from city ad valorem taxation for a period of up to ten (10) years an amount equal to
six (6) times the eligible expenses of such preservation or restoration project following the
completion of the project.
d. If a homeowner completes another qualified project (under the restoration program) or
incurs additional eligible expenses (under the preservation program) during the homeowner's
ten-year exemption period, the additional eligible expenses will be calculated in the same
manner and will be added to the remaining portion of the original ten-year period. All tax
exemptions shall remain with the property as long as the home is maintained as required by this
division.
e. Only the assessed value of the historic residential structure shall be subject to the tax
exemption. The tax exemption provided by this division may not be used as a credit towards the
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 578/684
value of the lot. The tax exemption period shall begin on the first day of the tax year following
completion of the approved project and execution of the tax exemption certificate.
(3) Step 3: Based on committee recommendation (restoration) and other program regulations, the
grants coordinator will approve, deny or request additional information on the application for tax
incentives.
(1) If approved, city staff will prepare a tax exemption certificate documenting the dollar
amount of the exemption to be granted to the structure and forward the same to the tax
assessor/collector for the applicable county.
(2) If denied, city staff will issue a letter stating reasons for denial of the application. The
homeowner will then have thirty (30) days from the date of the letter to appeal the denial to the
city manager, or his/her designee.
(3) If additional information is requested, city staff will issue a letter outlining additional
information that is needed in order to determine eligibility. The homeowner will have thirty
(30) days from the date of the letter to provide the information to city staff, unless a longer time
period is requested and approved. In most cases where additional information or clarification is
needed to determine eligibility, city staff or the homeowner may request a meeting to discuss
the application and/or the expenses being requested for approval under the program. If the
homeowner fails to provide the additional information required by the city in the specified time
period, then city staff will issue a letter denying the application.
(Ordinance 19-11-95 adopted 11/5/19)
Sec. 86-30 Historic landmark incentive program process
(a) Homeowners wishing to receive the historic landmark incentive shall submit an application and provide
evidence that they have received the following:
(1) Acknowledgement of a request for historical marker for the home from the Heritage
Association of Frisco and a statement agreeing to pay fees associated with requesting and receiving
the marker (if applicable).
(2) Grants coordinator approval based on review recommendation of the advisory committee and
other considerations of ordinance compliance.
(b) Based on committee recommendation and other program regulations, the grants coordinator will approve,
deny or request additional information on the application for historic landmark tax incentive.
(1) If approved, city staff will prepare a tax exemption certificate documenting the dollar amount
of the exemption to be granted to the structure and forward the same to the tax assessor/collector for
the applicable county.
(2) If denied, city staff will issue a letter stating reasons for denial of the application. The
homeowner will then have thirty (30) days from the date of the letter to appeal the denial to the city
manager, or his/her designee.
(3) If additional information is requested, city staff will issue a letter outlining additional
information that is needed in order to determine eligibility. The homeowner will have thirty (30) days
from the date of the letter to provide the information to city staff, unless a longer time period is
requested and approved. In most cases where additional information or clarification is needed to
determine eligibility, city staff or the homeowner may request a meeting to discuss the application
and/or the expenses being requested for approval under the program. If the homeowner fails to
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 579/684
provide the additional information required by the city in the specified time period, then city staff
will issue a letter denying the application.
(c) Request for the historic landmark incentive must be approved by the end of the calendar year prior to the
tax year in which the first incentive would be granted.
(Ordinance 19-11-95 adopted 11/5/19)
Sec. 86-31 Parties ineligible from receiving incentives; offenses
(a) Ineligible parties. No employee, agent, consultant, officer or elected or appointed official of the city who
exercises or has exercised any functions or responsibilities with respect to the activities assisted under this
program or who is in a position to participate in a decision-making process or gain inside information with
regard to such activities may obtain a tax exemption for his/her property under the program or have an interest in
any contract, subcontract or agreement (or proceeds thereof) with respect to the program either for themselves or
their family members related in the first degree by consanguinity or affinity, as defined in chapter 573 of the
Texas Government Code, during their tenure or for (1) year thereafter. Those persons having a tax exemption
under the program prior to becoming an ineligible party, as described in this paragraph, may retain the tax
exemption previously received, but they may not increase the amount of their tax exemption during their tenure
or for one (1) year thereafter.
(b) Offenses established. It shall be an offense for any person to submit false or inaccurate information to the
city:
(1) To obtain, or attempt to obtain, a tax exemption; or
(2) To obtain, or attempt to obtain, a greater exemption than the amount eligible for.
(Ordinance 19-11-95 adopted 11/5/19)
Sec. 86-32 Alteration/destruction of the property
(a) During the tax exemption period, if the city manager or his/her designee has reason to believe that a
structure receiving tax exemption under the program has been altered without proper approval, converted to a
non-residential use, is no longer the homeowner's primary residence, is not maintained in good condition or is
totally or partially destroyed by the willful act or negligence of the homeowner or his/her representative, then the
exemption of taxes under the program shall terminate. This provision shall not apply to destruction or alterations
that result from acts of God.
(b) If the tax exemption certificate executed by the city manager is timely recorded in the deed records of the
county with the approved application, the tax exemption authorized above shall constitute a covenant running
with the property for the ten year period provided in this division. Should the owner of the property ever cease to
comply with the terms of the application and of this division during such ten year period, this exemption may be
revoked for the portion of the period remaining, upon the finding of such noncompliance by the city council,
after giving notice to the homeowner and allowing the homeowner an opportunity to speak at the city council
meeting. The city manager or his/her designee shall advise the chief appraiser of the county appraisal district of
the revocation of the exemption and shall file an appropriate document in the deed records of the county
revoking the tax exemption.
(c) In the event that any affected jurisdiction having granted tax exemption determines that the applicant or
homeowner is in default of any of the terms or conditions of receiving and/or maintaining the tax exemption,
then the affected jurisdiction shall give the applicant or homeowner sixty (60) days' written notice to cure such
default. In the event such default is not cured to the satisfaction of the affected jurisdiction within the sixty (60)
day notice period, then the exemption of taxes shall terminate.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 580/684
(Ordinance 19-11-95 adopted 11/5/19)
Secs. 86-33–86-50 Reserved
ARTICLE III. SALES AND USE TAX
Sec. 86-51 Sales tax on telecommunications service
(a) The city council hereby authorizes a sales tax on all telecommunications services sold in the city. The sale
of telecommunications services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other telecommunications
device from which the call or other communication originates. If the point of origin cannot be determined, the
sale is consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed.
(b) The rate of the tax imposed shall be the same as the rate imposed by the city, for all other local sales and
use taxes. The tax shall not serve to offset any franchise fees payable to the city.
(Ordinance 89-09-08, secs. 2, 3, adopted 9/19/89)
Secs. 86-52–86-70 Reserved
ARTICLE IV. HOTEL/MOTEL TAXES*
Sec. 86-71 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
City manager shall mean the city manager or his designated representative.
Consideration shall mean the cost of the room in such hotel only if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping
and shall not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant of such room not
related to the cleaning and readying of such room for occupancy.
Hotel shall mean a building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping
accommodations. The term shall include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodginghouses, inns,
roominghouses or other buildings where rooms are furnished for a consideration, but “hotel” shall not be defined
so as to include hospitals, sanitariums or nursing homes.
Hotel occupancy tax shall mean the tax imposed by section 86-72.
Monthly/month collection/reporting period shall mean the regular calendar months of the year.
Occupancy shall mean the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room in a hotel if the
room is one ordinarily used for sleeping and if the occupant's use, possession or right to use or possession
extends for a period of less than 30 days.
Occupant shall mean anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has a right to use or possess any room
in a hotel if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping.
Permanent resident shall mean any occupant who has or shall have the right of occupancy of any room or rooms
or sleeping space or facility in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days during the current calendar year or
preceding year.
Person shall mean any individual, company, corporation or association owning, operating, managing or
controlling any hotel.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 581/684
(Ordinance 04-06-47, sec. 3, adopted 6/1/04)
Sec. 86-72 Levy of tax, rate; exemptions
There is hereby levied a tax upon the cost of occupancy of any room or space furnished by any hotel where such
cost of occupancy is at the rate of $2.00 or more per day, such tax to be equal to seven percent of the
consideration paid by the occupant of such room, space or facility to such hotel, exclusive of other occupancy
taxes imposed by other governmental agencies. Exemptions to the levy of the hotel occupancy tax described
herein shall be the same as those prescribed by V.T.C.A., Tax Code sec. 351.06, as it exists or may be amended.
(Ordinance 04-06-47, sec. 4, adopted 6/1/04)
Sec. 86-73 Extraterritorial jurisdiction
Any hotel occupancy tax provided herein shall be imposed in the city extraterritorial jurisdiction, provided,
however, that the levy such taxed shall not result in a combined rate of state, county or municipal hotel
occupancy taxes in the extraterritorial jurisdiction which exceeds 15 percent of the price paid for a room in a
hotel. (Ordinance 04-06-47, sec. 5, adopted 6/1/04)
Sec. 86-74 Disposition of revenue
The revenue derived from the hotel occupancy tax will only be used for the purposes authorized by V.T.C.A.,
Tax Code sec. 351.001 et seq., as it exists or may be amended, as the city council may direct and authorize.
(Ordinance 04-06-47, sec. 6, adopted 6/1/04)
Sec. 86-75 Collection
Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the hotel occupancy tax
imposed in section 86-72. (Ordinance 04-06-47, sec. 7, adopted 6/1/04)
Sec. 86-76 Reports
(a) On the last day of the month following each quarterly period, every person required in section 86-75 to
collect the tax imposed in section 86-72 shall file a report with the city manager showing the consideration paid
for all room occupancies in the preceding quarter, the amount of the tax collected on such occupancies and any
other information as the city manager or his designated representative may reasonably require. Such person shall
pay the hotel occupancy tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing such report.
(b) Effective July 1, 2004, every person required in section 86-75 to collect the tax imposed in section 86-72
shall file a report with the city manager showing the consideration paid for all room occupancies in the
preceding calendar month, the amount of the tax collected on such occupancies and any other information as the
city manager may reasonably require. Timely reports must be submitted so as to arrive at the city manager's
office by the 20th day of the month following the calendar month collection/reporting period. Such person shall
pay the hotel occupancy tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing such report.
(Ordinance 04-06-47, sec. 8, adopted 6/1/04)
Sec. 86-77 Rules and regulations
The city manager shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are necessary to effectively collect
the hotel occupancy tax levied by this article and shall upon reasonable notice have access to books and records
necessary to enable him to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article and the
amount of taxes due under the provisions of this article. (Ordinance 04-06-47, sec. 9, adopted 6/1/04)
Sec. 86-78 Penalty provision
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 582/684
If any person, firm, corporation or business entity shall fail to collect the hotel occupancy tax imposed by this
article, or shall fail to file a report as required herein, or shall fail to pay to the city manager the tax imposed by
this article when said report for payment is due, or shall file a false report, then such person, firm, corporation or
business entity shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction be punished a fine of not less than
$50.00 nor more than $500.00. In addition, such person, firm, corporation or business entity who fails to remit
the hotel occupancy tax imposed by this article within the time required shall forfeit ten percent of the amount
due as a penalty, and after the first 30 days shall forfeit an additional ten percent of such hotel occupancy tax.
Provided, however, that the penalty shall never be less than $1.00. Delinquent hotel occupancy taxes shall draw
interest at the rate of ten percent per annum beginning 60 days from the date due. (Ordinance 04-06-47, sec. 10,
adopted 6/1/04)
Sec. 86-79 Collection fee
The city shall retain one percent of the gross amount of the hotel occupancy taxes collected to cover the cost of
said collection duties. (Ordinance 04-06-47, sec. 11, adopted 6/1/04)
CHAPTERS 87–89
RESERVED
CHAPTER 90
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 90-1 Obedience to traffic officers
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with the lawful order or direction of a police officer or fire
department official given to direct or control traffic.
Sec. 90-2 Adoption by reference of state laws concerning operation and movement of vehicles
The provisions of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code secs. 545.001 through 545.352 and 545.361 through 545.424,
are adopted by reference and made a part of this Code as if set forth herein.
Sec. 90-3 Adoption by reference of state law concerning pedestrian conduct
The provisions of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code secs. 552.001 through 552.008, are adopted by reference and
made a part of this Code as if set forth herein.
Secs. 90-4–90-26 Reserved
ARTICLE II. SPEED REGULATIONS
Sec. 90-27 Speed zones and limits
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 583/684
Speed zones and limits shall be as established from time to time by ordinance, and posted for public notice in
accordance with state law. Zones, limits and other speed-related regulations and ordinances in effect on the date
of adoption of this Code are ratified, affirmed, and reserved from repeal.
Sec. 90-28 Public hearing to consider speed limits where certain schools are located
(a) The municipal governing body, if a public or private elementary or secondary school or an institution of
higher education as defined by V.T.C.A., Education Code secs. 61.003(8) or 61.003(15) is within municipal
limits, shall on request hold a public hearing at least once each calendar year to consider prima facie speed limits
on a highway in the municipality, including a highway of the state highway system, near the school or institution
of higher education.
(b) The municipal governing body on request may hold one public hearing for all public and private
elementary and secondary schools and institutions of higher education in its jurisdiction.
Secs. 90-29–90-59 Reserved
ARTICLE III. SCOOTERS
Sec. 90-60 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Adult means any individual 18 years of age or older.
Child means any individual under 18 years of age, but does not include a licensed minor, as defined below.
Helmet means properly fitted protective headgear that is not structurally damaged and that conforms to the
standards of the American National Standards Institute, the American Society for Testing and Materials, the
Snell Memorial Foundation or any federal agency having regulatory jurisdiction over bicycle helmets, as
applicable, at the time of the manufacture of the helmet.
Licensed minor means any individual who is 16 or 17 years of age and has in his possession a valid license
issued to him by the state, or the state of the licensed minor's residence, for the operation of a motorcycle or
motor vehicle on public streets and highways.
Motor assisted scooter shall have the same meaning assigned by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code sec. 551.351, as
it exists or may be amended, and includes a self-propelled device with at least two wheels in contact with the
ground during operation; a braking system capable of stopping the device under typical operating conditions; a
gas or electric motor 40 cubic centimeters or less; a deck designed to allow a person to stand or sit while
operating the device; and the ability to be propelled by human power alone.
Parent means the natural or adoptive parent or court-appointed guardian or conservator of a child.
Pocket bike or mini-motorbike shall have the same meaning assigned by the V.T.C.A., Transportation Code sec.
551.301, as it exists or may be amended, and includes a self-propelled vehicle that is equipped with an electric
motorscooter or internal combustion engine having a piston displacement of less than 50 cubic centimeters, is
designed to propel itself with not more than two wheels in contact with the ground, has a seat or saddle for the
use of the operator, is not designed for use on a highway, and is ineligible for a certificate of title under V.T.C.A.,
Transportation Code ch. 501, as it exists or may be amended; but does not include a moped, motorcycle, electric
bicycle, motor-driven cycle, motorized mobility device, electric personal assistive mobility device or a
neighborhood electric vehicle as those are defined in the Texas Transportation Code, as it exists or may be
amended.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 584/684
Public way or public property means real property owned, leased or controlled by a political subdivision of the
state, a governmental entity or agency, or similar entity, or any property that is publicly-owned or publiclymaintained
or dedicated to public use, including, but not limited to, a path, trail, walkway, sidewalk, alley, street
or highway, and a public park facility.
Wearing a helmet means that the person has a helmet fastened securely to his head with the straps of the helmet
securely tightened in the manner intended by the manufacturer to provide maximum protection.
(Ordinance 03-11-96, sec. 2, adopted 11/4/03; Ordinance 05-08-61, sec. 3, adopted 8/3/05)
Sec. 90-61 Restrictions and prohibitions for motor assisted scooters, mini-motorbike or pocketbike,
penalty for violation
(a) Restrictions and prohibitions on locations of use.
(1) It is unlawful for any child to operate or ride a motor assisted scooter on any public way or
public property within the city, except on paths and trails set aside for the exclusive operation of
bicycles. It is unlawful for any adult or licensed minor to operate or ride a motor assisted scooter on
any path, trail, walkway, alley, sidewalk or public park facility within the city, except on paths and
trails set aside for the exclusive operation of bicycles.
(2) It is unlawful for a parent to allow or permit a child to operate or ride a motor assisted scooter
on any public way or public property within the city, except on paths and trails set aside for the
exclusive operation of bicycles.
(3) It is unlawful for any child, licensed minor or adult to operate or ride a minimotorbike or
pocketbike on any public way or public property within the city.
(4) It is unlawful for a parent to allow or permit a child or licensed minor to operate or ride a minimotorbike
or pocketbike on any public way or public property within the city.
(5) It is presumed that a parent allowed a child or licensed minor to operate or ride a motor assisted
scooter, mini-motorbike or pocketbike in a restricted or prohibited area.
(6) It is unlawful for any adult or licensed minor to operate or ride a motor assisted scooter on any
public way or public property for which the posted speed limit is more than 35 miles per hour. The
motor assisted scooter may cross a road or a street at an intersection where the road or street to be
crossed has a posted speed of more than 35 miles per hour.
(7) It is a defense to prosecution that the motor assisted scooter, mini-motorbike or pocketbike was
not being operated upon public property or a public way at the time of the alleged offense.
(b) Penalty.
(1) A person who violates any provision of subsection (a), above, shall be guilty of a Class C
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined an amount not exceeding $500.00.
(2) The purpose of this section is to promote safety and discourage the use of motor assisted
scooters, mini-motorbikes and pocketbikes in unsafe areas. The courts may consider deferred
dispositions under the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as it exists or may be amended, whenever
the circumstances warrant deferred dispositions.
(Ordinance 03-11-96, sec. 3, adopted 11/4/03; Ordinance 05-08-61, sec. 4, adopted 8/3/05)
Sec. 90-62 Helmets required, penalty for failure to wear helmet
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 585/684
(a) Helmet required.
(1) It is unlawful for any child or licensed minor to operate or ride a motor assisted scooter unless
the child or licensed minor is wearing a helmet.
(2) It is unlawful for a parent to allow or permit a child or licensed minor to operate or ride a motor
assisted scooter unless the child or licensed minor is wearing a helmet.
(3) It is presumed that a parent allowed a child or licensed minor to operate or ride a motor assisted
scooter without wearing a helmet.
(4) It is a defense to prosecution that the motor assisted scooter was not being operated upon public
property or a public way at the time of the alleged offense.
(b) Penalty.
(1) A person who violates any provision of subsection (a), above, requiring helmets, shall be guilty
of a Class C misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined an amount not exceeding $50.00 upon
the first conviction and an amount not exceeding $100.00 upon the second and each subsequent
conviction.
(2) The municipal court shall dismiss a charge against a child, licensed minor and/or parent for a
first offense under subsection (a) upon receiving proof that:
a. The defendant acquired a helmet for the child or licensed minor who was operating or
riding the motor assisted scooter in violation of subsection (a); and
b. The defendant acquired the helmet on or before the tenth day after receiving the citation of
the violation.
(3) If the charge against a person is dismissed under subsection (b)(2), a later conviction for a
violation of subsection (a) shall be considered a second or subsequent conviction for purposes of
subsection (b)(1).
(4) The purpose of this section is to promote safety and encourage the use of helmets. The courts
may consider deferred dispositions under the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, as it exists or may
be amended, whenever the circumstances warrant deferred dispositions.
(Ordinance 03-11-96, sec. 4, adopted 11/4/03; Ordinance 05-08-61, sec. 5, adopted 8/3/05)
Secs. 90-63–90-82 Reserved
ARTICLE IV. STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING*
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 90-83 Parking limits and regulations
Regulations concerning parking, including but not limited to specified locations, conditions and time limits, shall
be as established from time to time by ordinance. Such regulations in effect on the date of adoption of this Code
are ratified, reaffirmed, and reserved from repeal.
Sec. 90-84 Presumption
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 586/684
In a prosecution for an offense under this article involving the stopping, standing, or parking of an unattended
motor vehicle, it is presumed that the registered owner of the vehicle is the person who stopped, stood, or parked
the vehicle at the time and place the offense occurred.
Secs. 90-85–90-111 Reserved
DIVISION 2. TRUCKS, TRAILERS, BUSES AND SEMI-TRAILERS*
Sec. 90-112 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Bus means every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than ten passengers and used for the transportation of
persons and every motor vehicle other than a taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.
Commercial vehicle means every truck-tractor, road tractor, semitrailer, bus, drivable construction equipment,
truck or trailer or any other motor vehicle that transports passengers or property with a rated carrying capacity of
two (2) tons or more according to the manufacturer's classification. Commercial vehicle does not include
vehicles carrying or designed to carry fewer than ten (10) passengers, motor homes, recreational vehicles or
vehicles used exclusively to transport personal possessions or family members for nonbusiness purposes.
Semi-trailer means every vehicle with or without motor power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying
persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some part of its weight and
that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
Trailer means every vehicle with or without motor power other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons
or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that no part of its weight and that of its
load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle.
Truck means every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property.
Truck tractor means every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicle and not so
constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
(Ordinance 89-10-07, sec. 1, adopted 10/17/89; Ordinance 19-04-25 adopted 4/2/19)
Sec. 90-113 Commercial vehicle parking prohibited
(a) It shall be unlawful for any owner or person in control of a commercial vehicle to leave, park or stand, or
to permit the leaving, parking or standing of, such vehicle, on any public street, highway, alley, parkway,
boulevard, right-of-way or other property owned or controlled by any unit of government. It is an affirmative
defense to an enforcement action under this section if a person leaves, parks or stands, or permits the leaving,
parking or standing of, a commercial vehicle in such locations under the following circumstances:
(1) Commercial vehicles owned or operated by or on behalf of a governmental entity, a public
utility or any contractor or materialman thereof, while engaged in the repair, maintenance or
construction of improvements to public streets, highways, alleys, parkways, boulevards or rights-ofway
or utilities within the city;
(2) Commercial vehicles owned or operated by or on behalf of a governmental entity while
engaging in or performing official, authorized government-related business;
(3) Passenger buses taking on or discharging passengers at an approved bus stop;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 587/684
(4) A commercial vehicle parked in a loading zone for the purpose of loading or unloading freight
or merchandise to a lawfully zoned business;
(5) A commercial vehicle parked for the purpose of delivering or picking up merchandise to or
from a specific designated location or loading or unloading personal property to or from a specific
designated location that shall not exceed three (3) hours in any case;
(6) A commercial vehicle experiencing a mechanical defect making it unsafe or impossible to
proceed, for such period of time as emergency repairs are made or, if repairs cannot be made within
three (3) hours, until a tow truck arrives;
(7) A commercial vehicle owned by a commercial establishment that is legally parked on the
street, highway, alley, parkway, boulevard or right-of-way adjacent to where the establishment is
located, and not in violation of any signage or other ordinance of the city governing stopping,
standing and parking;
(8) A commercial vehicle legally parked adjacent to a building construction site, not in violation of
any signage or other ordinance of the city governing stopping, standing or parking, where the
construction site has no room to accommodate the commercial vehicle and only while the
commercial vehicle is actively engaged in construction activities. The determination of whether a
construction site does not have sufficient room to accommodate the commercial vehicle shall be
made by the city manager or his or her designee; or
(9) A commercial vehicle parked on a street, highway, alley, parkway, boulevard or right-of-way in
a manner and at a time specified by the city manager, or his or her designee, through the issuance of
an approved right-of-way permit and/or traffic-control plan.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any owner or person in control of a commercial vehicle to leave, park or stand, or
to permit the leaving, parking or standing of such vehicle, on any vacant lot.
(c) The city manager, or his/her designee, may temporarily suspend the restrictions imposed by this section in
order to accommodate special events held within the city. The city manager, or his/her designee, shall, based on
the event taking place, determine how long prior to the start of the event the suspension will begin, as well as
how long after the event is completed the suspension will end.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in violation of this section. Any violation of any
provision of this section, as it exists or may be amended, is a class C misdemeanor. An offense under this section
carries a penalty in the form of a fine in an amount not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). A violation of
any provision of this section shall constitute a separate violation for each calendar day in which it occurs. The
penal provisions imposed under this section shall not preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin the violation.
The city retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law.
(e) In addition to any penalty or other remedy found in this section, any commercial vehicle that is left, parked
or found standing in violation of this section may be removed by or on an order of a city law enforcement officer
or the city manager or his or her designee provided that the owner or driver of the commercial vehicle has been
given at least one previous notice or citation for parking such vehicle in violation of this section. The owner of
such vehicle shall be responsible for the payment of any fees incurred for the towing and/or storage of said
vehicle.
(Ordinance 89-10-07, sec. 3, adopted 10/17/89; Ordinance 19-04-25 adopted 4/2/19)
Sec. 90-114 Enforcement
The city manager shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of this division. (Ordinance 89-10-07, sec. 4,
adopted 10/17/89)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 588/684
Sec. 90-115 Exemption
All federal, state, municipal and public utility companies which hold a properly executed franchise granted by
the city are hereby exempted from this division. (Ordinance 89-10-07, sec. 5, adopted 10/17/89)
Sec. 90-116 Signs
The city manager or such other person designated by the city manager shall erect appropriate signs to designate
“no through truck zones” or such language on the signs as the city manager or his designee may deem
appropriate. (Ordinance 89-10-07, sec. 6, adopted 10/17/89)
Secs. 90-117–90-147 Reserved
DIVISION 3. RECREATIONAL VEHICLES
Sec. 90-148 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
On-street parking permit means written governmental permission authorized by the chief of police of the city or
appointed designee (the “chief of police”) empowering the holder thereof to park or store a recreational vehicle
on a public street within a residential zoning district for a temporary period of time not to exceed 48 hours prior
to a trip or 24 hours following a trip. Said permit shall identify the owner or operator of such vehicle, nearest
street address or precise description of location where vehicle is to be parked or stored, the date the permit is
issued, date of expiration, and any other information, conditions or special restrictions deemed necessary by the
chief of police or at the time of issuance.
Recreational vehicle means any vehicular type portable structure without permanent foundation, which can be
towed, hauled or driven and primarily designed to serve as temporary living accommodations for recreational,
camping or travel use and including but not limited to travel trailers, camping trailers, converted buses and selfpropelled
motorhomes.
Visitor on-street parking permit means written governmental permission authorized by the chief of police or
appointed designee empowering the holder thereof to park or store a recreational vehicle on a public street
within a residential zoning district for a temporary period of time not to exceed five days for visitors from
outside of Collin/Denton County. Said permit shall identify the owner or operator of such vehicle, nearest street
address or precise description of location where vehicle is to be parked or stored, the property owner's name, the
date the permit is issued, date of expiration, and any other information, conditions or special restrictions deemed
necessary by the chief of police at the time of issuance.
(Ordinance 00-05-14, sec. 3, adopted 5/16/00)
Sec. 90-149 Restricted areas and times
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to park or stand or to allow any recreational vehicle to park or stand
upon any public street, highway, alley or public right-of-way between any street and alley within any part of the
city classified by the city's Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance No. 93-07-11, or as amended, as a single-family
dwelling district, two-family dwelling district, or multifamily dwelling district at any time.
(b) This section shall not prevent the parking, operating and/or standing of the above-described vehicles
and/or trailers upon any public street, highway or alley in any such zones or areas for the purpose of
expeditiously loading and unloading passengers, freight or merchandise, or the expeditious delivery of a service
or product.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 589/684
(c) This section shall not apply to recreational vehicles that have obtained an on-street parking permit in
accordance with sections 90-151 and 90-152.
(Ordinance 00-05-14, sec. 4, adopted 5/16/00)
Sec. 90-150 Parking not to obstruct traffic
(a) No person shall park any vehicle upon a public street, alley or highway in a manner or under such
conditions as to leave available less than 12 feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular
traffic.
(b) No person shall park any vehicle upon a street adjacent to a driveway in such a manner or under such
conditions as to leave available less than three feet of roadway between the vehicle and the point where the
curve return of the driveway connects with the curb.
(Ordinance 00-05-14, sec. 5, adopted 5/16/00)
Sec. 90-151 School zones
It shall be unlawful to park a recreational vehicle on a public street in a school zone during school hours when
school is in session. This section shall not apply to the parking of such vehicles for such time as is actually
necessary to load or unload passengers. (Ordinance 00-05-14, sec. 6, adopted 5/16/00)
Sec. 90-152 On-street parking permits
(a) It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution for parking or storing a recreational vehicle on public
streets within areas zoned for residential uses if a valid “on-street parking permit” has been issued to the owner
or operator of said vehicle and parking or storage of the vehicle in no way violates any other pertinent state
statute, City Code, ordinance, section or provision.
(b) The chief of police shall have sole authority to issue, deny, revoke or extend any on-street parking permit
and may impose any additional conditions or restrictions at time of issuance deemed necessary to ensure that the
health, safety and welfare of the residents and guests of the city are not jeopardized.
(c) No more than four on-street parking permits may be issued per calendar year for the same address or street
location, unless otherwise approved by the chief of police.
(d) A “visitor on-street parking permit” may only be issued to the host property owner for the exclusive use of
visitors from outside of Collin/Denton County to park or store a recreational vehicle on a residential street for a
maximum of five days. The application for a “visitor on-street parking permit” must be signed by the host
property owner or resident at which the recreational vehicle will be parked.
(e) No more than one visitor on-street parking permit may be issued per address or street location within a
calendar year, unless otherwise approved by the chief of police.
(Ordinance 00-05-14, sec. 7, adopted 5/16/00)
Sec. 90-153 Appeal
All appeals from a denial, denial of extension and/or revocation of an “on-street parking permit” and/or “visitor
on-street parking permit” shall be made in writing to the city manager of the city or his designee (the “city
manager”). The appeal shall be filed in writing within ten days of the occurrence of any denial and/or
revocation. The city manager shall attempt to hear the appeal within 30 days after receiving notice of the appeal.
The city manager shall have the power to reverse a decision of the police chief where he finds that such reversal
will not affect the health and/or welfare of the public. All decisions of the city manager shall be subject to
review by the city council at its next regularly scheduled meeting provided it can be reasonably added to the
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 590/684
agenda. Otherwise, the city council's review will occur at its next available regularly scheduled meeting. The
decision of the city manager will be final unless reversed by the city council. The city council's failure to take
action upon any such appeal shall constitute approval of the decision by the city manager. (Ordinance 00-05-14,
sec. 8, adopted 5/16/00)
Sec. 90-154 Penalty provision
Any person, firm, corporation or business entity violating this division shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction thereof shall be fined a sum not exceeding $500.00. Each continuing day's violation under
this division shall constitute a separate offense. The penal provisions imposed under this division shall not
preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin the violation. The city retains all legal rights and remedies available to
it pursuant to local, state and federal law. (Ordinance 00-05-14, sec. 9, adopted 5/16/00)
DIVISION 4. SPECIAL EVENT PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 90-155 Purpose and findings
The purpose of this division is to promote the health, safety and welfare of the City of Frisco citizens and
visitors and promote neighborhood integrity by addressing issues that occur when private property is used for
the parking of motor vehicles by persons attending special events. The establishment of a limited access zone
and appropriate signs and barricades on public right-of-way during special events is intended to reduce
neighborhood impact, improve traffic conditions, and increase the ability of residents to obtain neighborhood
access and adequate parking. The establishment of accessory special event parking permits for special event
parking addresses the integrity of private property use for parking in areas that were not originally designed or
intended for special event parking and the improper use of private property for parking, traffic problems created
by cash handling at the parking lot, and litter problems created by a lot operator's failure to properly administer
the lot and adjacent area after the special event. These provisions are intended to promote the safety of area
visitors, residents and businesses, and provide a systematic approach to parking and traffic management for
special events. (Ordinance 11-05-14, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 5/17/11)
Sec. 90-156 General authority and duty of the administrator
The administrator shall implement and enforce this division. (Ordinance 11-05-14, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted
5/17/11)
Sec. 90-157 Definitions
For the purposes of this division, the following definitions apply:
Accessory special event parking means the provision of special event parking for the public for a fee in a parking
area that normally provides required or excess parking for the occupants, clients, customers, or employees of a
particular nonresidential establishment.
Accessory special event parking area means the area to be used for accessory special event parking as shown on
the parking plan submitted by an applicant and approved by the administrator.
Accessory special event parking permit means the completed document provided by the administrator or
designee after the requirements of this division are accomplished.
Administrator means the person or persons designated by the city manager to administer this division.
Applicant. A person desiring to operate accessory special event parking for a special event shall file an
application to the administrator for an accessory special event parking permit.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 591/684
Community sponsored event. Special events that are primarily sponsored by the City of Frisco and intended for
the benefit of the citizens of the City of Frisco. Community sponsored events shall include, but are not limited
to, a July 4th annual event and a Christmas annual event.
Limited access zone number one. The area of land located within and bounded by Burlington Northern-Santa Fe
Railroad, Legacy Drive, Eldorado Parkway, and Stonebrook Parkway, which is more particularly depicted in
Figure 1, attached to Ordinance 11-05-14, on file and available for inspection in the city secretary's office.
Limited access zone number two. The area of land located within and bounded by Parkwood Boulevard, the
northbound access road to Dallas North Tollway, Gaylord Parkway, and the westbound access road to State
Highway 12, which is more particularly depicted in Figure 2, attached to Ordinance 11-05-14, on file and
available for inspection in the city secretary's office.
Limited access zones shall mean both limited access zone number one and limited access zone number two.
Nonresident establishment means a premises operating a use other than a single-family, townhouse, duplex or
multifamily use.
Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, firm, corporation, association or other legal entity.
Property means property assessed as one unit in the Collin or Denton Appraisal District upon which any part of
the accessory special event parking will occur, or upon which a sign has been posted during a special event
indicating that parking is available for a fee.
Public right-of-way means the definition set forth in chapter 78 of the Frisco Code of Ordinances.
Recreational vehicle (RV) means a vehicle designed for recreational use, casual travel or camping that includes a
portable dwelling or a specially equipped trailer.
Scheduled start time of the special event means the time advertised for the special event to begin as set by its
organizers. This definition includes the time listed on admission tickets and other promotional material for the
special event.
Single-family, townhouse, duplex or multifamily use means the definition set forth in the Zoning Code of
Ordinances of the City of Frisco.
Special event means the definition set forth in the special events chapter of the Code of the City of Frisco.
(Ordinance 11-05-14, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 5/17/11)
Sec. 90-158 Effective area
The special event parking regulations found in this division shall only apply to property within the limited access
zones. (Ordinance 11-05-14, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 5/17/11)
Sec. 90-159 Accessory special event parking permits required
(a) No person shall accept any form of consideration from another person in exchange for allowing that
person to park a vehicle on a parcel of land unless:
(1) An accessory special event parking permit has been issued by the administrator for that parcel
of land where the vehicle is to be parked; or
(2) A certificate of occupancy has been issued by the city expressly allowing commercial parking
or an overnight parking facility on that parcel of land where the vehicle is to be parked and:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 592/684
a. The vehicle is parked only on a paved parking surface with marked parking spaces; and
b. One vehicle is parked per marked parking space.
(b) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, if a vehicle is to be parked in more than one parking space, is
parked outside of marked spaces, or spaces are used for tailgating, parking of recreational vehicles, or camping
activities, a special event parking permit is required. Also, if a vehicle will be parked on a portion of a parcel of
land that is unpaved, a special event parking permit shall always be required.
(Ordinance 11-05-14, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 5/17/11)
Sec. 90-160 Applications for special event parking permit
(a) Filing deadline. All applicants for an accessory special event parking permit shall submit an application to
the administrator at least seven business days before the day the special event is to be held.
(b) Contents; generally. A complete application for a special event parking permit must be on a form issued
by the City of Frisco and shall contain the following information:
(1) The applicant's name, address, phone number, email address and valid sales tax identification
number, or if exempt from paying sales tax the applicant's exemption information and income tax
identification number;
(2) A description of the main use on the property;
(3) The name of the property owner, address, phone number and email address;
(4) Applicant's documentation for permission to use the property for accessory special event
parking (if application is not the property owner);
(5) Proof of general liability insurance, including independent contractor's liability, completed
operations and contractual liability fully insuring applicant's liability for injury to or death of third
parties, extended to including personal injury liability coverage and for damage to property of third
parties, with a minimum limit of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence and $2,000,000.00 annual aggregate.
Each policy will require that 30 calendar days prior to the expiration, cancellation, nonrenewal or any
material change in coverage, a notice thereof shall be given to the city, and will require that if the
policy is cancelled for nonpayment of premium, ten calendar days advance written notice shall be
given to city;
(6) A parking site plan indicating the address and name of the main use on the property, as shown
on the signage for the main use; for unimproved lot surfaces the parking plan shall indicate the parcel
number;
(7) The parking site plan shall also include the boundaries of the parking area, ingress and egress
locations, the parking layout (no stacking is permitted, parking must be in existing striped parking
spaces for improved lots), and the cash handling area on the property;
(9) The name, address, phone number and email address of the person responsible for the operation
of the special event parking area, if not the property owner or the applicant (the property owner's
identity, or the responsible person's identity if different than the property owner, must be proven by
showing a valid Texas Driver's License, military identification card, passport, or personal
identification card issued by the Texas Department of Public Safety);
(10) The existence of any shared parking arrangement or parking agreement with any other
property owner;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 593/684
(11) Whether tailgating and/or overnight camping will be permitted; and
(12) Any other information that the administrator determines necessary for the administration of
this division.
(c) Expiration. The special event parking permit expires 24 hours after the scheduled end of the special event.
(d) Scope of accessory special event parking permits. The accessory special event parking permit does not
authorize the use of the lots for commercial parking for other than special events.
(Ordinance 11-05-14, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 5/17/11)
Sec. 90-161 Approval and/or denial of special event parking permit
(a) Approval. The administrator may issue a special event parking permit if:
(1) A complete application for a special event parking permit is submitted to the administrator.
(2) The proposed special event parking and application complies with and/or addresses all
applicable regulations set forth in this division.
(3) The main use on the parcel of land where the special event parking will occur is a
nonresidential use.
(4) In addition to the regulations set forth in this division, the Frisco Square public parking
facilities identified in Figure 3, attached to Ordinance 11-05-14, on file and available for inspection
in the city secretary's office, shall also be regulated by written agreement by and between the
property owner and the city. The administrator shall review the status and terms of the agreement and
make a determination as to whether an accessory special event parking permit allowing for a fee for
parking on these facilities is permitted.
(b) Denial.
(1) The administrator shall deny a special event parking permit if the application fails to meet the
requirements as described in section 90-160(a).
(2) Any applicant who is denied an special event parking permit (an “appellant”) may, within five
business days of the service of notice of such determination, file a written appeal from such
determination with the administrator.
(3) The administrator shall have ten business days from the date on which the appeal was received
in which to provide appellant a notice that the decision was affirmed, modified or reversed.
(4) The notice to appellant shall be deemed served upon the appellant when it is personally
delivered or when it is sent by United States Mail, with proper postage prepaid, to the name and
address set forth on the application for permit.
(5) Any appeals filed pursuant to this division shall state succinctly the grounds upon which it is
asserted that the determination should be modified or reversed and shall be accompanied by copies of
the application for permit, the written notice of the determination of the city, and any other papers
material to the determination.
(6) The determination of the administrator shall be final.
(Ordinance 11-05-14, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 5/17/11)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 594/684
Sec. 90-162 Operation of an accessory special event parking area
(a) Mandatory on-site signage. On the day of the special event, a temporary sign must be displayed in the
accessory special event parking area near each entrance to the parking area in the location(s) shown on the
parking site plan. No sign permit is required for the placement of these temporary signs.
(1) All signs shall be at least 18 inches high and 24 inches wide (but no larger than 24 inches high
by 36 inches wide) with a maximum height from grade to the top of the sign of four feet;
(2) All signs shall include a parking symbol at least ten inches in height designated by the city;
(3) All signs shall include the following wording with the blanks filled in appropriately: “Special
Event Parking Lot, Permit # _____, Parking Fee $ _____, Operator Phone No. __________. Operator
may not charge MORE than listed on this sign”;
(4) The parking fee listed on each sign shall be provided in a font that is at least six inches in
height;
(5) All signs will follow guidelines for placement of lettering and symbols as outlined in Figure 4,
Required Parking Sign Layout, which is attached to Ordinance 11-05-14, on file and available for
inspection in the city secretary's office;
(6) No words, symbols, illustrations, photos, or other similar graphics are permitted on a sign
unless expressly allowed and required under this section;
(7) Signs must be of a durable material, such as plastic, metal, wood, or like material, and must be
professionally fabricated and maintained in good repair;
(8) The parking symbol, the wording, and the fee must be visible from the adjacent street;
(9) The parking fee must remain the same throughout the day of the special event unless decreased,
and the amount charged for parking must not exceed the amount stated on the sign; and
(10) The sign must be visible on the special event parking area from the time cars are admitted for
special event parking until the property has been cleaned of litter at the end of the special event.
(b) Off-site signage. All directional signage displayed off-site shall be identified on the parking site plan. No
off-site directional signage shall be placed in city right-of-way. All directional signage displayed off-site shall
contain the valid sign permit number attached to the sign.
(c) Message boards, etc. No message boards or flashing directional signs shall be allowed.
(d) No city obligation to direct motorists to lots. The city has no obligation to direct motorist to any or all lots,
nor any obligation to ensure that competing lots are achieving equal business.
(e) Directing traffic. The city has the right to direct traffic on streets around any lots to address congestion
issues, which may include temporarily preventing traffic from entering a parking lot for some amount of time.
The city has no obligation to reimburse a person operating an accessory special event parking lot for any actual
or perceived loss of revenue as a result of this traffic direction.
(f) Parking lot full. When the parking lot is full, a sign must be displayed with wording visible from the
adjacent street (both directions of travel) that the parking lot is full.
(g) Required materials on-site in accessory special event parking area. The accessory special event parking
permit and parking plan must be available for immediate on-site inspection by city staff or public safety officers.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 595/684
(h) Requirements for improved parking lots.
(1) Be paved, striped and lit in compliance with standards prescribed in city ordinances for parking
areas if the lot has received a certificate of occupancy.
(2) Vehicles must be parked on approved surfaces only and in compliance with the parking site
plan.
(3) Expansion of existing parking area without accompanying expansion of primary business is not
permissible.
(i) Requirements for unimproved parking lots.
(1) Recreational vehicles (RV's) shall not be allowed to park on any unimproved lot surface where
the permitted parking lot area does not have a permanent curb-cut entry in order for the recreational
vehicle (RV) to access the unimproved lot surface. The administrator must approve all lots allowing
the parking of RV's.
(2) All hazards must be clearly marked and protected.
(3) Vegetation must be mowed prior to special event to be no higher than four inches.
(5) Lot must be marked to show drive aisles. Individual stalls do not need to be marked.
(6) No parking will be allowed in the drive aisles.
(7) Drive aisles will be a minimum of 20 feet in width and shall maintain overhead clearance of 14
feet vertically above all parts of the aisle.
(8) Operator must have arrangements made to have vehicles removed from lot should rain or
inclement weather dictate. Parked vehicles shall not be charged in addition to their parking fee to be
towed from the lot to the public right-of-way.
(9) Minor deviations from city standards from lighting are permitted in a parking site plan, such as
the use of rented lighting, or the presence of additional lot attendants in lieu of required lighting, if
the administrator determines that the plan provides adequate lighting and security for the lot.
(j) Requirements for staffing an accessory special event parking area.
(1) The accessory special event parking area must be staffed by at least two attendants who must
be present on the accessory special event parking area from the time the operator starts accepting
cash payment on the lot for parking until the lot is full or the start of the special event, whichever
occurs first.
(2) A minimum of one attendant must remain on the lot until one hour after the end of the special
event. The number of attendants may be varied, and in some cases, adjacent accessory special events
parking areas may share attendants as shown in the parking site plan, if the administrator determines
that the plan provides adequate staff for guiding vehicles in and out of the lot, and monitoring the
accessory special event parking area(s).
(3) The attendants must be easily identifiable by uniform clothing indicating they are employed to
provide accessory special event parking.
(4) Workers cannot stand in any street to flag motorists towards or into their lot. Employees cannot
direct traffic or appear to direct traffic on any street. Employees flagging cars cannot be further than
100 feet from the boundaries of their lot.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 596/684
(5) Employees shall not place traffic control devices in a public right-of-way.
(k) Requirements for trash removal of an accessory special event parking area.
(1) The accessory special event permit holder must provide cleanup service on the accessory
special event parking area and adjacent parkways to remove solid waste, litter, garbage, junk, refuse
or other debris found throughout the accessory special event parking area.
(2) All solid waste shall be stored in suitable containers with tight-fitting lids; such containers shall
be conveniently located throughout the area, and the requirements for trash containment shall be
determined by the city's environmental services division.
(3) All solid waste containers shall be monitored and shall be collected at such frequent intervals as
may be necessary to maintain sanitary conditions at the accessory special event parking area and be
disposed of in a facility which has been approved by the city's environmental services division.
(4) Persons operating an accessory special event parking area shall make provisions to have all
required trash containment on-site prior to the persons allowing vehicles to be parked in the lot.
(5) All solid waste, litter, garbage, junk, refuse or other debris shall be removed by the accessory
special event parking permit holder within 24 hours of the end of the special event.
(6) All barricades placed in an accessory special event parking area shall be removed by the
accessory special event parking permit holder within 24 hours of the end of the special event.
(l) Requirements for lot security of an accessory special event parking area.
(1) Requirements for on-site lot security will be determined by the city's police department, who
shall consider the time of the event, the duration of the event, the location of the special event
parking area compared to the location where the special event will be held, and any other
considerations that may affect the safety of vehicles and persons using the special event parking area.
(2) Persons operating an accessory special event parking area shall make provisions to have the
required security on-site prior to the persons allowing vehicles to be parked in the lot.
(3) The city police department and/or fire code official may shut down an accessory special event
parking area if they deem that there is a hazard. There is no appeal process if the city determines that
public safety has been identified to be at risk.
(m) Requirements of entrance to private property from city right-of-way.
(1) Entrances to accessory special event parking areas shall be consistent with the parking site plan
and located at least 20 feet from street intersections.
(2) Entrances to accessory special event parking areas shall be clearly marked.
(3) Additional “Enter Here” signs may be placed at approved entrances in the parking site plan in
addition to the required parking sign. However, there shall be no more than two additional signs
along with the required parking sign.
(4) Each accessory special event parking area shall have some type of delineation at the public
right-of-way line to keep vehicles from entering the property over a city curb wherever desired (i.e.,
poles driven into the ground with string and flags attached to the poles is acceptable in order to
prevent a trip hazard for pedestrians).
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 597/684
(5) For special event parking areas serving vehicles other than recreational vehicles, all material
used to allow entrance over a city curb shall be comprised of a bagged temporary asphalt and shall be
approved by an employee of the city public works department. Curb cuts are required if the special
event parking area provides parking for recreational vehicles.
(6) All material used to allow entrance over a city curb shall be removed by the accessory special
event parking permit holder within 24 hours of the end of the special event.
(n) Requirements for lots allowing tailgating or camping.
(1) If tailgating and/or overnight camping is allowed in the accessory special event parking area,
the person operating the lot may charge an additional fee equivalent to the original parking fee as an
additional parking space is required.
(2) If overnight camping is allowed in the accessory special event parking area, sufficient
bathroom facilities shall be supplied. Portable type toilets, if provided, shall have waste therefrom
collected at intervals of sufficient frequency to preclude overflow, and the wastes therefrom shall be
disposed of in a manner that does not create a health hazard or nuisance.
(3) All food and beverages sold shall be obtained from approved sources, sources shall be deemed
approved if they have been approved and permitted for food sales or manufacture by the city's health
official.
(4) The application for an accessory special event parking permit shall state if tailgating and/or
overnight camping will be allowed that all solid waste shall be stored in suitable containers with
tight-fitting lids; such containers shall be conveniently located throughout the area, and the
requirements for trash containment shall be determined by the city's environmental services division.
(o) Special conditions on accessory special event parking permit. The accessory special event parking area
must be operated in compliance with any special conditions set forth on the accessory special event parking
permit.
(Ordinance 11-05-14, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 5/17/11)
Sec. 90-163 Revocation of permit
The administrator may revoke a special event parking permit issued under this division for violation of any
provision of this division; for violating any federal, state or local laws or ordinances during the special event; for
making any material false representation in an application for an special event parking permit; upon notice of
required insurance policy cancellations or failure to renew coverage; or if the administrator determines that the
special event parking at that location adversely affects traffic management or public safety. In the event of
revocation, the procedures for appeal shall be the same as for a denial of the special event permit, as set forth in
this division, commencing with the date the revocation notice is provided to the applicant. (Ordinance 11-05-14,
sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 5/17/11)
Sec. 90-164 Offenses
(a) A person commits an offense if that person or their agent:
(1) Submits false documents, or otherwise makes a false statement of a material fact on an
application for any permit submitted under this division;
(2) Provides special event parking for any vehicle during a special event in violation of this
division; each vehicle charged a fee for parking on a parking area during a special event in violation
of this division constitutes a separate offense;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 598/684
(3) Violates any other provision of this division.
(b) In the prosecution of an offense under this division, it is presumed that:
(1) The applicant for the accessory special event parking permit and the person named in the
application as responsible for the operation of the accessory special event parking area, are
responsible for parking violations under this division and for compliance with this division in the
operation of the accessory special event parking area;
(2) The owner of the property is responsible for parking violations under this division; and
(3) All vehicles parked on property during a special event have been charged a fee for parking if,
during a special event: (a) a sign is present on the property indicating that parking is available for a
fee; or (b) in the absence of such sign on the property, if there is signage in the vicinity of the
property indicating that parking is available for a fee and individuals are directing cars onto the
property to park.
(Ordinance 11-05-14, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 5/17/11)
Sec. 90-165 Penalty
An offense under any provision of this division is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00.
Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. Each vehicle parked on a
property without a valid accessory special event parking permit shall constitute a separate offense. (Ordinance
11-05-14, sec. 2, ex. A, adopted 5/17/11)
Secs. 90-166–90-170 Reserved
DIVISION 5. PROHIBITED OR RESTRICTED PARKING AREAS DESIGNATED BY SIGNS OR
MARKINGS
Sec. 90-171 Designation and marking of parking spaces and areas where parking is prohibited or
restricted
(a) Definitions. For the purposes of this division, the following definitions apply:
Parking enforcement officer. A city employee whose duties include enforcement of parking violations under this
division.
Public parking places. Places where a motor vehicle can be legally parked along a public roadway or on
property owned by the city, whether marked with parking space stripes or not. This includes, but is not limited
to, parking spaces within public parking lots, within public parking garages, around city-owned buildings and on
the side of public streets where allowed by state law. Parking is never allowed along type A or B thoroughfares
as defined by the city's engineering standards, as they exist or may be amended.
(b) Survey. Upon a survey performed by the traffic engineer and approved by the city manager or his/her
designee, the traffic engineer shall cause public parking places in which parking is prohibited or limited to be
maintained and marked off in and on such streets and parts thereof from time to time. All such spaces or areas
shall be clearly indicated by appropriate signs or markings on the pavement, curb, permanent building or wall or
as otherwise approved.
(c) Signs or markings. In areas designated as prohibited or limited parking areas, public parking places may be
prohibited or limited in any manner consistent with the traffic engineer's survey. The area shall be designated
with clearly distinguished markings or signs at both ends of the prohibited or limited area and at reasonable
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 599/684
intervals between the beginning and ending of such prohibited area, indicating what vehicles may park there, for
how long they may park there and any other restrictions that may apply in the prohibited or limited area.
(d) Applicable periods. Any prohibition of or time limit on public parking places established under this
section shall apply on such days and between such hours as prescribed by the traffic engineer and approved by
the city manager or his/her designee.
(e) Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in violation of this section. Any violation
by a person, firm, entity or corporation of any provision of this division, as it exists or may be amended, is a
civil offense, pursuant to chapter 682 of the Texas Transportation Code. A civil offense under this division
carries a civil penalty in the form of a fine in a sum not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each
continuing day's violation under this division shall constitute a separate offense. Payment of fines will be made
to the city's police department or its designee for parking violations under the provisions of this division. The
penal provisions imposed under this section shall not preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin the violation.
The city retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law.
(f) Presumptions. Whenever any vehicle stands in a public parking space in violation of this section, such fact
shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle has been parked illegally and that the registered owner and/or
operator of such vehicle did knowingly cause, allow or permit such vehicle to be parked in such location. A
registered vehicle owner is not liable for a violation subject to this article if:
(1) The vehicle operator, not the registered owner, assumes responsibility for the issued citation by
either paying the fine or contesting the citation as outlined in this division;
(2) The registered vehicle owner files an affidavit with the city's police department or its designee
and attaches supporting documentation, establishing that the vehicle being operated at the time of the
violation was sold prior to the date and time the citation was issued. Supporting documentation
includes but is not limited to a bill of sale and the vehicle's title signed by both the seller and the
purchaser of the vehicle;
(3) The registered vehicle owner files an affidavit with the city's police department or its designee
and attaches supporting documentation, establishing that the vehicle being operated at the time of the
violation was stolen prior to the date and time the citation was issued. Supporting documentation
includes but is not limited to a copy of an official police report; or
(4) The registered vehicle owner is now deceased and no other vehicle operator has been
personally served with the citation, nor claimed responsibility for the citation. Proof may be shown
by submitting an official death certificate.
(Ordinance 18-05-21 adopted 5/1/18)
Sec. 90-172 Prohibited reservation of public parking place by business
It shall be unlawful for a business to reserve a public parking place for the exclusive use of its customers, unless
said business is granted an exception by the city. This exception must be in writing from the city manager or
his/her designee. It must be maintained by the business, contained on the premises and provided when requested
by city employees. (Ordinance 18-05-21 adopted 5/1/18)
Sec. 90-173 Permit for special parking
Special permission for a definite period of time to allow parking of an unusual nature which may be contrary to
or in violation of any of the provisions of this division may be granted by the city manager or his/her designee.
This exception must be in writing from said employee and must be maintained by the permittee and provided
when requested by city employees. (Ordinance 18-05-21 adopted 5/1/18)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 600/684
Sec. 90-174 Adjudication of parking offense
(a) Hearing officer. The chief of police shall appoint a hearing officer who shall preside over parking hearings
in accordance with this division and shall have the authority to accept pleas, administer oaths and to issue orders
compelling the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents. An order compelling the attendance of
witnesses or the production of documents may be enforced by the municipal court.
(b) Parking citations. The administrative adjudication process for violations under this division shall be
initiated by the issuance of a parking citation which may be issued by a parking enforcement officer or other
authorized parking enforcement agent. Authorized parking enforcement agents shall include any police officer,
traffic-control technician or other employee of the city designated by the chief of police or the city manager to
enforce the provisions of this article in regard to the parking, stopping or standing of vehicles. The original
parking notice of violation must be signed by or bear the name or identification number, if applicable, of the
issuing parking enforcement officer.
(c) Service. A parking citation must be served personally upon the operator of a vehicle, if present at the time
of issuance. If the operator of the vehicle is not present at the time of issuance of the citation, the citation must
be served upon the registered owner of the vehicle by affixing the citation to the vehicle in a conspicuous place
or by mailing the citation to the last known address of the registered owner of the vehicle by United States mail.
(d) Right to hearing; admission of liability.
(1) The citation shall provide that the registered vehicle owner or operator charged with a parking,
stopping or standing offense shall have the right to an instanter hearing to determine the issue of
liability for the charged offense. Such right to a hearing shall be exercised by appearing in person
before a hearing officer within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the citation at such
convenient and reasonable hours to be printed on the parking citation. The thirtieth (30th) calendar
day shall be the last day to respond to a parking citation, and shall be known as the appearance date.
(2) The registered vehicle owner or operator charged with a parking, stopping or standing violation
may contest the citation in writing within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the citation, by
submitting written statements and evidence to either the department or the entity with which the city
contracts to operate parking enforcement under this division. All statements and evidence must be
sent no later than the thirtieth (30th) day from the date of the citation.
(e) Hearings.
(1) At the hearing before the hearing officer, the registered vehicle owner or operator may enter a
plea of liable, not liable or liable with an explanation to the alleged violation.
(2) The issuing peace officer, other authorized parking enforcement agent or the city's prosecuting
attorney shall not be required to attend the hearing.
(3) No formal or sworn complaint shall be necessary. The hearing officer shall examine the
contents of the citation and the evidence related to ownership of the vehicle in question, and shall
hear and consider evidence and testimony presented by the registered vehicle owner or operator and
the issuing officer if in attendance. If the hearing officer determines by the preponderance of the
evidence that the violation was committed by the registered vehicle owner or operator, the hearing
officer shall find the person liable.
(4) At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue an order stating whether or not
the registered vehicle owner or operator charged is liable for violation of the parking or stopping
ordinance and the amount of any fine, costs, or fee assessed against the person. The order shall be
filed with the clerk or secretary of the city or with a person designated by the city council. All such
orders shall be recorded on microfilm or microfiche or using data processing techniques.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 601/684
(5) The Texas Rules of Evidence do not apply to a hearing under this article.
(f) Appeal.
(1) After the administrative adjudication hearing or finding of liability, a person found liable by the
hearing officer for violating this division may appeal this determination to the municipal court.
(2) The appeal must be instituted by the liable party filing, not later than the thirtieth (30th) day
after the filing of the hearing officer's order, a petition with the clerk of the municipal court along
with payment of any other costs required by law for municipal courts.
(3) After the liable party files a petition for appeal, the municipal clerk shall schedule a hearing and
notify all parties of the date, time and place of the hearing.
(4) The appeal hearing shall be a trial de novo. The municipal court shall examine the evidence
presented at the appellate hearing and if the court determines by the preponderance of the evidence
that the violation was committed by the appealing party, the court shall find the appealing party
liable.
(g) Effect of liability. The imposition of a civil penalty under this division is not a criminal conviction and
may not be considered a conviction for any purpose. Additionally, a civil penalty may not be imposed upon a
person for a civil parking offense under this division if the person was arrested or was issued a criminal citation
and notice to appear by a peace officer for a violation of state law or city ordinance for the same specific
incidence as the civil parking offense.
(Ordinance 18-05-21 adopted 5/1/18)
DIVISION 6. RESERVED PARKING
Sec. 90-175 Temporary events
(a) Designation. The curbside parking spaces located on the south side of Hall of Fame Lane from Gridiron
Road to a point one thousand (1,000) feet east of Gridiron Road, the east side of Gridiron Road from Hall of
Fame Lane to a point six hundred (600) feet south of Hall of Fame Lane and the west side of Gaylord Parkway
from Hall of Fame Lane to a point five hundred (500) feet south of Hall of Fame Lane, as depicted in exhibit A
to Ordinance 19-01-01, are hereby reserved for the parking of vehicles associated with temporary events that
have displayed on the front windshield dash or other approved location an identification placard approved by the
city manager or his/her designated representative. As used in this section, the term “temporary event” means an
event held at The Star that lasts no more than seven (7) consecutive days.
(b) Violations. It is unlawful for any person to cause, allow or permit any vehicle registered in the name of or
operated by such person to be parked in any space hereby reserved for temporary event parking under this
section unless there is displayed on the front windshield dash of such vehicle or other approved location a valid
identification placard approved by the city manager or his/her designated representative.
(c) Presumptions. Whenever any vehicle stands in a parking space reserved for temporary event parking under
this section and such vehicle does not have a valid identification placard approved by the city manager or
designated representative displayed as required under this section, such fact shall be prima facie evidence that
the vehicle has been parked illegally and that the registered owner and/or operator of such vehicle did knowingly
cause, allow or permit such vehicle to be parked in such location.
(d) Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on
conviction, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each continuing day's
violation shall constitute a separate offense.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 602/684
(e) Towing authorized. Upon determination that a vehicle is illegally parked in violation of any provision of
this section, an authorized official, after issuance of a citation, may cause such illegally parked vehicle to be
removed and stored at a vehicle storage facility at the registered owner's or operator's expense in accordance
with other law.
(Ordinance 19-01-01 adopted 1/2/19)
Sec. 90-176 Reserved
ARTICLE V. TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
Sec. 90-177 Traffic-control devices are authorized, placed or erected as provided
(a) The city manager, or designated representative, shall be authorized to place, erect and maintain such traffic
control devices which he deems to be warranted in accordance with provisions or requirements of the “Manual
of Uniform Traffic-Control Devices” or as may be required by ordinances of the city.
(b) All existing traffic-control devices which have been placed or erected in general compliance with this
article are hereby approved and ratified, and shall be considered as having been legally placed and/or erected.
(c) Traffic-control devices which are determined by the city manager, or designated representative, or the city
council, to be no longer needed for the safety or welfare of the citizens of the city may be caused to be removed
by the city manager, or designated representative.
(d) All traffic-control devices authorized, placed, or erected by the state highway department on state
highways are adopted by the city council.
(Ordinance 96-10-07, sec. 1, adopted 10/1/96)
Sec. 90-178 Driver obedience to traffic signals
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable thereto
placed in accordance with this article, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. (Ordinance 96-10-07, sec. 2,
adopted 10/1/96)
Sec. 90-179 Violation; penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be fined in the sum not more than $500.00. (Ordinance 96-10-07, sec. 3, adopted
10/1/96)
Secs. 90-180–90-196 Reserved
ARTICLE VI. LOAD LIMITS AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Sec. 90-197 Ordinances reserved from repeal
Ordinances in effect on the date of adoption of this Code, concerning load limits, truck routes, hazardous
materials routes and regulations, one-way streets, turn lanes, and bicycles and other personal transportation
vehicles, to the extent not in conflict with state law, are ratified, reaffirmed, and reserved from repeal.
Secs. 90-198–90-200 Reserved
ARTICLE VII. AUTOMATED RED LIGHT ENFORCEMENT REGULATIONS*
Sec. 90-201 Definitions
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 603/684
In this article:
Department shall mean the police department of the City of Frisco, Texas.
Owner shall mean the owner of a motor vehicle as shown on the motor vehicle registration records of the Texas
Department of Transportation or the analogous department or agency of another state or country. The term
“owner” includes
(1) A lessee of a motor vehicle under a lease of six months or more; or
(2) The lessee of a motor vehicle rented or leased from a motor vehicle rental or leasing company,
but does not include the motor vehicle rental or leasing company itself.
Photographic traffic signal enforcement system shall mean a system that:
(1) Consists of a camera system and vehicle sensor installed to exclusively work in conjunction
with an electrically operated traffic-control signal; and
(2) Is capable of producing at least two recorded images that depict the license plate attached to the
front or rear of a motor vehicle that is not operated in compliance with the instructions of the trafficcontrol
signal.
Recorded image means an image recorded by a photographic traffic monitoring system that depicts the front or
the rear of a motor vehicle and is automatically recorded on a photograph or digital image.
Traffic control signal has the meaning assigned by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code sec. 541.304.
(Ordinance 07-08-35, sec. 2, art. 1, adopted 8/21/07)
Sec. 90-202 Imposition of civil penalty for violations
(a) The city council finds and determines that a vehicle that proceeds into an intersection when the traffic
control signal for that vehicle's direction of travel is emitting a steady red signal damages the public by
endangering motor vehicle operators and pedestrians alike, by decreasing the efficiency of traffic control and
traffic flow efforts, by increasing the number of serious accidents to which public safety agencies must respond
at the expense of the taxpayers, and is operated in violation of the instructions of that traffic-control signal.
(b) Except as provided in subsection (c), the owner of a motor vehicle is liable for a civil penalty of $75.00 if,
while facing only a steady red signal displayed by an electrically operated traffic-control signal located in the
city, the vehicle is operated in violation of the instructions of that traffic-control signal, as specified by V.T.C.A.,
Transportation Code sec. 544.007(d).
(c) An owner who fails to timely contest or pay the civil penalty shall be subject to a late payment penalty of
$25.00.
(Ordinance 07-08-35, sec. 2, art. 2, adopted 8/21/07)
Sec. 90-203 Enforcement; procedures
(a) The department is responsible for the enforcement and administration of this article.
(b) In order to impose a civil penalty under this article, the department shall mail a notice of violation to the
owner of the motor vehicle against whom the city seeks to impose the civil penalty not later than the 30th day
after the date the violation is alleged to have occurred to:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 604/684
(1) The owner's address as shown on the registration records of the Texas Department of
Transportation; or
(2) If the vehicle is registered in another state or country, the owner's address as shown on the
motor vehicle registration records of the department or agency of the other state or country analogous
to the Texas Department of Transportation.
(c) A notice of violation issued under this article shall contain the following:
(1) A description of the violation alleged;
(2) The date and time of the violation;
(3) The location of the intersection where the violation occurred;
(4) The name and address of the owner of the vehicle involved in the violation;
(5) The registration number displayed on the license plate of the vehicle involved in the violation;
(6) A copy of a recorded image limited solely to a depiction of the area of the registration number
displayed on the license plate of the vehicle involved in the violation;
(7) The amount of the civil penalty for which the owner is liable;
(8) The number of days the person has in which to pay or contest the imposition of the civil
penalty and a statement that the person incurs a late payment penalty of $25.00 if the civil penalty is
not paid or imposition of the penalty is not contested within that period;
(9) A statement that the person named in the notice of violation may pay the civil penalty by mail
sent to a specified address in lieu of appearing at the time and place of the administrative adjudication
hearing;
(10) Information that informs the owner of the vehicle named in the notice of violation:
a. Of the owner's right to contest the imposition of the civil penalty against the person in an
administrative adjudication hearing;
b. That imposition of the civil penalty may be contested by submitting a written request for
an administrative adjudication hearing before the expiration of the period specified under
subsection (c)(8); and
c. That failure to pay the civil penalty or to contest liability for the penalty in a timely manner
is an admission of liability and a waiver of the owner's right to appeal the imposition of the civil
penalty; and
(11) A statement that a recorded image is evidence in a proceeding for the imposition of a civil
penalty;
(12) The information required by section 90-208(d); and
(13) Any other information deemed necessary by the department.
(d) A notice of violation under this article is presumed to have been received on the 5th day after the date the
notice of violation is mailed.
(e) In lieu of issuing a notice of violation, the department may mail a warning notice to the owner.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 605/684
(Ordinance 07-08-35, sec. 2, art. 3, adopted 8/21/07)
Sec. 90-204 Presumption
(a) It is presumed that the owner of the motor vehicle committed the violation alleged in the notice of
violation mailed to the person if the motor vehicle depicted in a photograph or digital image taken by a
photographic traffic signal enforcement system belongs to the owner of the motor vehicle.
(b) If, at the time of the violation alleged in the notice of violation, the motor vehicle depicted in a photograph
or digital image taken by a photographic traffic signal enforcement system was owned by a person in the
business of selling, renting, or leasing motor vehicles or by a person who was not the person named in the notice
of violation, the presumption under subsection (a) is rebutted on the presentation of evidence establishing that
the vehicle was at the time:
(1) Being test driven by another person;
(2) Being rented or leased by the vehicle's owner to another person; or
(3) Owned by a person who was not the person named in the notice of violation.
(c) Notwithstanding section 90-205, the presentation of evidence under subsection (b) by a person who is in
the business of selling, renting, or leasing motor vehicles or did not own the vehicle at the time of the violation
must be made by affidavit, through testimony at the administrative adjudication hearing under section 90-205, or
by a written declaration under penalty of perjury. The affidavit or written declaration may be submitted by mail
to the city or the entity with which the city contracts under section 90-208.
(d) If the presumption established by subsection (a) is rebutted under subsection (b), a civil penalty may not
be imposed on the owner of the vehicle or the person named in the notice of violation, as applicable.
(e) If, at the time of the violation alleged in the notice of violation, the motor vehicle depicted in the
photograph or digital image taken by the photographic traffic signal enforcement system was owned by a person
in the business of renting or leasing motor vehicles and the vehicle was being rented or leased to an individual,
the owner of the motor vehicle shall provide to the city or the entity with which the city contracts under section
90-208, the name and address of the individual who was renting or leasing the motor vehicle depicted in the
photograph or digital image and a statement of the period during which that individual was renting or leasing the
vehicle. The owner shall provide the information required by this subsection not later than the 30th day after the
date the notice of violation is received. If the owner provides the required information, it is presumed that the
individual renting or leasing the motor vehicle committed the violation alleged in the notice of violation and the
city or contractor may send a notice of violation to that individual at the address provided by the owner of the
motor vehicle.
(Ordinance 07-08-35, sec. 2, art. 4, adopted 8/21/07)
Sec. 90-205 Administrative adjudication hearing
(a) A person who receives a notice of violation may contest the imposition of the civil penalty by requesting in
writing, an administrative adjudication of the civil penalty within 30 days after the date the violation was mailed.
Upon receipt of a timely request, the department shall notify the person of the date and time of the hearing on
the administrative adjudication which shall be held within 30 days upon the receipt of the request. The
administrative adjudication hearing shall be held before and conducted by a hearing officer appointed by the city
manager. Said hearing officer shall have the authority to administer oaths and issue orders compelling the
attendance of witnesses and the production of documents.
(b) A person who fails to pay the civil penalty or to contest liability for the penalty in a timely manner or who
requests an administrative adjudication hearing to contest the imposition of the civil penalty against the person
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 606/684
and fails to appear at that hearing is considered to:
(1) Admit liability for the full amount of the civil penalty stated in the notice of violation mailed to
the person; and
(2) Waive the person's right to appeal the imposition of the civil penalty.
(c) The civil penalty shall not be imposed against the person if after a hearing, the hearing officer enters a
finding of no liability.
(d) In an administrative adjudication hearing, the issues must be proved at the hearing by a preponderance of
the evidence. The reliability of the photographic traffic signal enforcement system used to produce the recorded
image of the motor vehicle involved in the violation may be attested to in an administrative adjudication hearing
by affidavit of an officer or employee of the city or the entity with which the city contracts to install or operate
the system and who is responsible for inspecting and maintaining the system. An affidavit of an officer or
employee of the city that alleges a violation based on an inspection of the pertinent recorded image is admissible
in a proceeding under this article and is evidence of the facts contained in the affidavit.
(e) A person who is found liable for a civil penalty after an administrative adjudication hearing shall pay the
civil penalty within ten days of the hearing.
(f) It shall be an affirmative defense to the imposition of civil liability under this article, to be proven by a
preponderance of the evidence, that:
(1) The traffic-control signal was not in proper position and sufficiently legible to an ordinarily
observant person;
(2) The operator of the motor vehicle was acting in compliance with the lawful order or direction
of a police officer;
(3) The operator of the motor vehicle violated the instructions of the traffic-control signal so as to
yield the right-of-way to an immediately approaching authorized emergency vehicle;
(4) The motor vehicle was being operated as an authorized emergency vehicle under V.T.C.A.,
Texas Transportation Code ch. 546 and that the operator was acting in compliance with that chapter;
(5) The motor vehicle was a stolen vehicle and being operated by a person other than the owner of
the vehicle without the effective consent of the owner;
(6) The license plate depicted in the recorded image of the violation was a stolen plate and being
displayed on a motor vehicle other than the motor vehicle for which the plate had been issued; or
(7) The presence of ice, snow, unusual amounts of rain or other unusually hazardous road
conditions existed that would make compliance with this article more dangerous under the
circumstances than noncompliance.
(8) The person who received the notice of violation was not the owner of the motor-vehicle at the
time of the violation.
(g) To demonstrate that at the time of the violation the motor vehicle was a stolen vehicle or the license plate
displayed on the motor vehicle was a stolen plate, the owner must submit proof acceptable to the hearing officer
that the theft of the vehicle or license plate had been timely reported to the appropriate law enforcement agency.
(h) Notwithstanding anything in this article to the contrary, a person who receives a notice of violation under
this article and who fails to pay the amount of a civil penalty or to timely request an administrative adjudication
hearing is entitled to an administrative adjudication hearing if:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 607/684
(1) The person submits a written request for the hearing to the designated hearing officer,
accompanied by an affidavit that attests to the date on which the person received the notice of
violation; and
(2) The written request and affidavit are submitted to the hearing officer within the same number
of days after the date the person received the notice of violation as specified under section 90-203.
(Ordinance 07-08-35, sec. 2, art. 5, adopted 8/21/07)
Sec. 90-206 Order
(a) At the conclusion of the administrative adjudication hearing, the hearing officer shall enter a finding of
liability for the civil penalty or a finding of no liability for the civil penalty. A finding under this subsection must
be in writing and be signed and dated by the hearing officer.
(b) A finding of liability for a civil penalty must specify the amount of the civil penalty for which the person is
liable. If the hearing officer enters a finding of no liability, a civil penalty for the violation may not be imposed
against the person.
(c) A finding of liability or a finding of no liability entered under this section may:
(1) Be filed with the clerk or secretary of the city or with a person designated by the city council;
and
(2) Be recorded on microfilm or microfiche or using data processing techniques.
(Ordinance 07-08-35, sec. 2, art. 6, adopted 8/21/07)
Sec. 90-207 Appeal
(a) The owner of a motor vehicle determined by a hearing officer to be liable for a civil penalty may appeal
that determination to a judge by filing an appeal petition with the clerk of the court. The petition must be filed
with the city's municipal court.
(b) The petition must be filed before the 31st day after the date on which the administrative adjudication
hearing officer entered the finding of liability for the civil penalty.
(c) The court clerk shall schedule a hearing and notify the owner of the motor vehicle and the department of
the date, time, and place of the hearing.
(d) An appeal stays enforcement and collection of the civil penalty imposed against the owner of the motor
vehicle. The owner shall file a notarized statement of personal financial obligation to perfect the owner's appeal.
(e) An appeal under this section shall be determined by the court by trial de novo.
(Ordinance 07-08-35, sec. 2, art. 7, adopted 8/21/07)
Sec. 90-208 Effect of liability; exclusion of civil remedy
(a) The imposition of a civil penalty under this article is not a conviction and may not be considered a
conviction for any purpose.
(b) The implementation of a photographic traffic signal enforcement system by the city under this article does
not prohibit a peace officer from arresting a violator of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code sec. 544.007(d) as
provided by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 543, if the peace officer personally witnesses the violation, or
from issuing the violator a citation and notice to appear as provided by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code ch. 543.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 608/684
(c) The city may not impose a civil penalty under this article on the owner of a motor vehicle if the operator of
the vehicle was arrested or was issued a citation and notice to appear by a peace officer for the same violation of
V.T.C.A., Transportation Code sec. 544.007(d), recorded by the photographic traffic signal enforcement system.
(d) If the owner of the motor vehicle fails to timely pay the amount of the civil penalty imposed against the
owner:
(1) An arrest warrant may not be issued for the owner; and
(2) The imposition of the civil penalty may not be recorded on the owner's driving record.
(e) Notice of subsection (d) must be included in the notice of violation required by section 90-203.
(Ordinance 07-08-35, sec. 2, art. 8, adopted 8/21/07)
Sec. 90-209 Traffic safety fund
(a) Not later than the 60th day after the end of the city's fiscal year, after deducting amounts the city is
authorized by subsection (b) to retain, the city shall:
(1) Send 50 percent of the revenue derived from civil or administrative penalties collected by the
city under this section to the comptroller for deposit to the credit of the regional trauma account
established under V.T.C.A, Health and Safety Code sec. 782.002; and
(2) Deposit the remainder of the revenue in a special account in the city's treasury that may be used
only to fund traffic safety programs, including pedestrian safety programs, public safety programs,
intersection improvements, and traffic enforcement.
(b) The city may retain an amount necessary to cover the costs of:
(1) Purchasing or leasing equipment that is part of or used in connection with the photographic
traffic signal enforcement system in the city;
(2) Installing the photographic traffic signal enforcement system at sites in the city, including the
costs of installing cameras, flashes, computer equipment, loop sensors, detectors, utility lines, data
lines, poles and mounts, networking equipment, and associated labor costs;
(3) Operating the photographic traffic signal enforcement system in the city, including the costs of
creating, distributing, and delivering violation notices, review of violations conducted by city
employees, the processing of fine payments and collections, and the costs associated with
administrative adjudications and appeals; and
(4) Maintaining the general upkeep and functioning of the photographic traffic signal enforcement
system.
(Ordinance 07-08-35, sec. 2, art. 9, adopted 8/21/07)
Secs. 90-210–90-220 Reserved
ARTICLE VIII. COMMERCIAL TRUCK ROUTES*
Sec. 90-221 Purpose
To protect the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city and to preserve and protect
functionality and integrity of the city's roads, streets and highways by designating commercial truck traffic
routes in the city. (Ordinance 10-02-09, sec. 3, adopted 2/2/10)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 609/684
Sec. 90-222 Definitions
For purposes of this article, when not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future tense, words in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular include the plural, and the use of
any gender shall be applicable to all genders whenever the sense requires. Words not defined in this section shall
be given their common and ordinary meaning.
Commercial truck. Any motor vehicle having a weight of 13 tons gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) or more
including the load carried, also including but not limited to, any vehicle carrying hazardous materials or solid
waste. Commercial trucks shall not include vehicles carrying or designated to carry passengers, all
governmentally owned or leased vehicles, public utility vehicles, motor homes, recreational vehicles or vehicles
used exclusively to transport personal possessions or family members for nonbusiness purposes.
Truck route. A road, street and/or highway on which commercial trucks are allowed and which is designated and
posted as a “truck route”.
(Ordinance 10-02-09, sec. 4, adopted 2/2/10)
Sec. 90-223 Unlawful acts/exemptions
(a) It shall be unlawful to operate a commercial truck on any road, street or highway in the city except upon
the following described roads, streets and highways located in the city:
Street Segment Extent
FM 423 Entire city limits
Spring Creek Parkway From Southbound SH 121 Frontage Road to
Town and Country Boulevard
Dallas Parkway Entire city limits
Frisco Street Main Street to Eldorado Parkway
Parkwood Drive From Eagan Way to Stonebrook Parkway
Preston Road (SH 289) Entire city limits
Independence Parkway From Southbound SH 121 Frontage Road to
Lebanon Road
Custer Road (FM 2478) Entire city limits
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 610/684
US 380 Entire city limits
Eldorado Parkway (FM 2934) From FM 423 to Dallas Parkway
Eldorado Parkway From Dallas Parkway to Preston Road
All Stars Avenue From Frisco Street to N. County Road
Main Street (FM 3537) Preston Road to Custer Road (FM 2478)
Main Street Dallas Parkway to Frisco Street
Stonebrook Parkway From Dallas Parkway to Preston Road (SH 289)
Lebanon Road From Independence Parkway to Southbound SH
121 Frontage Road
Southbound SH 121 Frontage
Road
Entire city limits
(b) The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) Emergency vehicles operating in response to any emergency call;
(2) A vehicle traveling to or from areas served directly by the roads, streets and/or highways listed
in this section for the purpose of providing repair or maintenance service or loading or unloading
goods, wares or merchandise, provided such vehicle is operated over the shortest possible route, and
the operator of such vehicle has in his immediate possession evidence of the local destination and
point of origin;
(3) An owner and/or operator of a commercial truck driving to and from his residence;
(4) Commercial trucks owned and/or operated by and/or on behalf of a governmental entity, a
public utility and/or any contractor or materialman, while engaged in the repair, maintenance or
construction of roads, streets and/or highways, and/or road, street and/or highway improvements
and/or utilities within the city;
(5) Commercial trucks owned and/or operated by and/or on behalf of a governmental entity while
engaging in and/or performing official, authorized government-related business; and
(6) Commercial trucks operating upon a city or state officially designated detour.
(Ordinance 10-02-09, sec. 5, adopted 2/2/10)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 611/684
Sec. 90-224 Establishing truck route(s)
The director of engineering, or his/her designee, shall maintain accurate maps setting out truck routes on streets
upon which truck traffic is permitted. The maps shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary and shall
be available to the public. (Ordinance 10-02-09, sec. 6, adopted 2/2/10)
Sec. 90-225 Posting of restrictions
Signs indicating the “truck route(s)” provided herein shall be placed or caused to be placed by the director of
engineering, or his/her designee, at the most advantageous points to be conspicuous to approaching vehicular
traffic. The signs shall be permanently affixed to a stationery post or installed on permanent buildings or walls or
as otherwise approved. The signs shall in no way be obstructed from view and shall comply with applicable state
laws. (Ordinance 10-02-09, sec. 7, adopted 2/2/10)
Secs. 90-226–90-235 Reserved
ARTICLE IX. TOWING REGULATIONS*
Sec. 90-236 Purpose
To protect the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city and to preserve and protect
functionality and integrity of the city's roads, streets and highways by the regulation of vehicle tow services in
the city. (Ordinance 09-08-46, sec. 2(90-226), adopted 8/18/09)
Sec. 90-237 Definitions
For purposes of this article, when not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future tense, words in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular include the plural, and the use of
any gender shall be applicable to all genders whenever the sense requires. Words not defined in this article shall
be given their common and ordinary meaning.
Consent tow means any tow of a motor vehicle by the owner or operator of the motor vehicle or by a person who
has possession, custody, or control of the motor vehicle. The term does not include an incident management tow
or a private property tow.
Incident management tow means any tow of a motor vehicle in which the tow truck is summoned because of a
traffic accident or to an incident.
Motor vehicle means a vehicle subject to registration under the Certificate of Title Act, Texas Transportation
Act, Chapter 501, as amended, or any other device designed to be self-propelled or transported on a public
highway and/or which may be attached to a trailer or other similar device.
Non-consent tow means any tow of a motor vehicle that is not a consent tow, including an incident management
tow and a private property tow.
Police department means the chief of police, supervisors, police officers and dispatchers of the city police
department only.
Private property tow means any tow of a motor vehicle authorized by a parking facility owner without the
consent of the owner or operator of the motor vehicle.
Vehicle storage facility means a garage, parking lot, or other facility owned or operated by a person other than a
governmental entity for storing or parking ten or more motor vehicles per year.
Wrecker or tow truck means a truck-mounted crane or A-frame, with either power of mechanical boom and joist,
or winch and hoist, or any combination thereof, which motor vehicle is commonly used to move, tow and
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 612/684
convey wrecked and disabled motor vehicles, vehicles, trailer or semitrailers, or both, from the scene or site of a
wreck, motor vehicle accident or collision and has a permit issued by the state department of licensing and
regulation.
Wrecker contractor means a wrecker operator who has entered into an agreement for services with the city for
police-directed tows.
Wrecker operator or tow truck operator means any person who owns or operates a wrecker within the corporate
limits of the city, who is regularly engaged in the business of repairing, rebuilding, storing, wrecking, selling or
trading wrecked and disabled motor vehicles, vehicles, trailers or semitrailers, or both and has a license issued
by the state department of licensing and regulation.
(Ordinance 09-08-46, sec. 2(90-227), adopted 8/18/09)
Sec. 90-238 Providing for non-consent towing by the city
No person shall provide wrecker service to the city without first executing an agreement therefore with the city.
Provided, however, nothing in this section shall prohibit the city from utilizing the services of noncontract
wreckers for towing services originating outside the corporate limits of the city. (Ordinance 09-08-46, sec. 2(90-
228), adopted 8/18/09)
Sec. 90-239 Maximum rates
Maximum rates for wrecker services provided to the city shall be specified in the agreement and shall comply
with applicable state law. (Ordinance 09-08-46, sec. 2(90-229), adopted 8/18/09)
Sec. 90-240 Agreement for wrecker service
The city shall have the power and authority to prepare requirements for wrecker operators, which shall be set
forth in the agreement described in section 90-238. Upon execution of the agreement, the wrecker contractor
shall respond upon request of the city to the scene or site of any wreck, motor vehicle accident or collision
occurring within the corporate limits of the city, or to any other scene or site at which the services of a wrecker
are required by the city. (Ordinance 09-08-46, sec. 2(90-230), adopted 8/18/09)
Sec. 90-241 Inspection
The police department shall have authority to inspect all wreckers belonging to a wrecker contractor to ensure
the wrecker operators' continued compliance with the terms of the agreement and state law. (Ordinance 09-08-
46, sec. 2(90-231), adopted 8/18/09)
Sec. 90-242 Dispatch by police generally
It shall be unlawful for any wrecker operator or driver to proceed to the scene or site of a wreck, motor vehicle
accident or collision, or follow any ambulance or police car which is traveling in response to a report of a wreck,
motor vehicle accident or collision, unless such wrecker has been duly, legally dispatched to the scene or site by
the city police department or has been requested to come to the scene by a party involved in the wreck, motor
vehicle accident or collision. (Ordinance 09-08-46, sec. 2(90-232), adopted 8/18/09)
Sec. 90-243 Promulgation of additional requirements
The chief of police shall have authority to promulgate other reasonable rules, regulations and requirements as
may become necessary to ensure that the wrecker contractor protects the motor vehicle and their contents.
(Ordinance 09-08-46, sec. 2(90-233), adopted 8/18/09)
Sec. 90-244 Private property tows
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 613/684
A wrecker operator that intends to remove a motor vehicle from a parking facility in accordance with V.T.C.A.,
Transportation Code ch. 684 may not tow a motor vehicle to a vehicle storage facility more than 15 miles
outside of the city corporate limits. (Ordinance 09-08-46, sec. 2(90-234), adopted 8/18/09)
Sec. 90-245 Tow truck operator and vehicle storage facility's duty to report after towing or accepting
unauthorized vehicle
A tow truck operator towing a motor vehicle and a vehicle storage facility accepting a motor vehicle that is
towed under this chapter shall, within 30 minutes after towing from the parking facility or receiving the motor
vehicle, report to the city police department in which the parking facility is located:
(1) A general description of the motor vehicle;
(2) The state and number of the motor vehicle's license plate, if any;
(3) The vehicle identification number of the motor vehicle, if it can be ascertained;
(4) The location from which the motor vehicle was towed; and
(5) The name and location of the vehicle storage facility where the motor vehicle is being stored.
The report required by this section must be made by telephone or delivered personally or by facsimile.
(Ordinance 09-08-46, sec. 2(90-235), adopted 8/18/09)
Sec. 90-246 Reports to city police department of towing pursuant to lienholder's request
(a) Whenever a wrecker operator tows, transports or otherwise takes a motor vehicle pursuant to a request by
a lienholder incident to a lawful repossession, the wrecker operator taking the motor vehicle shall make a verbal
report to the city police department within 30 minutes of the time of picking up the motor vehicle, which shall
include the following information:
(1) The license plate number of the repossessed motor vehicle;
(2) The motor vehicle identification number of the repossessed motor vehicle;
(3) The year, make, model and color of the repossessed motor vehicle;
(4) The name, address and telephone number of the lienholder who requested the taking of the
motor vehicle;
(5) The state license plate number of the auto wrecker used, and the name and Texas drivers
license number of the wrecker driver; and
(6) The location from which the motor vehicle was towed, the date and time that the motor vehicle
was picked up and the name, street address and telephone number of the place to which the motor
vehicle was taken for storage.
(b) The chief of police shall designate a telephone number for the filing of oral reports under this section.
(Ordinance 09-08-46, sec. 2(90-236), adopted 8/18/09)
Secs. 90-247–90-254 Reserved
ARTICLE X. OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS ON PUBLIC STREETS
Sec. 90-255 Definitions
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 614/684
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Golf cart means a motor vehicle designed by the manufacturer primarily for transporting persons on a golf
course.
Public safety personnel means any employee or officer of a governmental law enforcement agency or the city
fire department.
Public street means a publicly-owned or dedicated road, street, drive, or other right-of-way for the use of
vehicles within the corporate boundaries of the City of Frisco.
(Ordinance 10-10-49, sec. 2, adopted 10/19/10)
Sec. 90-256 Golf carts permitted and restricted
A person, other than public safety personnel, may operate a golf cart on a public street if:
(a) The maximum speed limit on the public street is 35 miles per hour or less;
(b) The person has a valid drivers license;
(c) The person maintains current financial responsibility for the golf cart, as required of other
passenger vehicles in the V.T.C.A., Texas Transportation Code sec. 601.051;
(d) The person complies with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and ordinances;
(e) The golf cart has the following equipment:
(1) Headlamps;
(2) Tail lamps;
(3) Reflectors;
(4) Parking brake;
(5) Mirrors; and
(6) A slow-moving vehicle emblem; and
(f) While the golf cart is in motion, the driver and every passenger in a golf cart is seated in a seat
designed to hold passengers. No person may stand or ride in the lap of the driver and/or other
passenger of a golf cart while it is moving.
(Ordinance 10-10-49, sec. 2, adopted 10/19/10)
Sec. 90-257 Public safety personnel
Public safety personnel may operate a golf cart on any public street without any further restrictions when the
golf cart is used in the performance of his/her duties. (Ordinance 10-10-49, sec. 2, adopted 10/19/10)
Secs. 90-258–90-299 Reserved
ARTICLE XI. TEMPORARY MORATORIUM ON SHARED MOBILITY SERVICES
Sec. 90-300 Definitions and exclusions
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 615/684
(a) As used in this article:
Bicycle or tricycle equipped with GPS. A device that a person may ride and that is propelled by human power
and has two (2) or more wheels at least one of which is more than fourteen (14) inches in diameter, which has a
global positioning system (GPS) to determine the geographic location of the bicycle or tricycle.
Electric bicycle or tricycle. A bicycle, tricycle or other device that:
(1) Is designed to be propelled by an electric motor, exclusively or in combination with the
application of human power;
(2) Cannot attain a speed of more than twenty (20) miles per hour without the application of
human power; and
(3) Does not exceed a weight of one hundred (100) pounds.
Motor-assisted scooter. A self-propelled device, not including a pocket bike or mini-motorbike, with:
(1) At least two (2) wheels in contact with the ground during operation;
(2) A braking system capable of stopping the device under typical operating conditions;
(3) A gas or electric motor not exceeding forty (40) cubic centimeters;
(4) A deck designed to allow a person to stand or sit while operating the device; and
(5) The ability to be propelled by human power alone.
Operator. A corporation, firm, joint venture, limited liability company, partnership, person or other organized
entity that began operating a shared mobility service, whether for profit or not for profit, in the city on or after
December 1, 2018.
Public property. Real property owned, leased or controlled by a political subdivision of the state, a governmental
entity or agency, or similar entity, or any property that is publicly owned or publicly maintained or dedicated to
public use, including, but not limited to, a path, trail, walkway, sidewalk, alley, roadway, easement, street or
highway, or a public park facility.
Shared mobility service. Any service that displays, offers or places for rent on public property one or more
bicycles or tricycles equipped with GPS, electric bicycles or tricycles, motor-assisted scooters or other similar
personal transportation devices that may be locked and unlocked with or without a docking station and such
service began operating in the city on or after December 1, 2018.
(b) This article does not apply to a moped or motorcycle; a motorized mobility device (Transportation Code
section 542.009); an electric personal assistive mobility device (Transportation Code section 551.201); or a
neighborhood electric vehicle (Transportation Code section 551.301).
Sec. 90-301 Temporary moratorium
(a) An immediate, temporary moratorium on shared mobility services in the city is hereby imposed until the
date the city council adopts a new ordinance governing shared mobility services.
(b) During the temporary moratorium, it shall be unlawful for any operator to park or place a bicycle or
tricycle equipped with GPS, electric bicycle or tricycle, motor-assisted scooter or other similar personal
transportation device on public property or other public area or in a manner that impedes access or ingress to,
egress from or use of public property or other public area.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 616/684
Sec. 90-302 Removal and impoundment
(a) During the moratorium, the city may remove and impound any bicycle or tricycle equipped with GPS,
electric bicycle or tricycle, motor-assisted scooter or other similar personal transportation device owned or
controlled by a shared mobility services operator that is found in any public property or other public area within
the city.
(b) After impoundment, the city shall send a notice of impoundment via email or U.S. mail to the owner of the
impounded property, if known or clearly ascertainable from external markings. The owner of the impounded
property shall satisfy any and all conditions or policies related to such impoundment prior to retrieval of the
property.
(c) The owner of the impounded property shall be subject to an impoundment fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per
bicycle or tricycle equipped with GPS, electric bicycle or tricycle, motor-assisted scooter or other similar
personal transportation device. The impoundment fee shall be assessed against and collected from the owner of
the impounded property as a condition of retrieval.
(d) The city may dispose of an impounded bicycle or tricycle equipped with GPS, electric bicycle or tricycle,
motor-assisted scooter or other similar personal transportation device in a manner consistent with state law if the
owner does not satisfy any and all conditions or policies related to such impoundment after thirty (30) calendar
days from the date of its impoundment. The city may determine the manner of disposal in its sole discretion,
including public auction, sealed bids, donation or destruction.
(Ordinance 18-12-72 adopted 12/18/18)
CHAPTERS 91–93
RESERVED
CHAPTER 94
UTILITIES
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 94-1–94-18 Reserved
ARTICLE II. PUBLIC SEWERS AND INDUSTRIAL WASTES DISCHARGE
Sec. 94-19 Definitions
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms and phrases used in this article
shall be as follows:
Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Public Law 92-500, known as the Clean Water Act (CWA),
as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 617/684
Administrator means the EPA Region VI Regional Administrator.
Approval authority means the regional administrator of EPA Region 6 or, upon approval of a state pretreatment
program within a delegated Texas NPDES permit program, the director of the Texas Water Commission (TWC)
or its successor agencies.
BOD (Biochemical Oxygen Demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of
organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in mg/l. The
laboratory determination shall be made in accordance with the procedures set forth in 40 CFR 136.
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge
from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys to the building sewer,
which begins three feet outside the inner face of the building wall.
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the sewer lateral at the property line or other
lawful place of disposal (also called house lateral or house connection).
Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment
facility.
Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge
limits promulgated by the U.S. EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317) which
apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
City means the City of Frisco, Texas, the city council, city manager, and/or any other person authorized by the
city council to represent the city.
COD (Chemical Oxygen Demand) means the measure of oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic and organic
matter present in water or wastewater. It is expressed in mg/l as the amount of oxygen consumed from a
chemical oxidant in a specific test. It does not differentiate between stable and unstable organic matter and thus
does not necessarily correlate with BOD.
Control manhole means a manhole giving access to a building sewer point before the building sewer discharges
into the public sewer.
Daily discharge means the discharge of a pollutant measured during a calendar day or any 24-hour period that
reasonably represents a calendar day for purposes of sampling.
Daily maximum means the highest allowable “daily discharge” during a calendar month.
Disposal means the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid or semisolid
waste (i.e., grease trap waste, grit trap wastes, and/or septage) into or on any land or water so that such
waste or any constituent thereof may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any
water, including, but not limited to, groundwaters.
Domestic sewage means the water-borne wastes normally discharged from the sanitary conveniences of
dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels), office buildings, factories and institutions, free of stormwater
and industrial wastes.
Environmental officer means the director of public works of the city or his duly authorized representative, which
may be any entity with which the city has contracted for operation of the POTW or a treatment plant and/or with
which the city has entered into a multijurisdictional, or interjurisdictional, agreement providing for wastewater
service, or a particular officer or employee thereof.
EPA (Environmental Protection Agency) means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; or where
appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized officials of
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 618/684
EPA.
Flow-proportioned composite sample means a sample collected either as a constant sample volume at time
intervals proportional to stream flow, or collected by increasing the volume of each aliquot as the flow increases
while maintaining a constant time interval between the aliquots.
Garbage means animal and vegetable wastes and residue from preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food; and
from handling, processing, storage, and sale of food products and produce.
Grab sample means an individual sample collected over a period of time not exceeding 15 minutes.
Grease trap means a watertight receptacle designed and constructed to intercept and prevent the passage of
greasy, fatty liquid, semi-liquid, and/or solid wastes into the sanitary sewer system to which the receptacle is
directly or indirectly connected.
Grease trap waste means any greasy, fatty liquid, semi-liquid, and/or solid wastes removed by a grease trap.
Grit/sand trap means a water-tight receptacle designed and constructed to intercept and prevent the passage of
sand, grit and other heavy solids into the sanitary sewer system to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly
connected.
Grit trap waste means any sand, grit and/or other heavy solids removed from a grit trap.
Hazardous waste means any substance which, if disposed of otherwise than by discharge into the POTW, would
be identified as a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261.
Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers,
septic tanks, and vacuum pump tank trucks.
Indirect discharge or discharge means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any non-domestic
source regulated under section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act.
Industrial user (or user) means any source of indirect discharge.
Industrial user wastewater surcharge means the additional charge made on those persons or industries who
discharge industrial wastes into the sewer system which are amenable to treatment by the POTW treatment
processes, but which exceed either the BOD or total suspended solids concentrations of “normal domestic
sewage.”
Industrial waste means the water-borne solids, liquids, or gaseous wastes resulting from and discharged,
permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing or food processing operation or process, or
from the development of any natural resources, or any mixture of these with water or domestic sewage as
distinct from normal domestic sewage.
Industrial wastewater discharge permit (or permit) means a permit required of an industrial user to discharge
waste into any sewer system under the jurisdiction of the city.
Interference means a discharge which, either alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other
sources, both:
(1) Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes,
use or disposal; and
(2) Is the cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an
increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or
disposal by the POTW in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 619/684
permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean
Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II, more commonly referred to as
the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including state regulations contained in
any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act,
the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act.
Liquid waste means water-borne solids, liquids, and gaseous substances derived from a grease trap, grit trap,
chemical/portable toilet and/or septic tanks and described as grease trap waste, grit trap waste or septage.
Milligrams per liter (mg/l) means a weight to volume ratio. The milligrams per liter value multiplied by the
factor 8.34 is equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.
Monthly average means the highest allowable average of “daily discharge” over a calendar month, calculated as
the sum of all “daily discharge” measured during a calendar month divided by the number of “daily discharge”
measured during that month.
New source.
(1) Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of
pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment
standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards
are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
a. The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other
source is located;
b. The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production
equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or
c. The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or
installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site.
In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors, such as the extent to which
the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is
engaged in the same type of activity as the existing source will be considered.
(2) Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather
than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation
meeting the criteria of subsections (1)b and (1)c above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to the
existing process or production equipment. Construction of a new source as defined has commenced if
the owner or operator has:
a. Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program:
1. Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or
2. Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of
existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly,
or installation of new source facilities or equipment;
b. Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment
which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for
feasibility, engineering; and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
definition.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 620/684
Normal domestic sewage means the “normal” sewage for the city, for which the average concentration of total
suspended solids is not more than 250 mg/l and BOD is no more than 250 mg/l. Industrial wastes and
stormwater are excluded from this term.
Overload means the imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered
or design capacity.
Owner means any person who owns a facility or any portion of a facility.
Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or
concentration which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a
violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration
of a violation).
Person means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock
company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns.
pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration.
Pollutant means any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand,
and cellar dirt; industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste; and the characteristics of wastewater (such as pH,
temperature, suspended solids, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, and odor).
POTW (Publicly Owned Treatment Works) means a treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act, (33
USC 1292) which is owned by the city. This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage,
treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes
lift stations, sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant.
PPM (parts per million) means a weight to weight ratio; the parts per million value multiplied by the factor
8.345 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.
Pretreatment (or treatment) means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the
alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained
by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes or by other means, except as prohibited by 40
CFR 403.6(d).
Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on
a user, other than a pretreatment standard.
Pretreatment standards (or standards). shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment
standards, and local limits.
Priority pollutant means a pollutant found in Table II or Table III of 40 CFR 122, Appendix D.
Prohibited discharge standards (or prohibited discharges) means absolute prohibitions against the discharge of
certain substances; these prohibitions appear in section 94-20.
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of foods that have
been shredded to such a degree that all particles shall be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
Responsible corporate officer means:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 621/684
(1) A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal
business function, or any other person who performs similar policy- or decision-making functions for
the corporation; or
(2) The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more
than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00 (in second
quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures.
Sanitary sewer means a public sewer that conveys domestic sewage or industrial wastes or a combination of
both, and into which stormwaters, surface waters, groundwaters and other unpolluted waters are not intentionally
passed.
Septage means wastes removed from a portable toilet, chemical toilet or septic tank.
Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which
causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably
be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused
by delays in production.
Sewage service charge means the charge made on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do not
exceed in strength the concentration values established as representative of normal domestic sewage.
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sanitary sewage.
SIC (standard industrial classification) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972, or the latest
edition.
Significant industrial user (SIU).
(1) Except as provided in subsection (2) of the term shall mean:
a. An industrial user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; and
b. Any other industrial user that: discharges 25,000 gallons per day or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown
wastewater); contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the
average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or is
designated as such by the environmental officer on the basis that the industrial user has a
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any
pretreatment standard or requirements (in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6)).
(2) Upon finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in subsection (1)b. has no reasonable
potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirements, the environmental officer may at any time, on his own initiative or in response to a
petition received from an industrial user, and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that
such industrial user is not a significant industrial user.
Slug discharge means any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental
spill or a noncustomary batch discharge, and/or a discharge which violates any prohibited discharge standard in
section 94-20, and/or could significantly disrupt the POTW and/or threaten human health and safety, and/or
could potentially result in violations of the POTW's NPDES permit or sludge requirements.
Spill means the accidental or intentional loss or unauthorized discharge of any waste or raw material.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 622/684
Storm sewer (or storm drain) means a sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage but
excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.
Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from
such precipitation, including snowmelt.
Surcharge means the charge in addition to the sewage service charge which is made on those persons whose
wastes are greater in strength than the concentration values established as representative of normal domestic
sewage.
Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension of water, sewage, or other
liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in 40 CFR 136.
Time composite sample means a sample composed of discrete sample aliquots collected in a single reservoir at
constant time intervals irrespective of flow.
Toxic pollutant (or toxic substance) means any substance whether gaseous, liquid or solid which, when
discharged to the POTW in sufficient concentrations, as determined by the environmental officer, may be
hazardous to sewer maintenance and personnel, tend to interfere with any wastewater treatment process, or to
constitute a hazard to human beings or animals, or to inhibit aquatic life, or to create a hazard to recreation in the
receiving waters of the effluent from a wastewater treatment plant; or any pollutant or combination of pollutants
listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA under the provision of the Clean Water Act 307(a) or other
Acts.
Trap means a device designed to skim, settle, or otherwise remove oil, grease, sand, flammable wastes or other
harmful substances.
Treatment plant (or wastewater treatment plant) means that portion, or those portions, of the POTW which is
designed to provide treatment of domestic sewage and industrial waste.
TWC means the Texas Water Commission or its successor agencies.
Upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the control of the industrial user. An upset does not
include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities,
inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
User (or industrial user) means any source of indirect discharge.
Waste means rejected, unutilized, or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous or solid form resulting from
domestic, agricultural or industrial activities.
Wastewater means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial
buildings, industrial and/or manufacturing facilities, and institutions, together with any stormwater which may
be present, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.
Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
(Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 1, adopted 2/6/96)
Sec. 94-20 Prohibited discharges
(a) No person may introduce into the POTW any pollutant which may pass through or interfere. Also
prohibited are any substances that have an adverse effect on the environment, or may endanger life, health or
property, or constitute a public nuisance.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 623/684
(b) Substances specifically prohibited from being discharged into the POTW are as follows:
(1) Any liquids, solids or gases, including but not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene,
toluene, xylene, ethers, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, sulfides or any other substances
which are a fire or other hazard to the system, which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may
be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fires, explosions, or be
injurious in any other way to the facilities or operation of the POTW.
(2) Any substance which creates a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited
to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees
Centigrade using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
(3) Any wastewater having A pH less than 5.0, greater than 10.5, or any wastewater having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to the POTW or any person.
(4) Any wastewater containing pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and/or safety problems.
(5) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees (65 degrees); or exhibiting
heat in amounts which will inhibit biological activity in a treatment plant causing an interference; or,
in any case, exhibiting heat in such quantities that the temperature at the treatment plant exceeds 40
degrees Celsius (104 degrees Fahrenheit).
(6) Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (COD, etc.) and total dissolved solids,
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause pass through or
interference at the POTW or which will cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with any federal or
state sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations.
(7) Any free or emulsified fats, waxes, greases or oils containing substances which may solidify or
become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0 and 65 degrees Celsius);
or any combination of free or emulsified fats, waxes, greases or oils, if, in the opinion of the
environmental officer, it appears probable that such wastes:
a. Can deposit grease or oil in the sanitary sewers in such a manner as to clog the sewers;
b. Can overload skimming and grease handling equipment;
c. Are not amenable to bacterial action and will therefore pass to the receiving water without
being affected by normal sewage treatment processes;
d. Can have deleterious effects on the treatment process due to excessive quantities.
(8) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that
will cause interference or pass through.
(9) Solid or liquid substances which may cause obstruction to the flow in sanitary sewers or other
interference with the proper operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited
to: ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, whole
blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, lime slurry, lime residues, slops, chemical
residues, paint residues, bulk solids or waste paper.
(10) Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either singly or by interaction with
other substances are sufficient to prevent entry into the sanitary sewers for maintenance and repair.
(11) Wastewater containing COD in concentrations which are not amenable to treatment, or any
other substance which is determined by the environmental officer to be not amenable to treatment by
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 624/684
the POTW.
(12) Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the environmental
officer.
(13) Pollutant which causes:
a. Excessive discoloration;
b. High hydrogen sulfide content;
c. Unusual taste- or odor-producing substances.
(c) In cases where, in the opinion of the environmental officer; the character of the sewage from any
manufacturer or industrial plant building or other premises is such that it will damage the system, or cannot be
treated satisfactorily in the system, the environmental officer shall have the right to require such user to dispose
of such waste otherwise and prevent it from entering the POTW.
(d) Unusual flow and concentration of any of the above shall be pretreated to a concentration acceptable to the
city, if such wastes can:
(1) Cause damage to the POTW;
(2) Impair processes;
(3) Incur treatment cost exceeding those of normal sewage;
(4) Render the water unfit for stream disposal or industrial use;
(5) Create a public nuisance.
(Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 2, adopted 2/6/96)
Sec. 94-21 Hazardous metals and chemical or toxic substances
(a) It shall be unlawful to discharge into the POTW, any metals, chemicals or toxic substances in excess of the
following concentration limits:
(1) The following heavy metals and toxic materials in the form of compounds or elements in
solution or suspension in concentrations exceeding these limits:
Parameter Monthly Average
Limit in mg/l
Arsenic (Total) 0.71
Cadmium (Total) 0.20
Chromium (Total) 1.30
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 625/684
Copper (Total) 2.07
Cyanide (Total) 0.61
Lead (Total) 0.43
Mercury (Total) 0.06
Nickel (Total) 1.75
Silver (Total) 0.24
Zinc (Total) 1.27
Phenols 28
Biochemical Oxygen Demand 474
Total Suspended Solids 592
Ammonia Nitrogen 19
(2) All other priority pollutants found in the POTW influent at a concentration at or above 0.1 mg/l
and all Numerical Aquatic Life Criteria as defined by the TWC including, but not limited to the
following, shall be excluded from the POTW unless a permit specifying the condition of
pretreatment, concentration, volumes, etc., is obtained from the city:
Aldrain
Aluminum
Carbaryl
Chlordane
Chlorpyrifos
DDT
Demeton
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 626/684
Dieldron
Endosulfan
Guthion
Heptachlor
Hexachlorocyclohexane
Malathion
Methoxychlor
Mirex
PCB (total)
Parathion
Phenanthrene
Pentachlorophenol
Selenium
Silver (free ion)
Toxaphene
Tributyltin
2-4-5-Tricholorophenol
(3) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes without prior written permission from the environmental
officer.
(b) Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, no
industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a
partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation. The
environmental officer may impose mass limitations on industrial users which are using dilution to meet
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is
appropriate.
(c) Upon the promulgation of a categorical pretreatment standard for a particular industrial category or
subcategory, the categorical pretreatment standard, if more stringent than specific limitations imposed under this
article for industrial users subject to that categorical standard, shall supersede the limitations imposed under this
article.
(d) Where industrial users combine waste streams prior to treatment, compliance with an applicable
categorical pretreatment standard will be determined either prior to combining the wastestreams or following
treatment of the combined wastestream (by applying the combined wastestream formula found in 40 CFR
403.6(e)).
(Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 3, adopted 2/6/96)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 627/684
Sec. 94-22 Garbage
(a) No person shall discharge garbage into the POTW unless it is shredded to a degree that all particles can be
carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in the sanitary sewer. Particles greater than one-half
inch in any dimension are prohibited.
(b) The environmental officer is entitled to review and approve the installation and operation of any garbage
grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater.
(Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 4, adopted 2/6/96)
Sec. 94-23 Discharges requiring traps
(a) Discharges requiring a trap include any nonresidential establishment discharging:
(1) Grease or water containing grease;
(2) Oil;
(3) Sand;
(4) Flammable wastes;
(5) Other harmful substances.
(b) Any person responsible for discharges requiring a trap shall at their own expense and as required by the
environmental officer:
(1) Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by the environmental officer.
(2) Locate the trap in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and
inspection.
(3) Maintain the trap in effective and operating condition.
(Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 5, adopted 2/6/96)
Sec. 94-24 Compliance with other authorities
(a) Compliance with federal authority. Industrial users within the jurisdiction of this article shall comply with
all federal general pretreatment regulations and with those categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
as specified in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
(b) Compliance with state authority. Industrial users within the jurisdiction of this article shall comply with
applicable sections of V.T.C.A., Water Code ch. 26.
(Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 6, adopted 2/6/96)
Sec. 94-25 Industrial wastewater discharge permit requirements
(a) All nondomestic users must notify the environmental officer of the nature and characteristics of their
wastewater prior to commencing their discharge. The environmental officer is authorized to prepare a form for
this purpose.
(b) It shall be unlawful for significant industrial users to discharge wastewater, whether directly or indirectly,
into the POTW without first obtaining an industrial wastewater discharge permit from the city. Any violation of
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 628/684
the terms and conditions of an industrial wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this article.
Obtaining an industrial wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to obtain any
other permits required by federal, state, or local law.
(c) The environmental officer may require that other industrial users, including liquid waste haulers, obtain
industrial wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article.
(d) All existing significant industrial users connected to or contributing to the POTW shall obtain an industrial
wastewater discharge permit within 180 days after the effective date of this chapter. The application must be
submitted to the environmental officer within 90 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this
chapter is derived.
(e) Any significant industrial user proposing to begin or recommence discharging nondomestic wastes into the
POTW must obtain an industrial wastewater discharge permit prior to beginning or recommencing such
discharge. For industrial users subject to categorical standards, a baseline monitoring report (see section 94-26)
will be used as an application for this permit and must be filed at least 90 days prior to commencement of
discharge. For industrial users not subject to categorical standards, a permit application must be filed in
accordance with section 94-31.
(f) Once permitted, the industrial user has the duty to reapply if the permittee wishes to continue an activity
regulated by the permit after the expiration date of the permit. The industrial user must submit an application for
a new permit at least 90 days before the expiration of the permit in accordance with section 94-31. The
application form may be obtained from the environmental officer.
(Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 7, adopted 2/6/96)
Sec. 94-26 Baseline monitoring report
Within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or 180 days after the final
administrative decision made upon a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later,
existing industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging to or
scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall be required to submit to the environmental officer a report which
contains the information listed in subsections (1) through (7) below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of
discharge, new sources, and sources that become subject to categorical standards subsequent to the promulgation
of an applicable categorical standard, shall be required to submit to the environmental officer a report which
contains the information listed in subsections (1) through (5) below. New sources shall also be required to
include this report information on the method of pretreatment the source intends to use to meet applicable
categorical standards. New sources shall give estimates to the information requested in subsections (4) and (5).
(1) The user shall submit the name and address of the facility including the name of the operators
and owners.
(2) The user shall submit a list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility.
(3) The user shall submit a brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and the
standard industrial classification of the operation carried out by such industrial user. This description
should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from
the regulated processes.
(4) The user shall submit information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily
flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from each of the following:
a. Regulated process streams; and
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 629/684
b. Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula of 40 CFR
403.6(e).
The environmental officer may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where justified by
cost or feasibility considerations.
(5) Measurement of pollutants:
a. The user shall identify the categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated
process.
b. In addition, the user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature
and concentration (or mass, where required by the categorical standard or by the environmental
officer) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Both daily
maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample
shall be representative of daily operations.
c. A minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and
grease, sulfide, and volatile organics. For all other pollutants, 24-hour composite samples must
be obtained through flow-proportional composite sampling techniques where feasible. The
environmental officer may waive flow-proportional composite sampling for any industrial user
that demonstrates that flow-proportional sampling is infeasible. In such cases, samples may be
obtained through time-proportional composite sampling techniques or through a minimum of
four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of
the effluent being discharged.
d. The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile that data necessary
to comply with the requirements of this section.
e. Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such
exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other
wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment the user should
measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream
formula of 40 CFR 403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with the categorical standards.
Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR
403.6(e) this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to the environmental
officer.
f. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in
40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or
analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the 40
CFR 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question,
sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other
applicable sampling and analytical procedures suggested by the environmental officer or other
parties, approved by the EPA.
g. The environmental officer may allow the submission of a baseline monitoring report which
utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information sufficient to determine the
need for industrial pretreatment measures.
h. The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place, of sampling, and methods of
analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work
cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 630/684
(6) A statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the industrial user (as specified in
section 94-33), and certified to by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards
are being met on a consistent basis, and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance
(O&amp;M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the industrial user to meet the pretreatment
standards and requirements.
(7) If additional pretreatment and/or O&amp;M will be required to meet the pretreatment
standards; the shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment
and/or O&amp;M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard.
(8) Where the industrial user's categorical pretreatment standard has been modified by a removal
allowance (40 CFR 403.7), the combined wastestream formula (40 CFR 403.6(e)), and/or a
fundamentally different factors variance (40 CFR 403.13) at the time the user submits the report
required by this section, the information required by subsections (6) and (7) shall pertain to the
modified limits.
(9) If the categorical pretreatment standard is modified by a removal allowance (40 CFR 403.7),
the combined wastestream formula (40 CFR 403.6(e)), and/or a fundamentally different factors
variance (40 CFR 403.13) after the user submits the report required by this section, any necessary
amendments to the information requested by subsections (6) and (7) shall be submitted by the user to
the environmental officer within 60 days after the modified limit is approved.
(Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 8, adopted 2/6/96)
Sec. 94-27 Compliance schedule progress reports
The following conditions shall apply to the schedule required by section 94-26(7):
(1) The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement
and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment
required for the industrial user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer,
completing plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing
construction, etc.).
(2) No increment referred to in subsection (1) shall exceed nine months.
(3) Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance,
the industrial user shall submit a progress report to the environmental officer including, at a
minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if
not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and
the steps being taken by the industrial user to return the construction to the schedule established. In
no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the environmental
officer.
(Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 9, adopted 2/6/96)
Sec. 94-28 Ninety-day compliance report
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in
the case of a new source following the commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any
industrial user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the environmental officer
a report containing the information described in section 94-26(4), (5), and (6). For industrial users subject to
equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the environmental officer in accordance with the
procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long term production
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 631/684
rate. For all other industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable
pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's
actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with section 94-33. (Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 10, adopted 2/6/96)
Sec. 94-29 Periodic report on continued compliance
(a) Any industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such
categorical standard, or, in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall
submit to the environmental officer during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently in
the categorical standard or by the environmental officer or the approval authority, a report indicating the nature
and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such categorical pretreatment standards. In
addition, this report shall include a record of measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the
reporting period for the discharge reported in section 94-26(4) except that the environmental officer may require
more detailed reporting of flows. At the discretion of the environmental officer and in consideration of such
factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the environmental officer may agree to alter
the months during which the above reports are submitted.
(b) Where the environmental officer has imposed mass limitations on an industrial user as provided for by 40
CFR 403.6(d), the report required by subsection (a) above shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by the
applicable categorical pretreatment standards in the discharge for the industrial user.
(c) For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the environmental
officer in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), the report required by subsection (a) above shall
contain a reasonable measure of the user's long term production rate. For all other industrial users subject to
categorical pretreatment standards expressed only in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production (or other measure of operation), the report required by subsection (a) above shall include the user's
actual average production rate for the reporting period.
(Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 11, adopted 2/6/96)
Sec. 94-30 Reporting requirements for significant noncategorical industrial users
Significant noncategorical industrial users shall submit to the environmental officer at least once every six
months (on dates specified by the environmental officer) a description of the nature, concentration, and flow of
the pollutants required to be reported by the environmental officer. These reports shall be based on sampling and
analysis performed in the period covered by the report, and performed in accordance with the techniques
described in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical
techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that the 40 CFR 136 sampling and
analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by
using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including
procedures suggested by the environmental officer or other persons, approved by the EPA. This sampling and
analysis may be performed by the environmental officer in lieu of the significant noncategorical industrial user.
Where the environmental officer collects all the information required for the report, the noncategorical
significant industrial user will not be required to submit the report. (Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 12, adopted
2/6/96)
Sec. 94-31 Permit application
(a) Significant industrial users required to obtain an industrial wastewater discharge permit shall complete and
file with the environmental officer, an application upon a form provided by the city. A permit fee shall
accompany the application. In support of the application, the significant industrial user shall submit the
following information:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 632/684
(1) The user shall submit the name and address of the facility including the name of the operators
and owners.
(2) The user shall submit a list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility.
(3) The user shall submit a brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and the
standard industrial classification of the operation carried out by such industrial user. This description
should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from
the regulated processes.
(4) The user shall submit information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily
flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from each of the following:
a. Regulated process streams; and
b. Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula of 40 CFR
403.6(e).
The environmental officer may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where justified
by cost or feasibility considerations.
(5) Wastewater constituents and characteristics including but not limited to those mentioned in this
article, and any federal, state or local standards. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in
accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(g) of the Act; in 40 CFR
136, as amended; and 40 CFR 403.12(b)(5), as amended.
(6) A statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the industrial user (as defined in
section 94-33), and certified to by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards
are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance
(O&amp;M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the industrial user to meet the pretreatment
standards and requirements.
(7) If additional pretreatment and/or O&amp;M will be required to meet the pretreatment
standards; the shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment
and/or O&amp;M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date
established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to the
schedule required by this subsection:
a. The schedule will contain increments of progress in the form of date for the
commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of
additional pretreatment required for the industrial user to meet the applicable pretreatment
standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing plans, executing contract for major components,
commencing construction, completing construction, etc.).
b. No increment referred to in subsection (a)(7)a. shall exceed nine months.
Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance,
the industrial user shall submit a progress report to the environmental officer including, at a
minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date
and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason
for delay, and the steps being taken by the industrial user to return the construction to the
schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress
reports to the environmental officer.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 633/684
(8) Any other information as deemed necessary by the environmental officer to evaluate the permit
application.
(b) The environmental officer shall issue a permit if he determines that pretreatment facilities are adequate for
efficient treatment and that discharged wastes will comply with all applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements, including those imposed by this article.
(Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 13, adopted 2/6/96)
Sec. 94-32 Permit conditions
(a) Industrial wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article and all
other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the city. Permits shall contain, but not be
limited to, the following:
(1) Statement of duration (in no case more than five years);
(2) Statement of nontransferability without, at a minimum, prior notification to the environmental
officer and provision of a copy of the existing control mechanism to the new owner or operator;
(3) Effluent limits based on applicable general pretreatment standards in 40 CFR 403, categorical
pretreatment standards, prohibited discharge standards, local limits, and state and local law;
(4) Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and recordkeeping requirements, including
an identification of the pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and
sample type, based on the applicable general pretreatment standards, categorical pretreatment
standards, prohibited discharge standards, local limits, and state and local law;
(5) Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and
requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedules may not extend the
compliance date beyond applicable federal deadlines.
(b) Industrial wastewater discharge permits may contain other conditions as deemed appropriate by the
environmental officer to ensure compliance with this article, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations.
(Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 14, adopted 2/6/96)
Sec. 94-33 Signatory requirements for industrial user reports
The reports required under sections 94-26, 94-28, 94-29 and 94-30 shall include the certification below:
“I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my
direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to ensure that qualified personnel
properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or
persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering information, the
information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge true, accurate and complete. I am aware that
there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations.”
and shall be signed as follows:
(1) By a responsible corporate officer, if the industrial user submitting the reports is a
corporation.
(2) By a general partner or proprietor if the industrial user submitting the reports is a
partnership or sole proprietorship, respectively.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 634/684
(3) By the principal executive officer or environmental manager having responsibility for the
overall operation of the discharging facility if the industrial user submitting the reports is a
federal, state, or local governmental entity, or their agents.
(4) By a duly authorized representative of the individual designated in subsection (1), (2), or
(3) of this section if:
a. The authorization is made in writing by the individual described in subsection (1),
(2), or (3);
b. The authorization specifies either an individual or a position having responsibility for
the overall operation of the facility from which the industrial discharge originates, such as
the position of plant manager, operator of a well, or well field superintendent, or a
position of equivalent responsibility for environmental matters for the company; and
c. The written authorization is submitted to the environmental officer.
(5) If an authorization under subsection (4) is no longer accurate because a different
individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall
responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the
requirements of subsection (4) of this section must be submitted to the environmental officer
prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative.
(Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 15, adopted 2/6/96)
Sec. 94-34 Permit issuance process
(a) Duration. Industrial wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified period, not to exceed five
years. A permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the environmental officer.
(b) Appeals. The environmental officer will provide all interested persons with notice of final permit
decisions. Upon notice by the environmental officer, any interested person, including the industrial user, may
petition to appeal the terms of a permit, or the denial of a permit, to the environmental appeals committee (as
established by section 94-37), within 30 days of the notice of the final permit decision.
(1) Failure to submit to a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the appeal.
(2) In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the permit provisions objected to, the reasons
for these objections, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to be placed in the permit. Any
reasons advanced against a permit denial shall be fully explained.
(3) The effectiveness of the permit shall not be stayed pending a reconsideration by the committee,
unless the environmental officer expressly so states. If, after considering the petition and any
arguments put forth by the environmental officer, the committee determines that reconsideration is
proper, it shall remand the permit, or permit application, back to the environmental officer for
reconsideration. Those permit provisions being reconsidered by the environmental officer on remand
shall be stayed pending reissuance, unless the committee expressly states to the contrary.
(4) An environmental appeals committee decision not to reconsider a final permit, or the denial of
a permit, shall be considered final administrative action for purposes of judicial review.
(c) Action. The environmental officer has the power to deny or condition new or increased contributions of
pollutants, or changes in the nature of pollutants, to the POTW by an industrial user where such contributions do
not meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements or where such contributions would cause the
POTW to violate its NPDES permit. The environmental officer may modify the permit for good cause including
but not limited to, the following:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 635/684
(1) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or
requirements.
(2) Material or substantial alterations or additions to the discharger's operation processes, or
discharge volume or character which were not considered in drafting the effective permit.
(3) A change in any condition in either the industrial user or the POTW that requires either a
temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge.
(4) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the POTW, POTW
personnel, or the receiving waters.
(5) Violation of any terms or conditions of the permit.
(6) Misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts in the permit application or in
any required reporting.
(7) Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13.
(8) To correct typographical or other errors in the permit.
(9) To reflect transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner or operator.
(10) Upon request of the permittee, provided such request does not create a violation of any
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or other laws, rules, or regulations.
The filing of a request by the permittee for a permit modification, revocation and reissuance, or termination, or a
notification of planned changes or anticipated noncompliance, does not stay any permit condition.
(d) Transfer. Permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner and/or operator with prior approval of
the environmental officer, provided:
(1) The permittee must give at least 30 days advance notice to the environmental officer.
(2) The notice must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which:
a. States that the new owner or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's
operations and processes;
b. Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and
c. Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing permit.
(e) Termination. Industrial wastewater discharge permits may be terminated for reasons including but not
limited to, the following:
(1) Falsifying self-monitoring reports.
(2) Tampering with monitoring equipment.
(3) Refusing to allow proper inspecting authorities timely access to the facility premises and
records.
(4) Failure to meet effluent limitations.
(5) Failure to pay fines.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 636/684
(6) Failure to pay sewer charges.
(7) Failure to meet compliance schedules.
A user will be notified of any proposed permit termination and offered an opportunity to show cause under
section 94-36(c) why the proposed termination should not occur. Industrial wastewater discharge permits shall
be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All industrial wastewater discharge
permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new permit to that user.
(f) Reissuance. The user shall apply for permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application a
minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit.
(g) Continuation of expired permits. An expired permit will continue to be effective and enforceable until the
permit is reissued if:
(1) The industrial user has submitted a complete permit application at least 90 days prior to the
expiration date of the user's permit.
(2) The failure to reissue the permit, prior to expiration of the previous permit, is not due to any act
or failure to act on the part of the industrial user.
(Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 16, adopted 2/6/96)
Sec. 94-35 General reporting and recordkeeping requirements
(a) If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the environmental
officer within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis
and submit the results of the repeat analysis within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation.
(b) If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirements of section 94-29 or section 94-30 monitors any
pollutant more frequently than required by this article or by the environmental officer, using the procedures as
prescribed in 40 CFR 403.12(g)(4), the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
(c) Any industrial user subject to the reporting requirements established in this article or the permit shall retain
for a minimum of three years any records of monitoring activities and results (whether or not such monitoring
activities are required by this article or the permit) and shall make available for inspection and copying by the
EPA, TWC or the environmental officer. This period of retention shall be extended during the course of any
unresolved litigation regarding the industrial user or the city or when requested by the state or the federal
government. For all samples, such records shall include but not be limited to:
(1) The date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the names of the person or persons
taking the samples;
(2) The date analyses were performed;
(3) Who performed the analyses;
(4) The analytical techniques/methods used; and
(5) The results of such analyses.
(Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 17, adopted 2/6/96)
Sec. 94-36 Administrative enforcement remedies
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 637/684
(a) When the environmental officer finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
article, an industrial wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, the environmental officer may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within ten days
of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and
prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the environmental
officer. If the user denies that any violation occurred and/or contends that no corrective action is necessary, an
explanation of the basis of any such denial or contention shall be submitted to the environmental officer within
ten days of receipt of the notice. Submission of an explanation and/or plan in no way relieves the user of liability
for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit
the authority of the environmental officer to take any action, including emergency actions or any other
enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation.
(b) The environmental officer may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other
similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents
may include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified
by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued
pursuant to subsections (d) and (e) of this section and shall be judicially enforceable.
(c) The environmental officer may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of
this article, an industrial wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, to appear before the environmental officer and show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the
meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause
why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally
or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice may
be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(d) When the environmental officer finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
article, an industrial wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, the environmental officer may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing
that the user come into compliance within a specified time limit. If the user does not come into compliance
within the specified time limit, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices,
or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other
requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring, and management practices
designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the
deadline for compliance established for a federal pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance
order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance
order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(e) When the environmental officer finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
article, an industrial wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the environmental officer may issue an order
to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to:
(1) Immediately comply with all requirements; and
(2) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a
continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action
against the user.
(f) The environmental officer may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after any reasonable notice to the
user that is practical under the circumstances, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 638/684
threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to
the health or welfare of persons. The environmental officer may also immediately suspend a user's discharge,
after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which
presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment.
(1) Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its
contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension
order, the environmental officer may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate
severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving
stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The environmental officer may allow the user to
recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the environmental
officer that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in subsection
(g) of this section are initiated against the user.
(2) A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent
endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful
contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the environmental officer
prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under subsection (c) or (g) of this section.
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this
section.
(g) In addition to the provisions in section 94-34(e), any user who violates the following conditions is subject
to discharge termination:
(1) Violation of industrial wastewater discharge permit conditions;
(2) Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;
(3) Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and
characteristics prior to discharge;
(4) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or
sampling; or
(5) Violation of pretreatment standards.
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show
cause under subsection (c) of this section why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option
by the environmental officer shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
(h) Administrative fines.
(1) When the environmental officer finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any
provision of this article, an industrial wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement, the environmental officer may fine such user in an
amount not to exceed $1,000.00. Such fines shall be assessed on a per-violation, per-day basis. In the
case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day
during the period of violation.
(2) Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after 30 calendar days, be assessed an additional
penalty of ten percent of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of ten
percent per month. A lien against the user's property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and
penalties.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 639/684
(3) Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against the user.
(i) Any industrial user subject to any order issued, any administrative fine imposed, or any enforcement action
taken by the environmental officer pursuant to his authority in this section, may appeal the order, action, or fine
by filing a written notice of appeal with the environmental officer. (The environmental officer may provide
forms for this purpose.) Such notice of appeal shall be filed within 15 days of notice of the order, action, or fine.
(Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 18, adopted 2/6/96)
Sec. 94-37 Environmental appeals committee
(a) An environmental appeals committee is hereby established, and authorized to hear and decide appeals
from any decision, fine, or order issued or any other enforcement action taken by the environmental officer
pursuant to this article. The committee shall be composed of the city manager, or assistant city manager, the
mayor, and the city attorney, or any of their designated representatives.
(b) The committee may call and hold hearings, administer oaths, receive evidence at the hearing, issue
subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of papers and documents related to the
hearing, and make findings of fact and decisions with respect to administering its powers herein.
(c) Upon the hearing of an appeal from an order issued, enforcement action taken, or fine imposed by the
environmental officer, the committee shall determine if there is a preponderance of evidence to support the
environmental officer's determination, fine, action, and/or order. The decision of the committee shall be in
writing and contain findings of fact. If the committee determines that there is a preponderance of evidence to
support the determination, fine, action, and/or order of the environmental officer, the committee shall, in
addition to its decision, issue an order:
(1) Requiring discontinuance of the violation or condition;
(2) Requiring compliance with any requirement to correct or prevent any condition or violation;
(3) Suspending or revoking any permit issued under this article; and/or
(4) Imposing the proper fine.
In any decision issued by the committee, the order shall specify the time in which the compliance with the order
must be taken. A copy of the order shall be delivered to the appellant or person to whom the order is directed in
person or sent to him by registered or certified mail.
(d) Upon the hearing of an appeal from a permit issuance, modification, or denial by the environmental
officer, the committee shall determine if there is a preponderance of evidence to support the environmental
officer's permitting decision. The decision of the committee shall be in writing. If the committee determines that
there is a preponderance of evidence to support the permitting decision of the environmental officer, the
committee shall affirm his decision. If the committee determines that there is not a preponderance of evidence to
support the permitting decision of the environmental officer, the committee shall remand the permit, or permit
application, back to the environmental officer for reconsideration. A copy of the decision of the committee upon
the permitting appeal shall be delivered to the appellant in person or sent to him by registered or certified mail.
An environmental appeals committee decision not to reconsider a final permit, or denial of a permit, shall be
considered final administrative action for purposes of judicial review.
(Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 19, adopted 2/6/96)
Sec. 94-38 Determining the character and concentration of wastewater
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 640/684
(a) The wastewater discharged or deposited into the POTW shall be subject to periodic inspection and
sampling as often as may be deemed necessary by the environmental officer. Sampling shall be conducted
according to customarily accepted methods, reflecting the effect of constituents upon the POTW and
determining the existence of hazards to health, life, limb, and property.
(b) The examination and analysis of the characteristics of waters and wastes shall be:
(1) Performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(h) of
the Act and contained in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures
approved by the EPA. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by
the EPA. Where 40 CFR 136 does not include sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutants in
question, or where the EPA determines that the 40 CFR 136 sampling and analytical techniques are
inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed using validated
analytical methods or any other sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested
by the environmental officer or other parties, approved by the EPA.
(2) Determined from suitable samples taken at the control manhole provided or other control
points authorized by the environmental officer provided at the expense of the industry.
(c) The city may select an independent firm or laboratory to perform sampling and laboratory analyses.
(d) The determination of the character and concentration of industrial wastewater shall be made by the
environmental officer at such times and on such schedules as he may establish.
(e) The environmental officer may require any industrial user to compensate the city for the costs of sampling,
analyses of the discharges, and any additional administrative fees provided in section 94-39.
(Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 20, adopted 2/6/96)
Sec. 94-39 User fees
(a) Each significant industrial user for which the city has reporting requirements under its National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit (for the POTW) shall, if the environmental officer so demands,
compensate the city for the cost of sampling, laboratory analyses and administration required to monitor
wastewater discharges. The environmental officer shall determine the number of samples and frequency of
sampling necessary to maintain surveillance of discharges.
(b) Each industrial user for which the city takes samples and/or runs laboratory analyses to monitor
wastewater discharges shall compensate the city, if the environmental officer so demands, for the cost of such
sampling and laboratory analyses.
(c) The city may adopt other reasonable fees for reimbursement of its costs of setting up and operating the
city's pretreatment program which may include:
(1) Fees for industrial wastewater discharge permit applications, including the cost of processing
such applications;
(2) Other fees to recoup costs of monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures;
(3) Fees to recoup the costs of responding to discharges by users in violation of this article and/or
to recoup monetary fines and/or penalties imposed on the city for violations of its NPDES Permit for
the POTW attributable to pass through or interference caused by an industrial user;
(4) Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction;
(5) Fees for reviewing appeals; and
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 641/684
(6) Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements of this article. These
fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees, fines, and
penalties chargeable by the city.
(d) All fees required under this article shall be invoiced, upon the environmental officer's request, to the
contributing industry or commercial firm by the city and shall be payable as indicated on the invoice.
(Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 21, adopted 2/6/96)
Sec. 94-40 Industrial wastewater surcharge
(a) A surcharge may be applied in addition to the monthly sewer service charge for the discharge of
wastewater with concentrations of either BOD or total suspended solids concentrations exceeding that of
“Normal Domestic Sewage,” to cover the additional costs of treating such wastewater. Such a charge is collected
by the city.
(b) The surcharge shall be calculated as follows:
C = [B (Bu-250) + S (Su-250)] × F × V
Where:
C = surcharge to the user in dollars
B = unit cost factor for treating one unit of BOD (per 1,000 gallons)
Bu = the tested BOD of the discharge
S = unit cost factor for treating one unit of total suspended solids (per 1,000 gallons)
Su = the tested total suspended solids of the discharge
F = a factor of 8.34 to convert mg/l to pounds/gallon
V = monthly billing volume (discharge) in thousand gallons
250 = average domestic BOD and total suspended solids (250 mg/l)
(c) If the concentration of BOD or total suspended solids in the discharge is less than the normal strength for
that category above specified, there shall be no surcharge for that category, nor shall there be credit given to the
total surcharge if the concentration of either BOD or total suspended solids is less than the normal concentration.
(d) All BOD and total suspended solids values used in determining the surcharge shall be re-evaluated and
adjusted to reflect any changes in wastewater characteristics as sampling results indicate necessary.
(Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 22, adopted 2/6/96)
Sec. 94-41 Inspection and sampling
(a) The enforcement officer, as well as other authorized representatives of the city, the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, the Texas Water Commission, and the Texas Department of Health, or any successor agency
bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter the premises of any user at any
reasonable time for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, examination and copying of
records, sampling and testing of any wastewater discharged into the POTW, as well as of any wastewater prior to
treatment or discharge, and inspection of any pretreatment facilities.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 642/684
(b) The environmental officer shall carry out all inspection and monitoring procedures necessary to determine
compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
(c) Anyone acting under this authority shall observe the establishment's rules and regulations concerning
safety, internal security and fire protection.
(d) Any denial of access or unreasonable delay in allowing the environmental officer access to a user's
premises shall be a violation of this article.
(e) If the environmental officer has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part
thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that
there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed
to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public
health, safety and welfare of the community, then the environmental officer may seek issuance of a search
warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 23, adopted 2/6/96)
Sec. 94-42 Control manhole
(a) When necessary to monitor wastewater discharged into the POTW, the environmental officer may require
an industrial user to install a suitable control manhole in order to adequately sample and measure such
wastewater. Installation of meters, equipment and accessories as deemed necessary by the environmental officer
may also be required.
(b) Required control manholes shall be located to provide ample room in or near the facility to allow accurate
sampling and preparation of samples for analyses. The manhole and any required installed equipment shall be
maintained by the user at all times in safe and proper operating condition.
(c) Before beginning construction of a control manhole, the user shall submit plans to the environmental
officer for review and approval to insure compliance with this section. Plans must include any meters or other
equipment required to be installed.
(Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 24, adopted 2/6/96)
Sec. 94-43 Pretreatment required
(a) Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with all pretreatment
standards and requirements. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall
be provided, operated and maintained at the user's expense. The environmental officer may require the
development of a compliance schedule by each industrial user for the installation of technology required to meet
applicable pretreatment standards and requirements.
(b) Before beginning construction of pretreatment facilities, the user shall submit detailed plans and operating
procedures for the facility to the environmental officer for review and approval. The review and approval of such
plans and procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as
necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the environmental officer and city under the provisions of this
article.
(c) All industrial users shall promptly notify the environmental officer in advance of any substantial change in
the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge.
(d) All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards and requirements shall be made available to
the environmental officer and to other authorized officials of the city, state, or environmental protection agency
upon request.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 643/684
(e) The determination of the character and concentration of industrial wastewater shall be made by the
environmental officer at such times and on such schedules as he may establish.
(Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 25, adopted 2/6/96)
Sec. 94-44 Notice of significant noncompliance
(a) The city shall publish annually a list of industrial users in significant noncompliance with applicable
pretreatment standards or other pretreatment requirements during the previous 12 months. The notification shall
also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the users during the same period. Said list shall be
published in the largest daily newspaper published in the city.
(b) For purpose of this section, an industrial user is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one or
more of the criteria defined under 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vii).
(Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 26, adopted 2/6/96)
Sec. 94-45 Bypass
(a) Bypass not violating applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. An industrial user may allow any
bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is
for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of
subsections (b) and (c).
(b) Notice.
(1) If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to
the environmental officer, if possible at least ten days before the date of the bypass.
(2) An industrial user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable
pretreatment standards to the environmental officer within 24 hours from the time the industrial user
becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the
time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a
description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times,
and if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps
taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The environmental
officer may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received
within 24 hours.
(c) Prohibition of bypass.
(1) Bypass is prohibited, and the environmental officer may take enforcement action against an
industrial user for a bypass, unless:
a. Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or sever property damage;
b. There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment
facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment
down time. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been
installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and
c. The industrial user submitted notices as required under subsection (b) of this section.
(2) The environmental officer may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse
effects, if the environmental officer determines that it will meet the three conditions in subsection (c)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 644/684
(1) of this section.
(Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 27, adopted 2/6/96)
Sec. 94-46 Slug control plan
Each industrial user shall provide protection from slug discharges, as defined in section 94-19. The
environmental officer may require the industrial user to develop and implement a slug control plan. The plan
shall contain, at a minimum, the following elements:
(1) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;
(2) Description of stored chemicals;
(3) Procedures for immediately notifying the environmental officer of slug discharges, including
any discharge that would violate a prohibition under 40 CFR 403.5, with procedures for follow-up
written notification within five days;
(4) If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection
and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading
operation, control of plant site run-off, worker training, building of containment structures or
equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures
and equipment for emergency response.
(Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 28, adopted 2/6/96)
Sec. 94-47 Notice of potential problems, including slug loading
All categorical and noncategorical industrial users shall notify the environmental officer immediately of all
discharges that could cause problems to the POTW, including any slug loadings, by the industrial user.
(Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 29, adopted 2/6/96)
Sec. 94-48 Upsets
(a) Effect of an upset. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance
with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (b) are met.
(b) Conditions necessary for a demonstration of upset. An industrial user who wishes to establish the
affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operation logs, or
other relevant evidence that:
(1) An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause of the upset;
(2) The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in
compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures;
(3) The industrial user has submitted the following information to the environmental officer within
24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally a written submission
must be provided within five days):
a. A description of the indirect discharge and the cause of noncompliance;
b. The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the
anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 645/684
c. Steps being taken and/or plans to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the
noncompliance.
(c) Burden of proof. In any enforcement proceeding the industrial user seeking to establish the occurrence of
an upset shall have the burden of proof.
(d) Reviewability of agency consideration of claims upset. In the exercise of prosecutorial discretion, the
environmental officer will review any claims that noncompliance was caused by an upset. No determinations
made in the course of his review shall constitute final action subject to judicial review. Industrial users will have
the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.
(e) User responsibility in case of upset. The industrial user shall control production or all discharges to the
extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure
of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This
requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment
facility is reduced, lost or fails.
(Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 30, adopted 2/6/96)
Sec. 94-49 Notification of discharge of hazardous wastes
(a) Industrial users shall notify the environmental officer, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division
Director, and state hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which,
if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261. Such notification must include the
name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of
discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the industrial user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste
per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such
information is known and readily available to the industrial user: An identification of the hazardous constituents
contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream
discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream
expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. Industrial users shall provide the notification no later
than 180 days after the discharge of the listed or characteristic hazardous waste. Any notification under this
subsection need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed
discharges must be submitted under 40 CFR 403.12(j). The notification requirement in this section does not
apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(b), (d) and (e).
(b) Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (a) above during a calendar month in which
they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as
specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous
wastes are specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months
during which the industrial user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require
additional information.
(c) In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of
hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify the
environmental officer, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director and the state hazardous waste
authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations.
(d) In the case of any notification made under this section, the industrial user shall certify that is has a
program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the extent determined to be
economically practical.
(Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 31, adopted 2/6/96)
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 646/684
Sec. 94-50 Confidential information
(a) Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and
monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without
restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the environmental
officer that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production
entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user.
(b) When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade
secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available
upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this article, the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) Permit, state disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided,
however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial
review or enforcement proceeding involving the person furnishing the report. Effluent data as defined in 40 CFR
2.302 will not be considered confidential.
(Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 32, adopted 2/6/96)
Sec. 94-51 Miscellaneous offenses relating to sewer system
No person other than a regular employee or officer of the city charged with such duties, shall do or aid in doing
any of the following acts:
(1) Opening, closing, lifting or removing the cover of any sanitary sewer manhole or clean-out
plug of the city sanitary sewers;
(2) Interfering with, destroying, impairing, injuring or defacing any property which is a part of or
essential to the proper functioning of the POTW;
(3) Covering or concealing from view any sanitary sewer manhole;
(4) Tapping and/or otherwise connecting into an existing sanitary sewer which is a part of the
POTW.
(Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 33, adopted 2/6/96)
Sec. 94-52 Judicial enforcement remedies
(a) Civil remedies.
(1) Whenever it appears that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
article that relates to the discharge of a pollutant into the POTW, the city may petition the state
district court or the county court at law, through the city attorney, for either the injunctive relief
specified in subsection (a)(2) or the civil penalties specified in subsection (a)(3) below, or both the
specified injunctive relief and civil penalties.
(2) The city may obtain against the violating user a temporary or permanent injunction, as
appropriate, that:
a. Prohibits any conduct that violates any provision of this article that relates to the discharge
of a pollutant into the POTW; or
b. Compels the specific performance of any action that is necessary for compliance with any
provision of this article that relates to the discharge of a pollutant into the POTW.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 647/684
(3) The city may recover a civil penalty of not more than $5,000.00 per day for each violation of
any provision of this article that relates to the discharge of a pollutant into the POTW, if the city
proves that:
a. The defendant was actually notified of the ordinance provision; and
b. After the defendant received notice of the ordinance provision, the defendant committed an
act or acts in violation of the ordinance provision or failed to take action necessary for
compliance with the ordinance provision.
(b) Criminal penalties.
(1) Any person who has violated any provision of this article, an industrial wastewater discharge
permit, or any order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be
strictly liable for such violation and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than
$2,000.00 per violation, per day.
(2) Any person who has knowingly made any false statement, representation, or certification in any
application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or, required to be maintained, pursuant
to this article, an industrial wastewater discharge permit, or any order issued hereunder, or who has
falsified, tampered with, or knowingly rendered inaccurate any monitoring device or method required
under this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than $2,000.00 per violation,
per day.
(3) In determining the amount of any fine imposed hereunder, the court shall take into account all
relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the
magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the violation,
corrective actions by the violator, the compliance history of the violator, the knowledge, intent,
negligence, or other state of mind of the violator, and any other factor as justice requires.
(c) Civil suit under the Texas Water Code. Whenever it appears that a violation or threat of violation of any
provision of V.T.C.A., Water Code sec. 26.121, or any rule, permit, or order of the Texas Natural Resources
Conservation Commission, has occurred or is occurring within the jurisdiction of the city, exclusive of its
extraterritorial jurisdiction, the city, in the same manner as the Texas Natural Resources Conservation
Commission, may have a suit instituted in a state district court through its city attorney for the injunctive relief
or civil penalties or both authorized in V.T.C.A., Water Code sec. 26.123(a), against the person who committed
or is committing or threatening to commit the violation. This power is exercised pursuant to V.T.C.A., Water
Code sec. 26.124. In any suit brought by the city under this subsection, the Texas Natural Resources
Conservation Commission is a necessary and indispensable party.
(d) Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
that the city may have under state or federal law or other city ordinances. The city may take any, all, or any
combination of these actions against a violator. The city is empowered to take more than one enforcement action
against any violator. These actions may be taken concurrently.
(Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 34, adopted 2/6/96)
Sec. 94-53 Supplemental enforcement action
(a) The environmental officer may decline to issue or reissue an industrial wastewater discharge permit to any
user who has failed to comply with any provision of this article, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or
order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement unless such user first files a
satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the environmental officer to
be necessary to achieve consistent compliance.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 648/684
(b) Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, an industrial wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to
the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily
demonstrated its ability to comply.
(c) A violation of any provision of this article, an industrial wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be
corrected or abated as directed by the environmental officer. Any person creating a public nuisance shall be
subject to the provisions of this Code governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the city for any costs
incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance.
(d) In addition to prohibiting certain conduct by natural persons, it is the intent of this article to hold a
corporation or association legally responsible for prohibited conduct performed by an agent acting on behalf of a
corporation or association and within the scope of his office or employment.
(e) Any user that, in violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, including any provision of this
article, causes pass through or interference, or otherwise causes the city to violate the terms of the city's NPDES
permit for the POTW, and as a consequence to incur any civil or criminal penalty, shall be liable to the city for
the amount of any such civil or criminal penalty, as well as any costs of compliance with any order issued by
EPA, the Texas Water Commission, or any state or federal court and, additionally, any costs and/or attorneys'
fees incurred by the city in defense or compliance with such judicial or administrative action.
(f) Any user that violates any pretreatment standard or requirement, including any provision of this article,
shall be liable to the city for any expense, loss, cleanup cost, damages, and/or waste disposal cost incurred by the
city because of such violations. Additionally, an administrative fee of up to one-half of assessed clean-up costs
may be levied by the city against the responsible violator.
(Ordinance 96-02-01, sec. A, sec. 35, adopted 2/6/96)
Secs. 94-54–94-79 Reserved
ARTICLE III. WATER
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 94-80 Water management plan
(a) Plan adopted. The city council hereby approves and adopts the water management plan attached to
Ordinance 19-04-34 as exhibit A and incorporated herein by reference for all purposes. The city commits to
implementing the requirements and procedures set forth in the adopted water management plan.
(b) Penalty. Any customer, defined under 30 Texas Administrative Code chapter 291, failing to comply with
the provisions of the water management plan shall be subject to a fine of up to two thousand dollars and 00/100
dollars ($2,000.00) per day per occurrence and/or discontinuance of irrigation or water service by the city. Proof
of a culpable mental state is not required for a conviction of an offense under this section. Each day a customer
fails to comply with the water management plan is a separate violation. The city's authority to seek injunctive or
other civil relief available under the law is not limited by this section.
(Ordinance 09-04-21, secs. 1–2, adopted 9/27/09; Ordinance 14-04-24, secs. 3, 6, adopted 4/15/14; Ordinance
15-04-22, secs. 3, 7, adopted 4/21/15; Ordinance 19-04-34, secs. 3, 7, adopted 4/16/19)
Editor's note–Ordinance 09-04-21, sec. 1, 2, and sec. 7, adopted 4/27/2009, repealed the former sec. 94-80, and enacted a new sec. 94-
80 as set out herein. The former sec. 94-80 pertained to water conservation plan and derived from Ordinance 05-05-42, secs. 2, 3,
adopted 5/17/2005. It should be noted that exhibit A referenced above is not set out at length herein, but is on file and available for
inspection in the office of the city clerk.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 649/684
Secs. 94-81–94-103 Reserved
DIVISION 2. WATER DISTRICTS
Sec. 94-104 Findings
The findings set forth above are incorporated into the body of this division as if fully set forth herein. (Ordinance
99-02-01, sec. 1, adopted 2/1/99)
Sec. 94-105 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
City means the City of Frisco, Texas.
Developer or property in the district means any person or entity that owns land located within a district and that
has divided or proposes to divide the land into two or more parts for the purpose of laying out any subdivision or
any tract of land or any addition to any town or city, or for laying out suburban lots or building lots, or any lots,
streets, alleys, or parks or other portions intended for public use, or the use of purchasers or owners of lots
fronting thereon or adjacent thereto.
District or water district means a freshwater supply district, municipal utility district, a water control and
improvement district, or any other district or authority created under V.T.C.A., Water Code title 4, either by
authority of Article III, Section 52, or Article XVI, Section 59, of the state Constitution.
Freshwater supply district means a district created under and subject to the authority, conditions, and restrictions
of Article XVI, Section 59 of the state Constitution and of V.T.C.A., Water Code chs. 53 and 54.
Municipal utility district means a district created under and subject to the authority, conditions, and restrictions
of Article XVI, Section 59 of the state Constitution and of V.T.C.A., Water Code chs. 49 and 54.
Water control and improvement district means a water district created under and subject to the authority,
conditions, and restrictions of either Article III, Section 52, of the state Constitution or Article XVI, Section 59
of the state Constitution, and of the V.T.C.A., Water Code chs. 49 and 51.
(Ordinance 99-02-01, sec. 2, adopted 2/1/99)
Sec. 94-106 Creation of water districts
(a) A water district may be created within the city's corporate limits only with the city's written consent and in
accordance with the provisions contained in this article and applicable state law.
(b) A water district may be created within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city only with the city's written
consent and in accordance with the provisions contained in this article and applicable state law.
(Ordinance 99-02-01, sec. 3, adopted 2/1/99)
Sec. 94-107 Inclusion of land within a water district
(a) Except as provided in section 94-106 and section 94-110 herein, territory within the city's corporate limits
and/or extraterritorial jurisdiction may not be included in a proposed or existing water district.
(b) The economic viability of the water district must be shown in the same manner as required by state laws,
rules, and regulations.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 650/684
(c) The consent resolution or ordinance and agreement shall conform to all applicable provisions of this article
and state law.
(Ordinance 99-02-01, sec. 4, adopted 2/1/99)
Sec. 94-108 General conditions for consent to creation of a water district
(a) Any conditions and restrictions imposed in connection with the city's consent to the creation of a water
district shall be in accordance with this article and applicable state law. Other conditions in addition to the
conditions and restrictions required by this article may be required in accordance with applicable ordinances,
rules, and law.
(b) All conditions and restrictions contained within the city's consent to creation of any district shall be
included within appropriate resolutions, agreements, and ordinances concerning the district.
(c) The following conditions and restrictions are required of all districts:
(1) All facilities constructed or financed by or on behalf of the district shall be consistent with the
city's projected utility and infrastructure plan and shall comply with the city's utility and
infrastructure construction standards.
(2) Plans and specifications for all facilities constructed or financed by or on behalf of the district
shall be approved by the city before construction begins. Construction shall be in accordance with the
approved plans and specifications. Fees for the review and approval of plans and specifications may
be charged by the city.
(3) The city shall have the right to inspect the construction of all facilities constructed or financed
by or on behalf of the district at any time to ensure compliance with the plans and specifications and
applicable requirements. Inspection fees may be charged by the city.
(4) The district shall prepare and file with the city manager a certified copy of its annual audit and
an annual report describing the status of construction by or on behalf of the district. The audit and
report shall be filed with the city manager simultaneously with the filing of the district's annual audit
with the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission pursuant to 30 Tex. Admin. Code sec.
293.94(h) or within 135 days after the close of the district's fiscal year, whichever is sooner.
(5) The planning commission and city council shall not approve any preliminary plat, final plat or
site plan within a district which does not conform to the applicable provisions of the resolutions,
ordinances, and agreements concerning the city's consent to the creation of the district.
(6) The district shall not provide service outside its boundaries without first obtaining the approval
of the city council.
(7) The district shall not annex territory into or exclude territory from the district without first
obtaining the approval of the city council.
(8) All lands and easements for district facilities shall be dedicated free and clear of all liens and
encumbrances to the public, the district, and its ultimate successor.
(Ordinance 99-02-01, sec. 5, adopted 2/1/99)
Sec. 94-109 Bond related provisions to be contained within consent
(a) The following provisions are required of all water districts:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 651/684
(1) Prior to submitting a bond application for approval by the Texas Natural Resource
Conversation Commission, the district shall submit the bond application and bond application report
to the city for review and approval.
(2) The district's revenues and ad valorem taxing authority shall be pledged on all bonds issued by
the district.
(3) Bonds shall be issued by the district only for purposes specifically authorized by state law.
(4) Bonds authorized for one purpose may not be used for another purpose.
(5) To the extent authorized by state law, the city may limit the amount of bonds to be issued by
the district in order to insure the economic viability of the district.
(6) To ensure the district complies with the consent requirements applicable to the district, the city
council shall have the right to approve all bond issues and sales before the district issues bid
invitations for bonds. The city shall not approve and the district shall not sell a district bond issue if
the district is not in compliance with such requirements.
(7) All bonds issued by the district shall have a call provision allowing the option to redeem the
bonds at par.
(8) No bonds funds shall be expended or indebtedness incurred to provide service outside the
boundaries of the district approved by the city council without the approval of the city council.
(9) The net effective interest rate will not exceed two percent above the highest average interest
rate reported by the daily bond buyer in its weekly “20 Bond Index” during the one-month period
preceding the date notice of sale is given.
(b) So long as the restrictions and conditions do not generally render the bonds and notes unmarketable, the
city's consent to the creation of a water district may include any other restrictions on the terms, provisions, or
sale of the district's bonds and notes issued to provide service to the land in the district.
(Ordinance 99-02-01, sec. 6, adopted 2/1/99)
Sec. 94-110 Annexation by water districts
(a) The provisions of this article apply to requests for annexation or inclusion of property to existing water
districts, unless otherwise prohibited by state law.
(b) Land within the city's corporate limits may be annexed by an existing water district only with the city's
written consent and in accordance with the provisions contained in this article and applicable state law.
(Ordinance 99-02-01, sec. 7, adopted 2/1/99)
Sec. 94-111 District contracts
(a) A water district that contains land within the city's corporate limits shall not execute a contract or
agreement with a developer of property within the district concerning land that is within the district and within
the city's corporate limits, without first having obtained the city's written consent.
(b) A water district that contains land within the city's corporate limits shall not execute a contract or
agreement concerning the construction of facilities that will be located within the district and within the city's
corporate limits, without first having obtained the city's written consent.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 652/684
(c) A water district that contains land within the city's corporate limits shall not execute a contract or
agreement that obligates the district to reimburse the developer of property within the district or any other person
or entity for the cost of facilities that have been or will be constructed within the district and within the city's
corporate limits, without first having obtained the city's written consent.
(Ordinance 99-02-01, sec. 8, adopted 2/1/99)
Sec. 94-112 Remedies
The city shall have all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law in
enforcing this article, including, but not limited to, a suit seeking injunctive relief. (Ordinance 99-02-01, sec. 9,
adopted 2/1/99)
Secs. 94-113–94-140 Reserved
ARTICLE IV. DROUGHT CONTINGENCY
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY*
Secs. 94-141–94-160 Reserved
DIVISION 2. RECLAIMED WATER
Sec. 94-161 Definitions
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the terms and phrases used in this article
shall be as follows:
Reclaimed water means effluent owned or controlled by the city that is produced from the treatment of the city's
wastewater through a wastewater treatment plant and treated to the standards required in 30 Tex. Admin. Code
sec. 210 et seq.
Reclaimed water system means the distribution, transmission and storage facilities designed to meet the
requirements of 30 Tex. Admin. Code sec. 210 et seq. as described in this article for the distribution of reclaimed
water to users.
TNRCC means the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission or any successor agency.
Users means entities or individuals that purchase reclaimed water from the city through the city's reclaimed
water system.
(Ordinance 98-07-11, sec. 1, adopted 7/7/98)
Sec. 94-162 Prohibitions
(a) It shall be unlawful to tap into, connect, or obtain reclaimed water from the reclaimed water system except
in accordance with the terms of an executed reclaimed water use agreement with the city and this article.
(b) It shall be unlawful to use reclaimed water in a manner that violates this article or the rules and regulations
of the TNRCC.
(Ordinance 98-07-11, sec. 2, adopted 7/7/98)
Sec. 94-163 Construction standards for reclaimed water system
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 653/684
The reclaimed water system shall be constructed in accordance with the following standards:
(1) Transmission lines. Any reclaimed water transmission lines shall be constructed with a
minimum separation from potable waterlines of nine fee whenever possible. When it is not possible
to maintain such separation, the reclaimed waterlines shall be constructed in accordance with 30 Tex.
Admin. Code ch. 290 concerning separation of potable and nonpotable water piping. A
nondegradable warning tape shall be placed in the trench above the pipe to reduce the possibility of
inadvertent connections. Pipe used for the construction of any additional reclaimed waterlines shall
be purple, covered with a purple polywrap bag, or marked with purple tape. Construction plans for
any additional reclaimed waterlines shall be submitted to the TNRCC for review and approval in
accordance with 30 Tex. Admin. Code sec. 210.25h.
(2) Internal lines. Users shall be responsible for the design of any internal reclaimed water
distribution piping or irrigation piping. The user shall design all piping in accordance with 30 Tex.
Admin. Code sec. 210.25.
(3) Storage ponds. All reclaimed water storage ponds shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with 30 Tex. Admin. Code sec. 210.25.c.
(Ordinance 98-07-11, sec. 3, adopted 7/7/98)
Sec. 94-164 User responsibilities
Reclaimed water users shall comply with the following requirements.
(1) Users shall post signs at all storage areas, hose bibs, faucets and other points of access to the
Reclaimed Water that comply with the requirements of 30 Tex. Admin. Code sec. 210.25.b.
(2) Users shall design all hose bibs, faucets, and valves in accordance with 30 Tex. Admin. Code
sec. 210.25.a.
(3) Users shall ensure that irrigation activities occur during times that will minimize the risk of
inadvertent human exposure.
(4) Users shall operate irrigation systems in a manner that will not cause any surface or airborne
discharge of reclaimed water.
(5) Users shall not operate irrigation systems when the earth is frozen or saturated with water.
(6) Users shall utilize operational procedures for irrigation systems that will minimize wet grass
conditions in unrestricted landscape areas during the periods the areas could be in use.
(7) Users shall maintain transmission mains, storage pond, pumping facilities and internal
irrigation piping beyond the point of delivery.
(8) Users shall design a routine maintenance schedule that includes a routine check of the sprinkler
heads, distribution piping, pumps, valves, and other mechanical equipment and shall conduct repairs
as necessary. Preventive maintenance on all mechanical equipment shall be as specified by the
manufacturer.
(Ordinance 98-07-11, sec. 4, adopted 7/7/98)
Sec. 94-165 Judicial enforcement remedies
(a) Criminal penalty. Any person who has violated any provision of this article regarding the use of reclaimed
water shall be strictly liable for such violation and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 654/684
$2,000.00 per violation per day.
(b) Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
that the city may have under state or federal law or other city ordinance. The city may take any, all, or any
combination of these actions against a violator. The city is empowered to take more than one enforcement action
against any violator. These actions may be taken concurrently.
(c) Supplemental enforcement action.
(1) Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, reclaimed
water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it
has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply.
(2) The misuse of reclaimed water in violation of this article is hereby declared a public nuisance
and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the city manager. Any person creating a public
nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the city code governing such nuisances, including
reimbursing the city for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance.
(3) In addition to prohibiting certain conduct by natural persons, it is the intent of this article to
hold a corporation or association legally responsible for prohibited conduct performed by an agent
acting on behalf of a corporation or association and within the scope of his office or employment.
(4) Any user that violates any provision of this article and thereby causes the city to violate a rule
or regulation of the TNRCC or any other state or federal agency, and as a consequence causes the city
to incur any civil or criminal penalty, shall be liable to the city for the amount of any such civil or
criminal penalty, as well as any costs of compliance with any order issued by the TNRCC or any state
or federal court and, additionally, any costs and/or attorneys fees incurred by the city in defense or
compliance with such judicial or administrative action.
(Ordinance 98-07-11, sec. 5, adopted 7/7/98)
Secs. 94-166–94-190 Reserved
DIVISION 3. THEFT OF WATER
Sec. 94-191 Offense established
A person commits an offense of theft of water by any of the following actions:
(1) A person may not knowingly tamper, connect to, or alter any component of the city's water
system including valves, meters, meter boxes, lids, hydrants, lines, pump stations, ground storage
tanks, and elevated storage tanks. This shall include direct or indirect efforts to initiate or restore
water service without the approval of the city.
(2) If, without the written consent of the city manager or the city manager's designee, the person
knowingly causes, suffers or allows the initiation or restoration of water service to the property after
termination of service. For purposes of this section, it shall be assumed that the owner, occupant, or
person in control of the property caused, suffered, or allowed the unlawful initiation or restoration of
service.
(3) A person may not knowingly make or cause a false report to be made to the city of a reading of
a water meter installed for metered billing.
(4) A person commits a separate offense each day that the person performs an act prohibited by
this section or fails to perform an act required by this section.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 655/684
(Ordinance 05-05-41, sec. 2, adopted 5/17/05)
Sec. 94-192 Disconnections and reconnection of water service
An offense under this article, including the first offense, will result in forfeiture of any and all deposits, removal
of meters, and discontinuance of water service by the city. A $500.00 fee will be required before the city will
restore service. (Ordinance 05-05-41, sec. 3, adopted 5/17/05)
Sec. 94-193 Penalty
An offense under this article is a class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $2,000.00 and
discontinuance of water service by the city. (Ordinance 05-05-41, sec. 4, adopted 5/17/05)
Secs. 94-194–94-220 Reserved
ARTICLE V. ON-SITE SEWAGE FACILITIES
Sec. 94-221 On-site sewage facility rules
(a) Where a public sanitary sewer is not available, any building sewer must be connected to an on-site sewage
facility complying with the rules more fully described herein.
(b) In the event any local restrictions enumerated in section 94-223 conflict with the rules, the local
restrictions shall control.
(Ordinance 93-02-03, sec. 3, adopted 2/2/93)
Sec. 94-222 On-site sewage facility rules adopted
(a) The rules (“Construction Standards for On-Site Sewage Facilities”, 31 Tex. Admin. Code 285.11-285.18)
attached hereto, promulgated by the Texas Water Commission for on-site sewage systems are hereby adopted,
and all officials and employees of the city having duties under said rules are authorized to perform such duties as
are required of them under said rules.
(b) The city manager of the city or his designee is herewith declared the designated representative for the
enforcement of these rules.
(Ordinance 93-02-03, sec. 4, adopted 2/2/93)
Sec. 94-223 Local restrictions
On-site sewage facilities are prohibited on individual lots or tracts having a surface area of one acre or less.
(Ordinance 93-02-03, sec. 5, adopted 2/2/93)
Sec. 94-224 Appeals
Persons aggrieved by an action or decision of the designated representative may appeal such action or decision
to the city council of the city. (Ordinance 93-02-03, sec. 6, adopted 2/2/93)
Sec. 94-225 Area of jurisdiction
The rules adopted by this article shall apply to any lot or tract in the city limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction of
the city. (Ordinance 93-02-03, sec. 7, adopted 2/2/93)
Sec. 94-226 Penalties
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 656/684
In addition to such penalties as may be provided by state law, violation of any provision of this article shall be
deemed a misdemeanor punishable in the municipal court of the city by a fine of not more than the maximum
amount for the same offense provided by state law. Each day of a continuing violation is a separate offense. Such
penal provision shall not preclude a suit to enjoin such violation. (Ordinance 93-02-03, sec. 8, adopted 2/2/93)
Secs. 94-227–94-234 Reserved
ARTICLE VI. BACKFLOW PREVENTION*
DIVISION 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 94-235 Article designation
This article of the Code of Ordinances of the city is designated and shall be known and referred to as the
“backflow prevention” article of said code or as the “backflow prevention ordinance,” and shall be referred to
herein as the “article.” (Ordinance 18-05-24, sec. 94-2601, adopted 5/15/18)
Sec. 94-236 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to protect the water supply of the city from contamination or pollution due to any
cross connections. (Ordinance 18-05-24, sec. 94-2602, adopted 5/15/18)
Sec. 94-237 Administration
This article shall apply to residents of the city and to persons outside the city who by permit, contract, agreement
with the city or otherwise are users of the public water system or who conduct business in the city. Except as
otherwise provided herein, the authority shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article.
(Ordinance 18-05-24, sec. 94-2603, adopted 5/15/18)
Sec. 94-238 Definitions
(a) Unless a provision of this article explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in
this article, shall have the meaning hereinafter designated.
Air gap. A physical separation between the free-flowing discharge end of a potable water supply piping and/or
appurtenance and an open or non-pressure receiving vessel, plumbing fixture or another device. An approved air
gap separation shall be at least twice the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the overflow rim
of the vessel, plumbing fixture or other device, in no case less than one (1) inch, and shall comply with the
plumbing code.
Appeal officer. The city manager designee that presides over appeals of the director, authority or regulatory
authority actions or decisions.
Approved backflow prevention assembly or backflow assembly or assembly. An assembly to counteract
backpressure or prevent backsiphonage that meets the standards contained in the plumbing code.
Atmospheric vacuum breaker backflow prevention device or atmospheric vacuum breaker or AVB. A device used
to prevent backsiphonage in non-health hazard conditions. This device cannot be tested and cannot prevent
backpressure backflow.
Authority. The director of public works or his/her designees charged with the administration and enforcement of
this article.
Backflow. The flow in the direction opposite to the normal flow or the introduction of any foreign liquids, gases,
or substances into the water system of the city's water.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 657/684
Backflow protection. A means of protection against backflow that shall be provided in accordance with the
plumbing code.
Backpressure. Any elevation of pressure in the downstream piping system (by any means) above the supply
pressure at the point of consideration which would cause, or tend to cause, a reversal of the normal direction of
flow and the introduction of fluids, mixtures, or substances from any source other than the intended source.
Backsiphonage. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable
water supply system from any source other than its intended source caused by a sudden reduction of pressure in
the potable water supply system.
City. The City of Frisco and the city's officers and employees.
Commission. The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality or successor entity.
Contaminants. Any foreign material, solid or liquid, not common to the potable water supply which makes or
may make the water unfit or undesirable for human or animal consumption.
Contamination. The admission of contaminants into the potable water supply system.
Cross connection. Any connection, physical or otherwise, between a potable water supply system and any
plumbing fixture, or any tank, receptacle, equipment or device, through which it may be possible for any nonpotable,
used, unclean, polluted and contaminated water, or other substances, to enter into any part of such
potable water system under any condition or set of conditions.
Cross-connection control assembly. Any assembly placed upon any connection, physical or otherwise, between a
potable water supply system and any plumbing fixture, or any tank, receptacle, equipment or device, which is
designed to prevent non-potable, used, unclean, polluted, and contaminated water, or other substances, from
entering into any part of such potable water system under any condition or set of conditions.
Degree of hazard. The low or high hazard classification that shall be attached to all actual or potential cross
connections.
(1) Health hazard. An actual or potential threat of contamination of a physical or toxic nature to
the public potable water system or the consumer's potable water system that would be a danger to
health.
(2) High hazard. The classification assigned to an actual or potential cross connection that
potentially could allow a substance that may cause illness or death to backflow into the potable water
supply.
(3) Low hazard. The classification assigned to an actual or potential cross connection that
potentially could allow a substance that may be objectionable but not hazardous to one's health to
backflow into the potable water supply.
(4) Plumbing hazard. An internal or plumbing-type cross connection in a consumer's potable water
system that may be either a pollution or a contamination-type hazard.
(5) Pollution hazard. An actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or
the potability of the public or the consumer's potable water system but which would not constitute a
health or system hazard, as defined. Maximum degree of intensity of pollution which the potable
water system could be degraded under this definition would cause a nuisance or be aesthetically
objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances.
(6) System hazard. An actual or potential threat of severe danger to the physical properties of the
public or consumer's potable water supply or of a pollution or contamination that would have a
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 658/684
detrimental effect on the quality of the potable water in the system.
Director. The director of public works or his/her designees charged with the administration and enforcement of
this article.
Double check detector backflow prevention assembly or double check detector or DCDA. An assembly
composed of a line-size approved double check assembly with a bypass containing a specific water meter and an
approved double check valve assembly. The meter shall register accurately for very low rates of flow.
Double check valve backflow prevention assembly or double check assembly or double check or DC. An
assembly which consists of two (2) independently acting, approved check valves, including tightly closing
resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located resilient
seated test cocks.
Fire line tester. A tester who is employed by a state-approved fire line contractor and is qualified to test
backflow prevention assemblies on fire lines.
General tester. A tester who is qualified to test backflow prevention assemblies on any domestic, commercial,
industrial or irrigation service, except fire line.
Mobile unit. Any operation which may have the potential to introduce contaminants into a potable water system
from a mobile source. These include, but are not limited to, carpet-cleaning vehicles, water-hauling vehicles,
street-cleaning vehicles, liquid-waste vehicles, power-wash operations and pest-control vehicles.
Nonresidential use. Water used by any person other than a residential customer of the water supply and includes
all uses not specifically included in residential uses.
Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, club, fraternal organization, joint stock
company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination
acting as a unit.
Plumbing code. The city ordinance governing plumbing in the City of Frisco, Texas, as amended.
Point-of-use isolation. The appropriate backflow prevention within the consumer's water system at the point at
which the actual or potential cross connection exists.
Potable water supply. Any water supply intended or used for human consumption or other domestic use.
Premises. Any piece of property to which water is provided, including all improvements, mobile structures and
structures located on it.
Premises isolation. The appropriate backflow prevention at the service connection between the public water
system and the water user.
Pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assembly or pressure vacuum breaker or PVB. An assembly
which provides protection against backsiphonage, but does not provide adequate protection against backpressure
backflow. The assembly is a combination of a single check valve with an AVB and can be used with downstream
resilient seated shutoff valves. In addition, the assembly has suction and discharge gate valves and resilient
seated test cocks which allow the full testing of the assembly.
Public water system or system. Any public or privately owned water system which supplies water for public
domestic use. The system will include all services, reservoirs, facilities, and any equipment use in the process of
producing, treating, storing, or conveying water for public consumption.
Reclaimed water. Wastewater, collected and treated at a wastewater treatment plant, which has been treated to a
quality that meets or exceeds the requirements of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality's chapter 210
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 659/684
authorization to the city.
Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or reduced pressure principle assembly or RPZ
assembly or RPZ. An assembly containing two (2) independently acting approved check valves together with a
hydraulically operated, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check
valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The assembly shall include properly located resilient
seated test cocks and a tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valve at the end of the assembly.
Reduced pressure principle detector backflow prevention assembly or reduced pressure detector or RPZDA. An
assembly composed of a line-size approved reduced pressure principle assembly with a bypass containing a
specific water meter and an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. The meter shall
register accurately for very low rates of flow.
Regulatory authority. The director of public works or designated representative, the chief of the fire department
or designated representative and/or the city manager-appointed department ordinance administrator or their
designees charged with the administration and enforcement of this article.
Representative of the water system. A person designated by the city to perform cross-connection control duties
that shall include, but are not limited to, cross-connection inspections and water use surveys.
Residential use. Water used by any residential customer of the water supply and include single-family dwellings,
duplexes, multiplexes, housing and apartments where the individual units are each on a separate meter or, in
cases where two (2) or more units are served by one (1) meter, the units are full-time dwellings.
Service connection. The point of delivery at which the water purveyor loses control of the water.
TCEQ. The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality or successor entity.
Tester. A person that is a certified backflow prevention assembly technician approved by and registered with the
city and the TCEQ.
Thermal expansion. Heated water that does not have the space to expand.
(b) If a word or term is not defined in this article, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, it shall have
the definition provided for such word or term as set out in the ninth or current edition of the Manual of Cross-
Connection Control published by the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research,
University of Southern California. A copy shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary.
(Ordinance 18-05-24, sec. 94-2604, adopted 5/15/18)
Sec. 94-239 Conflicts between this article and other ordinances or codes
The provisions in this article are cumulative of all city ordinances. If any other ordinances or codes conflict with
this article, the more restrictive provision shall apply. (Ordinance 18-05-24, sec. 94-2605, adopted 5/15/18)
Sec. 94-240 Enforcement
(a) The regulatory authority shall have the authority and responsibility to enforce the provisions of this article
and the state statutes regarding cross connections, when applicable.
(b) The regulatory authority shall inspect or cause to be inspected all backflow prevention assemblies installed
pursuant to the requirements of this article.
(c) For new facilities or buildings, permanent water service shall not be provided until all backflow prevention
assemblies have been tested and are operational.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 660/684
(d) Except in cases where the testing of backflow prevention assemblies must be delayed until the installation
of internal production or auxiliary equipment, the regulatory authority shall not approve a certificate of
occupancy until all backflow prevention assemblies have been tested and are operational.
(e) The regulatory authority may, without prior notice, suspend water service to any premises when the
regulatory authority finds such suspension is necessary to prevent or stop an actual or threatened backflow,
which presents, or may present, imminent and substantial danger to the environment, the public water supply or
the health and welfare of any person. As soon as practicable after the suspension of service, the regulatory
authority shall notify the owner or person in charge of the premises of the suspension in person or by certified
mail, return receipt requested. When time permits, the regulatory authority may notify the owner or person in
charge prior to suspending water service. Notice shall provide the date that service will be or was discontinued
without further notice, the reason for discontinuance and the ability to request an administrative review
regarding the reasons for discontinuance within fifteen days from the date of notice. Services are not reinstated
upon request for an administrative review. The regulatory authority may not reinstate suspended services until:
(1) The person presents proof, satisfactory to the regulatory authority, that the actual or threatened
backflow has been eliminated and its cause determined and corrected;
(2) The person pays the city for all costs the city incurred in responding to the actual or threatened
backflow; and
(3) The person pays the city for all cost the city will incur in reinstating service.
(f) A person commits an offense if the person reinstates water service to any premises for which the regulatory
authority has suspended water service in order to prevent or stop an actual or threatened backflow which
presents, or may present, imminent and substantial danger to the environment, the public water supply or the
health and welfare of any person, except as directed by the regulatory authority.
(Ordinance 18-05-24, sec. 94-2640, adopted 5/15/18)
Sec. 94-241 Backflow fees and charges
A person who owns, operates or manages premises where a backflow prevention assembly or assemblies are
required shall annually register and pay an annual nonrefundable administrative fee for the registration of each
health or high hazard backflow prevention assembly. The annual administrative fee charged for a backflow
prevention assembly shall be per each separate device and shall be established by city council. This annual
administrative fee is to cover the administrative cost associated with the regulatory authority annually registering
a backflow prevention assembly and obtaining, reviewing and maintaining the documentation required by this
article. Such fee may appear on the person's water utility statement. The director of public works is authorized to
collect such charges in a manner consistent with applicable provisions of the code of ordinances, the city charter
and state law. (Ordinance 18-05-24, sec. 94-2650, adopted 5/15/18)
Sec. 94-242 Penalty for violations and other remedies
(a) A person who violates any provision of this article by performing a prohibited act or by failing to perform
a required act is guilty of a misdemeanor; each day the violation continues shall be a separate offense.
(1) If the definition of an offense under this article does not prescribe a culpable mental state, then
a culpable mental state is not required and the offense is one of strict liability. A strict liability offense
shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars and no cents ($500.00). Although not
required, if a culpable mental state is in fact alleged in the charge of the offense, such offense shall be
punishable by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars and no cents ($2,000.00).
(2) If the definition of an offense under this article prescribes a culpable mental state, then a
culpable mental state is required and the offense shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed two
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 661/684
thousand dollars and no cents ($2,000.00).
(b) The penal provisions imposed under this article shall not preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin the
violation. The city retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law.
(Ordinance 18-05-24, sec. 94-2660, adopted 5/15/18)
Sec. 94-243 Appeal
A person may appeal the decision of the director or regulatory authority by making a written request for appeal
to the appeals officer within seven (7) business days of the adverse decision or action. The appeal hearing shall
be conducted no later than seven (7) business days following receipt of the notice of appeal unless the parties
agree to a later date. The appeal shall be conducted by the appeal officer. The decision of the appeal officer shall
be final. (Ordinance 18-05-24, sec. 94-2670, adopted 5/15/18)
Secs. 94-244–94-249 Reserved
DIVISION 2. BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 94-250 General regulations
(a) The regulatory authority shall determine the type and location of backflow prevention assembly to be
installed within the area served by the city.
(b) The use of a backflow prevention assembly at the service connection shall be considered as additional
backflow protection and shall not negate the use of backflow protection on internal hazards as outlined and
enforced by the plumbing code.
(c) At a minimum, a backflow prevention assembly shall be required in the following circumstances:
(1) When the nature and extent of any activity at a premises, or the materials used in connection
with any activity at a premises, or materials stored at the premises could contaminate or pollute the
potable water supply.
(2) When a premises has any one (1) or more cross connections.
(3) When internal cross connections are present that are not correctable.
(4) When intricate plumbing arrangements are present that make it impractical to ascertain whether
cross connections exist.
(5) When a premises has a repeated history of cross connections being established or reestablished.
(6) When entry to a premises is unduly restricted so that inspections for cross connections cannot
be made with sufficient frequency to assure that cross connections do not exist.
(7) When materials are being used such that if a backflow should occur, a health hazard could
result.
(8) When installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly is deemed by the regulatory
authority to be necessary to protect the water supply of the city from contamination or pollution.
(9) When an appropriate cross-connection survey report form has not been filed with the regulatory
authority.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 662/684
(10) When a fire sprinkler system is connected to the city's water system.
(11) In all new nonresidential construction there shall be installed an approved backflow
prevention assembly at the service connection. The type of backflow prevention assembly required
will be commensurate with the degree of hazard as determined by the regulatory authority in order to
protect the water supply of the city from contamination or pollution.
(12) When a building is constructed on commercial premises, and the end use of such building is
not determined or could change, a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be
installed at the service connection to provide protection of the public water supply in the event of the
most hazardous use of the building.
(13) When a premises is required to have backflow prevention assemblies, but water cannot be
turned off during the testing of such assemblies, the premises shall be equipped with dual backflow
prevention assemblies of the same type so that testing, repair and maintenance can be performed.
(14) Any used water return system.
(15) When a point-of-use assembly has not been tested or repaired as required by this article, a
premise isolation assembly shall be required.
(16) When the regulatory authority determines that additions or alterations have been made to the
plumbing system without the proper permits as required by the plumbing code, premises isolation
shall be required.
(17) All multistory buildings or any building with a booster pump or elevated storage tank.
(18) Retrofitting shall be required on all high hazard connections and on all other connections
where the regulatory authority deems it necessary to retrofit in order to protect the water supply of
the city from contamination or pollution.
(19) When reclaimed water is supplied to the site, a RPZ shall be installed on the potable water
supply just inside the property line and before any branch connections and a double check backflow
device shall be installed on the reclaimed water supply just inside the property line and before any
branch connections.
(d) A person commits an offense if the person owns or is in control of any premises and fails to install and
maintain backflow prevention assemblies on said premises as required by this section.
(e) A person commits an offense if the person owns, operates or manages any premises and backflow from the
premises enters the public water supply system.
(Ordinance 18-05-24, sec. 94-2610, adopted 5/15/18)
Sec. 94-251 Installation requirements
(a) Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance with the plumbing code,
commission rules, this article and other relevant law. The assembly installer shall obtain the required
permits prior to installation and shall have the assembly inspected by the regulatory authority.
(2) When the regulatory authority requires a backflow prevention assembly to be installed at the
point of delivery of potable, auxiliary and reclaimed water supplies, such installation of the assembly
shall be before any branch in the line and on private property located just inside the boundary
between the city right-of-way and the landowner's property. Other areas of installation of a backflow
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 663/684
prevention assembly may be required when the regulatory authority deems it necessary in order to
protect the water supply of the city from contamination or pollution.
(3) The assembly shall be protected from freezing and other severe weather conditions.
(4) All backflow prevention assemblies shall be of a type and model approved by the regulatory
authority.
(5) Vertical installations of backflow prevention assemblies shall be approved in writing by the
regulatory authority prior to installation.
(6) Backflow prevention assemblies that are larger than four (4) inches and are installed more than
five (5) feet or higher above floor level shall be equipped with a rigidly and permanently installed
scaffolding acceptable to the regulatory authority.
(7) Bypass lines are prohibited. Pipefittings which could be used for connecting a bypass line shall
not be installed.
(8) Premises that require backflow prevention assemblies, where an uninterrupted, continuous
water supply is critical shall be provided with two (2) assemblies installed in parallel for testing,
maintenance, or repair. They should be sized in such a manner that either assembly will provide the
maximum flow required or desired.
(9) Lines shall be thoroughly flushed prior to installation. A strainer with blowout tapping may be
required ahead of the backflow prevention assembly.
(10) Upon completion of installation, the regulatory authority shall be notified and all backflow
prevention assemblies shall be inspected and tested. The original test report shall be signed and dated
by the tester; contain test gauge make, model, serial number, and calibration date; name of tester;
state certification number of tester; facility name, address and telephone number; and, submitted to
the regulatory authority.
(b) A person commits an offense if the person installs a backflow prevention assembly in violation of this
section.
(c) A person commits an offense if the person fails to notify the regulatory authority of installation, to inspect
and test, or to report the test report in compliance with this article.
(Ordinance 18-05-24, sec. 94-2611, adopted 5/15/18)
Sec. 94-252 Right-of-way encroachment
(a) No person shall install or maintain a backflow prevention assembly upon or within any city right-of-way
except as provided in this section.
(b) A backflow prevention assembly required by the article may be installed upon or within any city right-ofway
only when the city determines that there is no other feasible location for installing the assembly, installing it
in the right-of-way will not interfere with traffic or utilities, and there is application for and approval by the city
of a license and encroachment agreement on the form provided by the city. The city retains the right to approve
the location, height, depth, enclosure, installation and other requisites of the assembly prior to its installation and
the city shall not be liable for any damage done to or caused by an assembly installed in a right-of-way.
(c) All permits, approvals and inspections required by applicable City Code of Ordinances and other law to
perform work in the right-of-way shall be obtained.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 664/684
(d) Double check valve assemblies installed in the right-of-way shall be installed below or flush with the
surrounding grade except when the city determines that it is not practicable to install it in this manner.
(e) Any assembly or portion of an assembly which extends above ground shall be located no closer than
eighteen (18) inches to the face of the curb.
(f) A property owner shall, at the request of the city and at the owner's sole expense, relocate a backflow
prevention assembly which encroaches upon any city right-of-way when such relocation is necessary for the
city's reconstruction, widening or straightening of streets; placement or installation of traffic signals, traffic signs
and streetlights; or construction of any other city public improvement project.
(g) A person commits a violation if the person fails to relocate a backflow prevention assembly located in or
upon any city right-of-way within the time required by the city after receiving a written order from the city to do
so.
(h) A person commits an offense if the person installs or maintains a backflow prevention assembly in
violation of this section.
(i) A backflow prevention assembly installed or maintained in city right-of-way in violation of this section or
an order issued pursuant to this section is declared to be a nuisance.
(Ordinance 18-05-24, sec. 94-2612, adopted 5/15/18)
Sec. 94-253 Multiple connections
Any premises requiring multiple service connections for adequacy of supply and/or fire protection shall have a
backflow prevention assembly on each service connection. The type of backflow prevention assembly required
will be commensurate with the degree of potential hazard as determined by the regulatory authority in order to
protect the water supply of the city from contamination or pollution. (Ordinance 18-05-24, sec. 94-2613, adopted
5/15/18)
Sec. 94-254 Residential service connections
When the regulatory authority determines that residential premises have a cross connection, said premises shall
be required to eliminate the actual or potential cross connection or shall be equipped with an approved backflow
prevention assembly installed in accordance with this article. (Ordinance 18-05-24, sec. 94-2614, adopted
5/15/18)
Sec. 94-255 Connection of mobile units
(a) The connection of a mobile unit to any potable water system is prohibited unless:
(1) Such connection is protected by an air gap or an approved backflow prevention assembly;
(2) There is annual device testing of any backflow prevent assembly; and
(3) The regulatory authority has given approval prior to connection to any potable water system.
(b) A person commits an offense if the person operates or causes to be operated a mobile unit in violation of
this section.
(Ordinance 18-05-24, sec. 94-2615, adopted 5/15/18)
Sec. 94-256 Fire protection systems
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 665/684
(a) A double check valve assembly (DCVA) approved by the regulatory authority shall be the minimum
protection required for fire sprinkler systems using piping material that is not approved for potable water use
and/or that do not provide for periodic flow-through during each twenty- four-hour period, unless a variance has
been issued in writing from the regulatory authority. A reduced pressure principle assembly (RPZ) shall be
installed when any solution other than potable water can be introduced into the sprinkler system, unless an air
gap is used to protect a tank supplying the system.
(b) Vaults are required to be used for installation of backflow valves on fire suppression systems. All backflow
valves/vaults used on fire suppression systems shall be located as close to the right-of-way as possible, but shall
be located no further than one hundred (100) feet from the property line. If the backflow valve can be installed
inside the building, and remain within one hundred (100) feet of the property line, the valves may be installed
inside the building. Only the regulatory authority shall by written approval grant a variance to the distance
requirement.
(c) Upon the approved installation of the DCVA, RPZ or approved backflow prevention assembly, a licensed
fire line tester shall complete a cross-connection test report and submit the completed report to the regulatory
authority as required by this article.
(d) All fire line equipment, including piping and valves shall be installed by a state licensed fire sprinkler
system contractor. Backflow prevention assembly testers may test and repair assemblies on fire lines only if they
are permanently employed by an approved fire line contractor. The state fire marshal's office requires that any
person performing maintenance on fire lines shall be employed by an approved fire line contractor.
(Ordinance 18-05-24, sec. 94-2616, adopted 5/15/18)
Sec. 94-257 Fire hydrant protection
(a) An approved double check valve assembly (DCVA) or reduced pressure principle assembly (RPZ) that has
been approved by the regulatory authority shall be required protection for fire hydrant water meters which are
being used for a temporary water supply during any construction or other uses which would pose a potential
hazard to the public water supply. A RPZ is required if any solution other than the potable water can be
introduced into the system.
(b) It is the responsibility of all persons engaging in the use and rental of a fire hydrant water meter to abide
by the conditions of this article. All fire hydrant meter rentals shall meet the current requirements, as provided
by the city.
(c) Only city fire hydrant meters with approved backflow prevention assemblies are allowed to be used within
the city limits.
(Ordinance 18-05-24, sec. 94-2617, adopted 5/15/18)
Sec. 94-258 Lawn irrigation system
(a) All lawn irrigation systems shall obtain a permit issued by the building inspection and/or public works
department for installation and repairs. Lawn irrigation systems shall be installed in compliance with the
plumbing code, city irrigation regulations and this article.
(b) Interconnections of the potable water supply with an auxiliary water source are required to have a RPZ
backflow device installed immediately past the city meter before any branch connections or an approved air gap.
(c) When an irrigation system is connected to a reclaimed water supply, a double check backflow prevention
assembly shall be installed immediately past the city meter just outside city right-of-way before any branch
connections, and the potable water supply to the site is required to have a RPZ backflow device installed
immediately past the city meter just outside the city right-of-way before any branch connections.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 666/684
(Ordinance 18-05-24, sec. 94-2618, adopted 5/15/18)
Sec. 94-259 Thermal expansion
It is the responsibility of any person who owns or controls property to eliminate the possibility of thermal
expansion if a closed system has been created by the installation of a backflow assembly. (Ordinance 18-05-24,
sec. 94-2619, adopted 5/15/18)
Sec. 94-260 Pressure loss
Any reduction in water pressure caused by the installation of a backflow assembly shall not be the responsibility
of the city. (Ordinance 18-05-24, sec. 94-2620, adopted 5/15/18)
Sec. 94-261 Testing of assemblies
(a) The regulatory authority shall inspect and/or test, or cause to be inspected and tested, all backflow
prevention assemblies in each of the following circumstances:
(1) Immediately after installations;
(2) Whenever the assembly is moved;
(3) A minimum of once a year for all assemblies providing protection against health hazards;
(4) Premises that have been vacated and unoccupied for one (1) year, prior to re-occupancy; and
(5) Immediately after repairs or replacement.
(b) Backflow prevention assemblies may be required to be tested more frequently if the regulatory authority
deems it necessary to protect the water supply of the city from contamination or pollution.
(c) All backflow prevention assembly testing shall be performed by a certified backflow prevention assembly
tester who is registered with the city's regulatory authority.
(d) It is the responsibility of the property owner and the person in control of the premises to have all backflow
prevention assemblies tested in accordance with this article.
(e) All results from backflow prevention assembly testing by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester
shall be placed on a form that shall be obtained by the tester from the city.
(f) It is the responsibility of any person who owns or who controls any premises to have all backflow
prevention assemblies tested in accordance with this article.
(g) A person commits an offense if the person owns or is in control of any premises and fails or refuses to
have the backflow prevention assemblies installed on said premises, inspected or tested as required by this
section.
(h) The city shall not be liable for damage to a backflow prevention assembly that occurs during testing.
(Ordinance 18-05-24, sec. 94-2621, adopted 5/15/18)
Sec. 94-262 Maintenance of assemblies
(a) A person who owns, operates or manages premises in which required backflow prevention assemblies are
installed shall maintain such assemblies in proper working order at all times, including repair as required, annual
registration on an approved form provided by the regulatory authority, and payment of an annual nonrefundable
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 667/684
administrative fee in an amount established by city council. All maintenance and repair of assemblies shall be
done in accordance with all applicable regulations of the commission and this article.
(b) Backflow prevention assemblies shall be maintained in a manner that allows them to be tested by a
method that has been approved by the regulatory authority.
(c) All records related to backflow prevention assembly installation, testing, and repair shall be maintained on
the premises for a minimum of three (3) years.
(d) A person commits an offense if the person allows an unregistered tester to perform testing work at their
establishment.
(e) A person commits an offense if a person fails to maintain backflow prevention assemblies in compliance
with this section.
(f) A person commits an offense if the person fails to comply with a repair order issued by the regulatory
authority.
(Ordinance 18-05-24, sec. 94-2622, adopted 5/15/18)
Sec. 94-263 Installation standards and specifications
(a) Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies (RPZs). RPZs may be utilized at premises
where a substance is handled that would be hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water system. The
RPZ is normally used in locations where an air gap is impractical. The RPZ is effective against both
backsiphonage and backpressure.
(1) RPZs shall be sized to provide an adequate supply of water and pressure for the premises being
served. Flow characteristics are not standard. Consult manufacturer's specifications for specific
performance data.
(2) The assembly shall be readily accessible for testing and maintenance and shall be located in an
area where water damage to building or furnishing would not occur from relief valve discharge. The
property owner assumes all responsibility for any damage caused by water discharge from a RPZ
assembly. An approved air gap shall be located at the relief valve orifice of RPZ assemblies. This air
gap shall be at least twice the inside diameter of the incoming supply line as measured vertically
above the top rim of the drain, and in no case less than one (1) inch. An approved air gap funnel
assembly may be used to direct minor discharges away from the assembly; this assembly will not
control flow in a continuous relief situation. Drain lines to accommodate full relief valve discharge
flow should be considered.
(3) No part of a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly shall be submerged in
water or installed in a location subject to flooding. RPZs are typically installed above grade in welldrained
areas. The drain shall be of adequate capacity to carry the full rated flow of the assembly and
shall be screened on both ends.
(4) Enclosures shall be designed for ready access and sized to allow for the minimum clearances
established below. Removable protective enclosures are typically installed on the smaller assemblies.
Daylight drain ports shall be provided to accommodate full pressure discharge from the assembly.
(5) Assemblies two (2) inches and smaller shall have at least six (6) inches clearance on both sides
and on top of the assembly, and twelve (12) inches below and behind the assembly. All assemblies
larger than two (2) inches shall have a minimum of twelve (12) inches on the back side, twenty-four
(24) inches on the test cock side, and the relief valve opening shall be at least twelve (12) inches plus
nominal size of assembly above the floor or highest possible water level. Headroom of six (6) feet
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 668/684
zero (0) inches is required in vaults without a fully removable top. A minimum access opening of
thirty-six (36) inches is required on all vault lids.
(6) Vertical installation is prohibited.
(7) All RPZ assemblies shall be tested in accordance with this article. Tests are the responsibility of
the assembly owner. The owner shall notify the regulatory authority upon installation of any
backflow prevention assembly.
(8) Variances from these specifications will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Any deviation
shall be prohibited without prior written approval of the regulatory authority.
(b) Double check valve backflow prevention assemblies (DCs). DCs may be utilized at premises where a
substance is handled that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if introduced into the potable water
system.
(1) DCs shall be sized to provide an adequate supply of water and pressure for the premises being
served. Consult manufacturer's specifications for specific performance data.
(2) Premises where an uninterrupted water supply is critical should be provided with two (2)
assemblies installed in parallel. Assemblies shall be sized in such a manner that either assembly will
provide the minimum water requirements while the two (2) together will provide the maximum flow
required.
(3) The assembly shall be readily accessible with adequate room for testing and maintenance.
DCVAs may be installed below grade, providing all test cocks are fitted with brass pipe plugs. All
vaults shall be well-drained, constructed of suitable materials, and sized to allow for the minimum
clearances established below.
(4) Assemblies two (2) inches and smaller shall have at least six (6) inches of clearance below and
on both sides of the assembly and, if located in a vault, the bottom of the assembly shall be not more
than twenty-four (24) inches below grade. All assemblies larger than two (2) inches shall have a
minimum clearance of twelve (12) inches on the back side, twenty-four (24) inches on the test cock
side, and twelve (12) inches below the assembly. Headroom of six (6) feet zero (0) inches is required
in vaults without a fully removable top. A minimum access opening of thirty-six (36) inches is
required on all vault lids. “Y” pattern double check valve assemblies shall be installed so that the
checks are horizontal and the test cocks face upward. These clearance standards apply to all
assemblies installed in vaults, enclosures, and meter boxes.
(5) Vertical installations of DCVAs are only allowed on sizes up to and including four (4) inches
that meet the following requirements:
a. Internally spring-loaded check valves;
b. Flow is upward through assembly;
c. Manufacturer and University of Southern California's Foundation for Cross-Connection
Control and Hydraulic Research states the assembly can be used in a vertical position;
d. Approved by the regulatory authority.
(6) All DCVAs shall be tested in accordance with this article. Tests are the responsibility of the
assembly owner. The owner shall notify the regulatory authority upon installation of any backflow
prevention assembly.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 669/684
(7) Variances from these specifications will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Any deviation
shall be prohibited without prior written approval of the regulatory authority.
(c) Pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assemblies (PVBs). PVBs may be utilized at point-of-use
protection only and where a substance is handled that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if
introduced into the potable water system. PVBs protect against backsiphonage only and shall not be installed
where there is potential for backpressure.
(1) The assembly shall be installed a minimum of twelve (12) inches above the highest
downstream piping.
(2) PVBs shall not be installed in an area subject to flooding or where damage would occur from
water discharge.
(3) The assembly shall be readily accessible for testing and maintenance, with a minimum
clearance of twelve (12) inches all around the assembly.
(4) All PVBs shall be tested in compliance with this article. Tests are the responsibility of the
assembly owner. The owner shall notify the regulatory authority of installation of any backflow
prevention assembly.
(5) Variances from these specifications will be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. Any deviation
shall be prohibited without prior written approval of the regulatory authority.
(d) Spill-resistant pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assemblies (SVBs). SVBs may be utilized in
all installations requiring a pressure vacuum breaker. SVBs shall comply with the installation requirements
applicable for pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention assemblies.
(e) Air gap separation. Air gap separations provide maximum protection from backflow hazards and may be
utilized at premises where a substance is handled that would be hazardous to health if introduced into the potable
water system.
(1) An air gap separation shall be at least twice the diameter of the supply pipeline measured
vertically above the top rim of the receiving vessel, and in no case less than one (1) inch. If splashing
is a problem, tubular screens may be attached or the supply line may be cut at a forty-five-degree
angle. The air gap distance is measured from the bottom of the angle. Hoses are not allowed.
(2) Air gap separations shall not be altered in any way without prior approval from the regulatory
authority and shall be available for inspection at all reasonable times.
(Ordinance 18-05-24, sec. 94-2623, adopted 5/15/18)
Sec. 94-264 Registration of certified backflow prevention assembly testers
(a) No certified backflow assembly tester shall operate within the city without first registering with the
regulatory authority. The regulatory authority shall determine whether an applicant is eligible for registration.
(b) Each applicant for registration shall:
(1) Annually register with the regulatory authority;
(2) Provide evidence of commission certification;
(3) Provide evidence that testing equipment is able to maintain a calibration of plus or minus 0.2
psid accuracy; and
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 670/684
(4) Obtain and maintain in full force and effect for the duration of the registration period, and any
extension thereof, at the applicant's sole expense, insurance coverage written on an occurrence basis,
by companies authorized and admitted to do business in the state and rated A- or better by A.M. Best
Company in the following types and amounts:
Type Amount
1. Worker's compensation/employer's liability Statutory $500,000.00/$500,000.00/ $500,000.
2. Commercial general (public) liability insurance
to include coverage for the following:
a. Premises/operations
Bodily injury and property damage of:
$2,000,000.00 per occurrence, $5,000,000.00
general, aggregate or its equivalent in umbrella
excess liability coverage.
b. Independent contractors
c. Products/completed operations
d. Contractual liability
e. Personal injury
f. Explosion, collapse, underground
g. Broad form property damage, to include fire
legal liability
*3. Business automobile liability: Combined single limit for bodily injury and
property damage of $1,000,000.00 per occurren
or its equivalent.
a. Owned/leased vehicle
b. Nonowned vehicles
c. Hired vehicles
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 671/684
a. Each applicant shall furnish a completed certificate of insurance evidencing such
coverages that shall be completed by an agent authorized to bind the named underwriter and its
company to the coverage, limits, and termination provisions shown thereon;
b. The regulatory authority reserves the right to modify required insurance coverage and
limits when deemed necessary and prudent by the regulatory authority based upon changes in
statutory law, court decisions, or circumstances surrounding this article, but in no instance will
the regulatory authority allow modification whereupon the regulatory authority may incur
increased risk.
c. Each applicant shall ensure that all such insurance policies and certificates of insurance
contain the following required provisions:
i. Name the regulatory authority and its council members, officers, employees,
volunteers, agents and representatives as additional insureds with respect to the operations
and activities of, or on behalf of, the named insured performing work under the provisions
of this article, with the exception of the professional liability and worker's compensation
policies;
ii. Insurance shall be deemed primary with respect to any insurance or self-insurance
carried by the regulatory authority;
iii. Provide for an endorsement that the “other insurance” clause shall not apply to the
regulatory authority where the regulatory authority is an additional insured shown on the
policy;
iv. Worker's compensation and employer's coverage shall provide for a waiver of
subrogation in favor of the regulatory authority;
v. Provide for notice to the regulatory authority in the event of any notice of
cancellation, nonrenewal or material change in coverage and shall give such notices not
less than thirty (30) days prior to the change, or ten (10) days' notice for cancellation due
to nonpayment of premiums, which notice must be accompanied by a replacement
certificate of insurance.
d. Nothing herein contained shall be construed as limiting in any way the extent to which the
applicant or certified backflow assembly tester may be held responsible for payments of
damages to persons (including death) or property resulting from the applicant's or certified
backflow assembly tester's performance of work under the provisions of this article.
(c) A registration shall remain in effect one (1) year from the date of registration provided that:
(1) The tester maintains eligibility for registration and certification; and
*4. Professional liability (claims made from) $1,000,000.00 per claim to pay on behalf of the
insured all sums which the insured shall becom
legally obligated to pay as damages by reason o
any act, malpractice, error or omission in
professional services.
*If applicable.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 672/684
(2) Registration is not revoked by the regulatory authority.
(d) After notice and hearing, the regulatory authority may revoke a registration if the regulatory authority
determines that the tester:
(1) Has falsely, incompletely or inaccurately reported assembly reports;
(2) Has used inaccurate gauges;
(3) Has used improper testing procedures;
(4) Has expired insurance;
(5) Is not in compliance with safety regulations;
(6) Has failed to register the serial numbers of his/her test kits or failed to calibrate gauges
annually as required by this article;
(7) Has on three or more times in a calendar year failed to return completed test forms to the
regulatory authority within the time period required by this article; or
(8) Has violated any other provision of this section.
(e) The regulatory authority will maintain a current list of registered certified testers.
(f) A person commits an offense if the person tests a backflow prevention assembly within the city without
being certified by the commission.
(g) A person commits an offense if the person operates as a backflow prevention assembly tester within the
city without registering with the regulatory authority.
(Ordinance 18-05-24, sec. 94-2624, adopted 5/15/18; Ordinance 19-03-17 adopted 3/19/19)
Sec. 94-265 Certified backflow prevention assembly tester responsibilities
A certified backflow prevention assembly tester shall:
(1) Register annually with the city;
(2) File the serial number of each of his/her test kits with the regulatory authority;
(3) Annually have each recorded test kit tested for accuracy and calibrated to maintain a two (2)
percent accuracy factor;
(4) Maintain testing equipment in proper working condition/calibration;
(5) Perform competent and accurate certifications on each backflow prevention assembly tested
and shall submit complete original, signed and dated reports on the city approved forms;
(6) Report test results to the regulatory authority within ten (10) days of testing;
(7) Provide a copy of the completed test report to the property owners and/or persons in charge of
any premises;
(8) Maintain testing and/or repair records for a minimum of three (3) years;
(9) Shall not change the design or operation characteristics of a backflow prevention assembly; and
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 673/684
(10) Shall not commingle backflow test gauges used on the reclaimed or auxiliary water system
with the potable water system.
(Ordinance 18-05-24, sec. 94-2625, adopted 5/15/18)
Sec. 94-266 Nuisance
Backflow entering or threatening to enter the public water supply from any premises is hereby declared to be a
nuisance. The city may abate the nuisance in accordance with the nuisance provisions of the Code of
Ordinances, or in any other manner authorized by law. (Ordinance 18-05-24, sec. 94-2626, adopted 5/15/18)
Sec. 94-267 Access to premises
(a) Each person provided water service by the city directly or indirectly shall permit the regulatory authority
to enter such person's premises and buildings for the purpose of inspecting pipes and fixtures and the manner in
which water is used to determine compliance with this article. The regulatory authority's right of entry is a
condition of the person's water service or connection to the city's public water system.
(b) The person shall promptly remove, at the person's sole expense, a security barrier or other obstacle to
access by the regulatory authority to the person's premises.
(c) In connection with action by the regulatory authority under this article, a person with water service
provided by the city commits an offense if the person:
(1) Fails to remove a barrier or obstacle to access by the regulatory authority; or
(2) Unreasonably delays access by the regulatory authority.
(d) The regulatory authority may apply to the municipal court or other court of competent jurisdiction for a
search warrant if:
(1) A person denies the regulatory authority access to a building, structure, property or a public or
private potable system connected to the city's public water system.
(2) The regulatory authority has probable cause to believe there is:
a. A violation of this article or other enforcement order;
b. A need to conduct a cross-connection inspection or cross-connection survey; or
c. A threat to public health or safety.
(Ordinance 18-05-24, sec. 94-2627, adopted 5/15/18)
Secs. 94-268–94-269 Reserved
ARTICLE VII. BURYING UTILITIES LINES
Sec. 94-270 Definitions
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined as follows:
Civil engineering plans. The construction plans for improvements required by Subdivision Regulation
Ordinance No. 94-08-19, as it presently exists or may be amended, and other applicable ordinances, that are
reviewed by the city engineering department.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 674/684
Final acceptance. Acceptance by the City of Frisco of all improvements, franchise utilities, grading and erosion
control following the inspections required by Subdivision Regulation Ordinance No. 94-08-19, sec. 7-13, as it
presently exists or may be amended.
Property. Any real property that is the subject of any development activity, subdivision or permit application.
Utility fee. The fee established by section 94-271 of this chapter.
Utility line. Any line, wire, cable, fiber, etc., regardless of the material made of, used to provide utility services,
including but not limited to electric, telephone, voice, gas, television, cable, telecommunication, data and
internet, but excluding electrical distribution lines greater than 60,000 volts.
Utility zone. The areas designated as utility zones by section 94-272 of this chapter.
(Ordinance 06-10-106, sec. 2, adopted 10/3/06)
Editor's note–Subdivision Regulation Ordinance No. 94-08-19, referenced above, is not set out in this Code, but is on file and
available for inspection in the office of the city secretary.
Sec. 94-271 Utility fee established; amount of assessment
The property owner shall pay a fee equal (per net acre as set forth in the final plat approved by the property by
the city) as follows: “):
Zone Utility Fee
One $3,075.00
Two $3,164.00
Three $4,125.00
Four $3,518.00
(Ordinance 06-10-106, sec. 3, adopted 10/3/06)
Sec. 94-272 Utility zones established
The city is hereby divided into utility zones as set forth on the map attached to Ordinance No. 06-10-106 as
Exhibit “A” and incorporated as if fully set forth herein. (Ordinance 06-10-106, sec. 4, adopted 10/3/06)
Sec. 94-273 Accounts to be established for each utility zone and expenditures
All utility fees collected from each utility zone shall be placed in an account clearly identifying the utility zone
from which the utility fee was collected. Funds contained in a utility zone account may only be expended within
the utility zone for which the account was established.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 675/684
Funds contained in a utility zone account shall be used to pay for the burying of utility lines and costs related to
the burying of utility lines, including but not limited to design, engineering, construction, and obtaining
construction easements and right-of-way, located within the utility zone from which the utility fees were
collected. The city shall determine the order in which utility lines will be buried and when they will be buried
based upon factors such as, the amount of development that has occurred in the utility zone, the amount of and
timing of development still expected to occur in the utility zone, the location of existing underground conduits,
information received from utility companies regarding future plans for additional utility lines, including network
lines, and/or the amount of boring necessary to bury a section of utility line.
(Ordinance 06-10-106, sec. 5, adopted 10/3/06)
Sec. 94-274 Payment of utility fee
The utility fee assessed in accordance with section 94-271 of this chapter, must be paid prior to the final
acceptance by the city of the improvements made to the property in accordance with the civil engineering plans.
(Ordinance 06-10-106, sec. 6, adopted 10/3/06)
Sec. 94-275 Waiver of utility fee
If at the time of final acceptance of the improvements made in accordance with the civil engineering plans for
the property all utility lines required to be included in the quote or estimate to bury have been placed
underground, the assessed utility fee will be waived and not collected. (Ordinance 06-10-106, sec. 7, adopted
10/3/06)
Sec. 94-276 Variance; appeal procedures
(a) Applicability. A request for a variance from the amount of utility fee owed or the application of this
section may be filed pursuant to this section. However, the appeal process provided by this section shall not be
available for criminal violations of this section.
(b) Variance request/appeal to city manager. A property owner may appeal decisions made by the city staff
pursuant to this section by filing a written appeal with the city manager within ten business days of being
notified of the decision of the city staff. A property owner may request a variance in regards to the requirements
of this section by filing a written request for a variance with the city manager within ten business days of being
notified of the amount of utility fee assessed pursuant to this section. An appeal filed pursuant to this section
shall specifically state the basis for the aggrieved party's challenge to the city's authority under this section and
the basis for such assertion. A request for variance filed pursuant to this section shall specifically state the nature
of the variance to the utility fee requested and the basis thereof. All information that the requestor desires to be
considered by the city manager, or his/her designee, in reviewing the appeal or request for variance should be
submitted with the written appeal or request for variance.
(c) Issuance of decision by city manager. Decisions of the city manager shall be issued within 14 business
days of receipt of the written appeal or request for variance.
(d) Appeal to city council. A property owner may appeal a decision regarding an appeal or request for
variance of the city manager to the city council by filing a written appeal within ten business days of the date of
the city manager's decision is issued. If reasonably possible, and to the extent allowed by law, an appeal to the
city council will be placed on the city council's next regularly scheduled meeting for determination. A decision
made by the city council is final.
(e) Factors to be considered by city manager and city council. The following factors, among others, may be
considered by the city manager, or his/her designee, and the city council in hearing an appeal or request for
variance:
(1) Variances:
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 676/684
i. Whether the topography or sub-surface of the property affects the ability to bury utility
lines;
ii. Whether a utility company has future plans to install an overhead system line(s) 60,000
volts or greater;
iii. Whether literal enforcement of this section would result in materially different treatment
of the property owner compared to similarly situated property owners in the city or extreme
hardship;
iv. Information considered by the city staff in making an assessment of the amount of utility
fee;
v. Whether the property owner is a political subdivision of the State of Texas funded by tax
dollars; and/or
vi. Any other information deemed relevant to the request or necessary to make a decision by
the city manager, or his/her designee, or the city council.
(2) Appeals:
i. Whether the topography or sub-surface of the property affects the ability to bury utility
lines;
ii. Whether a utility company has future plans to install an overhead system line(s) 60,000
volts or greater;
iii. Whether literal enforcement of this section would result in materially different treatment
of the Property owner compared to similarly situated property owners in the city or extreme
hardship;
iv. Information considered by the city staff in making an assessment of the amount of utility
fee;
v. Whether the property owner is a political subdivision of the State of Texas funded by tax
dollars; and/or
vi. Any other information deemed relevant to the request or necessary to make a decision by
the city manager, or his/her designee, or the city council.
(Ordinance 06-10-106, sec. 8, adopted 10/3/06)
Sec. 94-277 Penalty provision
Any person, firm, corporation, or business entity violating this section, as amended, shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the sum of $500.00, unless the
violation relates to fire safety, zoning or public health and sanitation, including dumping and refuse, in which the
fine shall not exceed the sum of $2,000.00. Each continuing day's violation under this section shall constitute a
separate offense. The penal provisions imposed under this section shall not preclude [the city] from filing suit to
enjoin the violation. [The city] retains all legal right and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state, and
federal law. (Ordinance 06-10-106, sec. 9, adopted 10/3/06)
Secs. 94-278–94-279 Reserved
ARTICLE VIII. MUNICIPAL STORMWATER UTILITY SYSTEM
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 677/684
Sec. 94-280 Adoption of act
The Municipal Drainage Utility Systems Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 402, subch. C, as amended,
(the “act”) is hereby adopted and shall be fully implemented as provided by the act and by the city council; and
the drainage of the city is hereby found to be a public utility within the meaning of the act. (Ordinance 09-01-03,
sec. 2, adopted 1/20/09)
Sec. 94-281 Drainage service provided
The city will provide stormwater drainage for all real property within its boundaries upon payment of the
determined drainage charges, as defined in the act, and excluding certain exempted real property, and that the
fees, assessments, and charges will be based on nondiscriminatory, reasonable and equitable terms. (Ordinance
09-01-03, sec. 2, adopted 1/20/09)
Sec. 94-282 Billing for service
The city is hereby authorized to bill the drainage charges incurred as a result of the adoption of the act and
through the establishment of the municipal stormwater utility system. The stormwater utility fee shall be
separately identified from other public utility billings. (Ordinance 09-01-03, sec. 2, adopted 1/20/09)
Sec. 94-283 Authority to levy charges
The city may levy a schedule of drainage charges upon satisfaction of the procedural requirements provided in
the act and this article. (Ordinance 09-01-03, sec. 2, adopted 1/20/09)
Sec. 94-284 Exemption authorized
The city is authorized to exempt certain entities or persons from all ordinances, resolutions, and rules which the
city may adopt from time to time in connection with the adoption of the act and the establishment of its
municipal stormwater utility system. (Ordinance 09-01-03, sec. 2, adopted 1/20/09)
Sec. 94-285 Fees
(a) The city will adopt a schedule of drainage fees after the passage of this article which will be collected
through the city's bill for public utilities pursuant to the act other applicable law.
(b) The fees which will be established will apply to the accounts maintained by the city for utility services.
(c) All billings, credits, exemptions and other procedures relating to these fees shall be subject to the
provisions of the act and other applicable law.
(Ordinance 09-01-03, sec. 2, adopted 1/20/09)
Sec. 94-286 Appeals
(a) Billing and payment disputes for administrative issues shall be subject to appeals procedures used by the
city for other utility billing disputes.
(b) Appeals for the following reasons shall be directed to the stormwater utility director or his designee for
evaluation and determination:
(1) Exempt property has been assessed a stormwater utility fee;
(2) Stormwater utility fee for an individual property is based on an incorrect determination of the
property's contribution to the stormwater system, as established in the municipal stormwater utility
fee schedule;
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 678/684
(3) Stormwater utility fee for an individual property is assessed on more than one utility account;
or
(4) Stormwater utility fee is assessed to individual property outside the city's jurisdictional area.
(c) The stormwater utility director or his designee shall render a written decision on such appeals within 30
days after receiving a written notice of appeal from the landowner.
(d) Any landowner who disagrees with the decision of the stormwater utility director or his designee may
appeal such decision to the city council. The decision of the city council shall be final.
(Ordinance 09-01-03, sec. 2, adopted 1/20/09)
Sec. 94-287 Penalties
(a) Failure to pay the stormwater utility fee promptly when due shall subject such user to discontinuance of
any utility services provided by the city, in accordance with all applicable laws.
(b) The city shall not require a deposit for drainage charges as a precondition to accepting surface flow from
benefited property into the city's drainage utility system. All real property of the city will be provided with
drainage service on payment of drainage charges.
(Ordinance 09-01-03, sec. 2, adopted 1/20/09)
Secs. 94-288–94-299 Reserved
ARTICLE IX. WATER WELLS
Sec. 94-300 Purpose
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public
and private losses due to contamination of the public water supply, to maximize groundwater protection and
pollution abatement control procedures, minimize land use restriction and to ensure that the public is provided
with a safe potable water supply now and for future generations. (Ordinance 19-05-39 adopted 5/21/19)
Sec. 94-301 Scope
The provisions of this article shall apply to all water wells located within the city limits and in the extraterritorial
jurisdiction (ETJ), at any location within a radius of one thousand (1,000) feet of the city limits. (Ordinance 19-
05-39 adopted 5/21/19)
Sec. 94-302 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article and the following terms
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning.
Air gap. A physical separation between the free-flowing discharge end of a potable water supply piping and/or
appurtenance and an open or non-pressure receiving vessel, plumbing fixture or other device. An approved airgap
separation shall be at least twice the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the overflow rim
of the vessel, plumbing fixture or other device, in no case less than one (1) inch and shall comply with the
plumbing code.
Auxiliary water supply. Any water supply other than a city-approved water supply source, including water from
another public water supply or from a natural source, including but not limited to, wells, cisterns, springs, rivers,
streams, used waters or industrial fluids.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 679/684
Backflow. The flow in the direction opposite to the normal flow or the introduction of any foreign liquids, gases
or other substances into the water system of the city's water.
Backflow prevention assembly. An assembly to counteract backpressure or prevent backsiphonage that meets the
standards contained in the plumbing code. For the purposes of this article, the only approved assembly shall be a
reduced pressure backflow assembly (“RPBA”).
Backflow prevention assembly tester. An individual licensed in accordance with Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality (“TCEQ”) rules, as amended, for the purpose of testing backflow prevention assemblies.
Building official. The officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of
this article or other duly authorized city representative.
City or City of Frisco. The City of Frisco and the city's officers and employees.
Contaminants. Any foreign material, solid or liquid, not common to the potable water supply which makes or
may make the water unfit or undesirable for human or animal consumption.
Contamination. The admission of contaminants into the potable water supply system.
Cross connection. Any connection, physical or otherwise, between a potable water supply system and any
plumbing fixture, or any tank, receptacle, equipment or device, through which it may be possible for any nonpotable,
used, unclean, polluted and contaminated water, or other substances, to enter into any part of such
potable water system under any condition or set of conditions.
Director of public works. The director of public works or his or her designee.
Existing work. A water well or water system which had been installed prior to the effective date of this article.
Health hazard. A cross connection, potential contamination hazard, or other situation involving any substance
that can cause death, illness and spread of disease or has a probability of causing such effects if introduced into
the potable drinking water supply.
Nonpotable water. A water supply that has not been approved for human consumption by the city.
Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, club, fraternal organization, joint stock
company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination
acting as a unit.
Plumbing inspector. Any person hired by the city for the purpose of inspecting work and installation in
connection with health and safety laws as provided in, or referred to in, this article.
Potable water. Any water supply intended or used for human consumption or other domestic use.
Premises or property. Any real, improved or personal property that is connected to the city-approved water
supply source.
Premises isolation. The practice of protecting the potable water supply by installing a backflow prevention
assembly at or near the point where water enters the premises. This protection does not provide backflow
protection for personnel inside the premises.
Public sewer. A common sewer directly controlled by the city or other public authority.
Reduced pressure backflow assembly (RPBA). An assembly containing two (2) independently acting approved
check valves together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve
located between the check valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The unit includes properly
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 680/684
located resilient-seated test cocks and two tightly-closing resilient-seated shutoff valves at each end of the
assembly.
Sanitary sewer. A pipe which carries wastewater and excludes storm, surface water and groundwater.
Septic tank. A watertight receptacle which receives the discharge of a drainage system or part thereof, which is
designed and constructed so as to separate solids from the liquid, digest organic matter through a period of
detention, and allow the liquids to discharge into the soil outside of the tank through a drain field, disposal or
perforated piping.
Service connection. The point of delivery at which the water purveyor loses control of the water.
Testing or reporting deficiencies. Incomplete or inaccurate backflow prevention assembly test results or reports
filed with the city pursuant to this article; the use of inaccurate gauges; or the use of improper operational
certification methods.
Thermal expansion. Heated water that does not have any space to expand.
Water main. A water distribution pipe for public or community use.
Water purveyor. The operator of a potable water system supplying at least fifteen (15) service connections or
servicing at least twenty-five (25) individuals at least sixty (60) days out of the year.
Water wells. Bored wells, dug wells or driven wells developed into the underground soils, which are to produce
water for private use. Water wells are prohibited unless approved under the provisions of this article.
(Ordinance 19-05-39 adopted 5/21/19)
Sec. 94-303 Permits and licenses
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, maintain, operate or drill a water well or water system in the city
limits or in the extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) of the city, at any location within a radius of one thousand
(1,000) feet of the city limits, without having first obtained the necessary contractor registration and permit as
provided for in this article. All workmanship and materials shall meet the requirements of this article in regard to
the drilling, construction, maintenance, location and operation of water wells and systems. The forms, plans and
other information and documentation required to be provided under this article may be approved by the city or
its designees only if all provisions of this article are complied with. (Ordinance 19-05-39 adopted 5/21/19)
Sec. 94-304 Licensing requirements
Construction of water wells shall be performed only by those holding a valid water well drillers license issued
by the state. The license number shall be displayed during construction at the site of the work. The number shall
be clearly readable from the nearest traveled public roadway. Water well drillers must hold a current contractor
registration with the city and be in good standing. In addition, the approved permit issued by the city shall be
displayed during construction at the site of the work and remain on site until a final inspection is obtained.
(Ordinance 19-05-39 adopted 5/21/19)
Sec. 94-305 Permits, fees and inspection
(a) When permit required. It shall be unlawful to construct a water well or to overhaul a water well without
first securing a water well permit. “Overhaul” means work that is not considered routine maintenance.
(b) Permits not transferable. Each permit issued under this article shall be personal to the permittee. No such
permit shall be assigned or transferred to another person, and no person shall permit another person to obtain a
permit in his or her name or permit any new well construction or overhaul work to be performed under his or her
permit other than a person authorized to do the same.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 681/684
(c) False statement or bad faith. Any person who shall willfully make any false statement in order to obtain a
permit shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalty provided herein. Bad faith or unreasonable
delay in the performance of work under this article shall be deemed a sufficient reason for suspension of the
permit of the well driller so offending and no further permit shall be issued until such act of bad faith or
unreasonable delay has been corrected. Water well drillers in violation of any ordinance governing contractor
registration requirements may be suspended or have their registration revoked.
(d) Issuance of permit. The director of public works or his or her designated representative shall issue all
permits in accordance with the provisions and requirements of this article. Incomplete applications shall be
rejected or denied. All applications for permits shall be on the approved and current form and provide the
following information:
(1) Company name, address and telephone number of the well driller.
(2) Well driller's license number.
(3) Name, address, legal description and telephone number of property owner.
(4) Company name and city-assigned contractor registration number of irrigation contractor (if
applicable).
(5) Company name of backflow prevention assembly tester.
(6) A plan of the property that shows the location of the proposed water well, all buildings, septic
tanks, drain fields and other significant structures. The plan shall also show the location of structures
and adjacent property if within ten (10) feet of the property line. All setbacks and dimensions shall be
shown to be in conformance with section 94-310 (location) of this article.
(7) Proof of general liability and workers compensation insurance.
(8) Any other information deemed necessary by the director of public works or his or her
designated representative.
(e) Duration of permits. Every permit issued under the provisions of this article shall expire one hundred
eighty (180) days after the date issued. In every case where a permit is expired, a new permit shall be obtained
before any work is resumed.
(f) Permit and inspection fees. The permit and inspection fees provided for in this article shall be paid to the
city before the issuance of a permit and before any work is started. Fees shall not be collected prior to permit
approval. The fee shall be collected once an inspection is required for the following:
(1) Electrical inspection fees, includes electrical underground and electrical final inspections.
(2) Plumbing inspection fees, includes plumbing rough (disconnect) and plumbing final (RPBA)
inspections.
(3) Reinspection fees shall be in accordance with the city-approved fee schedule, as amended.
(4) Whenever any work for which a permit is required by this article has been commenced or
completed without first obtaining a permit, a special investigation shall be made before a permit may
be issued for such work.
(g) Inspections and tests.
(1) The director of public works or his or her designated representative shall have the right, at any
time, to enter the property for the purpose of inspections to ensure compliance with this article. In
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 682/684
addition, the director of public works or his or her designated representative shall have the right to
enter the property at any time in the future for the purpose of inspections to ensure that there are no
cross connections pursuant to Ordinance 18-05-24, as it exists or may be amended. Such right of
entry is a condition of the person's privilege to drill and operate a water well under this article.
(2) Director of public works or his or her designated representative may apply to the municipal
court or other court of competent jurisdiction for a search warrant if a person denies the director or
representative access to the property for such purposes or if the director or representative has
probable cause to believe there is a violation of this article or other enforcement order, a need to
conduct a required inspection or a threat to public health or safety.
(3) The original permit packet shall be located at the water meter at all times during construction.
Adequate provisions must be made to protect piping from freezing by insulation or heat or both on all
water wells and RPBAs. A RPBA is the only approved backflow prevention assembly allowed on
properties with water wells located within the city, its extraterritorial jurisdiction or any other
premises connected to the approved water supply source.
(4) The RPBA is to be installed at or near the point where the approved water supply source enters
the premises on the owner's side of the property line. For purposes of this article, the service
connection shall mean where the approved water supply enters the premises.
(6) The following inspections shall be required on all water wells drilled in the city limits or in the
extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) of the city, at any location within a radius of one thousand (1,000)
feet of the city limits:
(A) Plumbing rough to verify the disconnection of the existing irrigation system from the
approved water supply source (if applicable).
(B) Plumbing final to determine the proper installation of the RPBA. The original backflow
assembly test report, on an approved city form, must be in the permit packet at time of
inspection (if applicable).
(C) Electrical underground (EUG) to verify trench depth and proper wire is used (size and
type).
(D) Electrical final to verify disconnects are installed and appropriate panel box in place
(weather tight).
(E) Upon completion of the water well, the well driller shall furnish the director of public
works or his or her designated representative with a copy of the driller's report and a copy of the
water analysis. Any well that is not completed shall be sealed and considered a plugged or an
abandoned well in accordance with rules, regulations and statues of the state.
(F) A backflow assembly test report, on an approved city form, shall be submitted annually,
within twelve months from the last test. Only a state-licensed, city-registered backflow
prevention assembly tester (BPAT) shall perform the test pursuant to Ordinance 18-05-24, as it
exists or may be amended.
(Ordinance 19-05-39 adopted 5/21/19)
Sec. 94-306 Construction requirements
(a) Casing. A casing of steel or other approved material shall be provided to prevent caving of the formations
penetrated and to ensure protection of the water supply from contamination by water from shallow strata. The
wall shall be cased from the bottom of the drilled hole to twenty-four (24) inches above the finish grade or more
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 683/684
if required to keep surface water from entering casing. The well casing shall be cemented in place and sealed to
protect the underground water formation from potential contamination resulting from surface water or individual
waste disposal systems (i.e. septic tanks).
(b) Well seal. The annular space between the drilled hole and the well casing shall be sealed with concrete or
grout for a depth of at least ten (10) feet above the water producing formation. The casing shall be covered at the
ground with a concrete slab no less than twenty-four (24) inches by twenty-four (24) inches by twelve (12)
inches. The top of the slab shall protrude six (6) inches above finished grade and shall be sloped away from the
casing. The top of the casing shall be provided with a suitable well seal to prevent contamination of the well. If a
vent is provided on the casing, it shall be equipped with an elbow turned downward and screened with a sixteen
(16) mesh screen.
(c) Abandonment of wells. Permanently abandoned wells shall be filled with cement grout or concrete.
Abandoned wells shall not be used for the disposal of wastewater, septic tank effluent or other wastes.
(d) Screening. The water bearing formation shall be screened to control, among other similar conditions, the
flow or production of sands and formation materials.
(e) Compliance with Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation (TDLR) Rules and Regulations. The
permittee shall comply with any and all TDLR rules and regulations and other governing state statues.
(Ordinance 19-05-39 adopted 5/21/19)
Sec. 94-307 Applicability of state regulations
The regulations of the TDLR and the Texas Water Well Drillers Act, as they exist or may be amended, and as
they pertain to the construction of water wells, are hereby incorporated into this article and shall be strictly
complied with. (Ordinance 19-05-39 adopted 5/21/19)
Sec. 94-308 Domestic use prohibited
It shall be unlawful for a commercial water well to be used for domestic (household) use or for consumption by
the public. (Ordinance 19-05-39 adopted 5/21/19)
Sec. 94-309 Irrigation use
Any irrigation water well must be constructed in accordance with the provisions of this article. No irrigation
water well shall be used for domestic (potable water) use. No irrigation water well shall be shared without
complying with the following requirements:
(1) The owner of the water well, or proposed water well, shall furnish a notarized letter to the city
that includes the owner's name and address and the legal description of the property. The letter shall
include the names, addresses and legal descriptions of all properties intending to tie on to the well.
The letter shall state that the owner and all affected properties acknowledge and understand that the
well is for irrigation use only and not domestic (potable water) use.
(2) All owners of properties intending to tie on to the well shall:
(A) Hire a state-licensed, registered plumbing or irrigation contractor to obtain a plumbing
permit for the installation of the RPBA. A state licensed, registered backflow prevention
assembly tester shall be declared on the permit at time of application.
(B) Obtain a plumbing permit and pay inspection fees as required by the plumbing code and
section 94-305 (permits, fees and inspection) of this article.
9/6/2020 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 684/684
(C) Plumbing permits shall expire ninety (90) days after the date issued. In every case where
a permit is expired, a new permit shall be obtained before any work is resumed.
(Ordinance 19-05-39 adopted 5/21/19)
Sec. 94-310 Location
Water wells shall be constructed no closer to property lines or significant structures than the following distances:
(1) Front property line: Twenty-five (25) feet;
(2) Side property lines: Five (5) feet;
(3) Rear property line: Ten (10) feet;
(4) Buildings: Ten (10) feet;
(5) Power lines: Thirty (30) feet;
(6) Septic tanks and drain fields: One hundred (100) feet;
(7) Septic tanks and drain fields: One hundred (100) feet if well is cement encased;
(8) Septic spray heads/soil absorption area: One hundred (100) feet;
(9) Barns and animal pens: One hundred fifty (150) feet; and
(10) Permanent derricks and towers: No closer than forty (40) feet to a property line.
(Ordinance 19-05-39 adopted 5/21/19)
Sec. 94-311 Cross connections
In addition to the required RPBA, an approved air gap with a physical separation of at least twelve (12) inches
between the potable water system and the auxiliary water system pursuant to Ordinance 18-05-24, as it exists or
may be amended. (Ordinance 19-05-39 adopted 5/21/19)
Sec. 94-312 Debris, etc. on public rights-of-way
There shall be no debris, dirty water, mud or any other refuse dumped or discharged onto public rights-of-way.
The well driller will be responsible for the cleaning of any discharge and debris in the right-of-way. The driller
shall control and dispose of, among other things, all drilling, cuttings, mud and water so as not to create a mud
pit or disposal operation at the well site. (Ordinance 19-05-39 adopted 5/21/19)
Sec. 94-313 Conflicts between this article and other ordinances or codes
The provisions of this article are cumulative of all city ordinances. If any other ordinances or codes conflict with
this article, the more restrictive provision shall apply. (Ordinance 19-05-39 adopted 5/21/19)

CITY OF FRISCO
ZONING ORDINANCE
Adoption Date: 04/05/11 (ORD. 11-04-09)
As Amended Through: 06/18/13 (Ord. 13-06-36)
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK FOR DOUBLE-SIDED PRINTING
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Adoption and Summary of Amendments
Ordinance Number
Date of Adoption
Case Number
Summary
11-04-09
04/05/2011
ZA09-0006
Adoption of new Zoning Ordinance; amends all previous Zoning Ordinances in their entirety.
11-08-27
08/01/2011
ZA10-0001
Amends Section 3.02.01. Conditional Development Standards regarding (14) Convenience Store with Gas Pumps. Permits Tollway Overlay District in its entirety; permits a convenience store with gas pumps at the third corner of the intersection the Dallas North Tollway and a major thoroughfare upon approval of a Specific Use Permit.
11-08-29
08/01/2011
ZA11-0001
Amends Subsection 3.02 Use Chart permitting a Mortuary/Funeral Parlor in certain single family districts as a Conditional Use.
Amends 3.02.01. Conditional Development Standards, establishing a new standard (34) Mortuary/Funeral Parlor.
12-12-81
12/18/2012
ZA12-0002
Amends Subsection 3.02 Use Chart by amending “Package Sales” to read “Alcoholic Beverage Sales.”
Amends 3.02.01. Conditional Development Standards by amending standard (24) Alcoholic Beverage Sales in its entirety.
Amends Subsection 7.01 Terms and Words Defined by deleting the term, “Package Sales” and adding a new term, “Alcoholic Beverage Sales.”
13-03-18
03/05/2013
ZA12-0001
Amends Subsection 3.02.01. Conditional Development Standards by amending standard (18) Home Occupation in its entirety.
Amends Subsection 7.01 Terms and Words Defined by deleting the term, “Cottage Food Production Operation.”
13-06-36
06/18/2013
ZA13-0001
Amends Subsection 3.02 Use Chart by permitting Household Care Facilities per new Conditional Development Standard (35) in lieu of permitted by right in multiple zoning districts.
Amends Subsection 3.02.01. Conditional Development Standards by amending standard (27) Rehabilitation Care Facility and establishing a new standard (35) Household Care Facilities.
Amends Subsection 7.01 Terms and Words Defined by amending definitions for “Household Care Facilities” and “Rehabilitation In-Home Care.”
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 4 Table of Contents
THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK FOR DOUBLE-SIDED PRINTING
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section 1. General Provisions..........................................................................................................................9
Subsection 1.01. Enacting Clause..........................................................................................................................10
Subsection 1.02. Purpose......................................................................................................................................10
Subsection 1.03. Zoning District Map ...................................................................................................................10
Subsection 1.04. Zoning District Boundaries ........................................................................................................12
Subsection 1.05. Compliance Required / Interpretation / Rules of Construction ................................................13
Subsection 1.06. Nonconforming Uses and Structures.........................................................................................15
Section 2. Zoning Districts ............................................................................................................................. 19
Subsection 2.01. Zoning Districts Established.......................................................................................................20
Subsection 2.02. Equivalency Table......................................................................................................................21
Subsection 2.03. Residential Zoning Districts .......................................................................................................22
Subsection 2.04. Nonresidential Zoning Districts .................................................................................................39
Subsection 2.05. Special Zoning Districts..............................................................................................................54
Subsection 2.06. Development Standards Tables.................................................................................................84
Section 3. Land Uses ..................................................................................................................................... 87
Subsection 3.01. Use of Land and Buildings..........................................................................................................88
Subsection 3.02. Use Chart ...................................................................................................................................89
Section 4. Site Development Requirements ................................................................................................ 115
Subsection 4.01. Tree Preservation Requirements.............................................................................................116
Subsection 4.02. Landscape Requirements ........................................................................................................122
Subsection 4.03. Screening Standards ................................................................................................................135
Subsection 4.04. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements........................................................................147
Subsection 4.05. Lighting Standards ...................................................................................................................159
Subsection 4.06. Accessory Structure Standards................................................................................................166
Subsection 4.07. Supplementary Regulations ....................................................................................................172
Subsection 4.08. Nonresidential Development Standards .................................................................................190
Subsection 4.09. Nonresidential Design Standards ............................................................................................193
Subsection 4.10. Residential Cluster Development Option ................................................................................197
Subsection 4.11. Voluntary Buffer Areas for Creeks and Tributaries .................................................................202
Subsection 4.12. Multifamily Development Standards.......................................................................................205
Subsection 4.13. Usable Open Space Requirements ..........................................................................................212
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 6 Table of Contents
Section 5. Development Review Bodies ......................................................................................................217
Subsection 5.01. Director of Development Services .......................................................................................... 218
Subsection 5.02. Planning & Zoning Commission .............................................................................................. 221
Subsection 5.03. City Council ............................................................................................................................. 222
Subsection 5.04. Board of Adjustment............................................................................................................... 223
Section 6. Development Review Procedures ...............................................................................................227
Subsection 6.01. Zoning Upon Annexation ........................................................................................................ 228
Subsection 6.02. Platting Property Not Zoned................................................................................................... 229
Subsection 6.03. Creation of Building Site ......................................................................................................... 230
Subsection 6.04. Certificates of Occupancy and Compliance ............................................................................ 231
Subsection 6.05. Site Plan Requirements........................................................................................................... 232
Subsection 6.06. Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance / Districts and Administrative Procedures ............... 241
Subsection 6.07. Vesting and Complete Application Requirements .................................................................. 245
Subsection 6.08. Dormant Development Projects / Expired Projects................................................................ 248
Subsection 6.09. Variance Procedures............................................................................................................... 249
Subsection 6.10. Special Exception for Building Official Error ........................................................................... 250
Subsection 6.11. Amortization of Nonconforming Uses .................................................................................... 251
Subsection 6.12. Reinstatement of Nonconforming Rights ............................................................................... 253
Subsection 6.13. Landscape Plan Review........................................................................................................... 254
Subsection 6.14. PD Application and Review..................................................................................................... 255
Subsection 6.15. Specific Use Permit (SUP) Application and Review................................................................. 261
Subsection 6.16. Façade Plan Review ................................................................................................................ 263
Subsection 6.17. Historic Landmark Procedures................................................................................................ 265
Subsection 6.18. Alternative Compliance Standards ......................................................................................... 267
Subsection 6.19. Appeals and the Appeal Process............................................................................................. 268
Section 7. Definitions ..................................................................................................................................273
Subsection 7.01. Terms and Words Defined ...................................................................................................... 274
Section 8. Administrative Clauses................................................................................................................313
Subsection 8.01. Savings / Repealing ................................................................................................................. 314
Subsection 8.02. Penalty for Violations.............................................................................................................. 314
Subsection 8.03. Severability ............................................................................................................................. 314
Subsection 8.04. Estoppel / Waiver ................................................................................................................... 314
Subsection 8.05. Publication .............................................................................................................................. 315
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 9. Appendices ................................................................................................................................. 317
Subsection 9.01. Illustrations..............................................................................................................................318
Subsection 9.02. Planned Developments ...........................................................................................................328
Subsection 9.03. Specific Use Permits ................................................................................................................328
Subsection 9.04. Historic Landmark Designations ..............................................................................................328
Subsection 9.05. Conversion Chart for Ordinance Nos. 93-07-11 and 00-11-01................................................329
Subsection 9.06. Downtown Architectural Design Standards; OTC & OTR.........................................................331
Subsection 9.07. Form-Based Code Manual .......................................................................................................332
Page Navigation – Instructions
Hyperlink Buttons
For easy navigation between hyperlinks within an Adobe PDF document, please select the following buttons within the Page Navigation Toolbar.
Buttons:
When clicking on hyperlinks, these buttons allow a reader to jump backwards or forwards within the document to the previous page view before a hyperlink was clicked.
Below are instructions for Adobe Acrobat to show the “Previous View” button and the “Next View” button:
1) Click on the “Tools” tab.
2) Click on the “Customize Toolbars” tab.
3) Scroll down to “Page Navigation Tool Bar.”
4) Click on the check boxes next to “Previous View” and “Next View” buttons.
5) Click the “OK.”
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 8 Table of Contents
THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK FOR DOUBLE-SIDED PRINTING
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 1. General Provisions
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 10 Section 1: General Provisions
Subsection 1.01. Enacting Clause
That the Zoning Ordinance, Ordinance Number 11-04-09, of the City of Frisco, Texas, as passed and approved on April 5, 2011, together with all amendments thereto is hereby amended in its entirety to read as follows.
Subsection 1.02. Purpose
1.02.01. Zoning Ordinance Guiding Principles
The zoning regulations and districts as herein established have been made in accordance with an adopted comprehensive plan for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the City.
1.02.02. Zoning Ordinance Intent
The zoning regulations and districts have been designed to lessen the congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to ensure adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of population; and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements.
1.02.03. Zoning Ordinance Considerations
The zoning regulations and districts have been made with reasonable consideration, among other things, for the character of the district, and its peculiar suitability for the particular uses specified; and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the City consistent with the Comprehensive Plan. The Comprehensive Plan has been used as a guide to develop the regulations within this Zoning Ordinance.
Subsection 1.03. Zoning District Map
1.03.01. Zoning Districts Shown on the Zoning District Map
The boundaries of zoning districts set out herein are delineated upon a Zoning District Map of the City, adopted as part of this ordinance as fully as if the same were set forth herein in detail.
1.03.02. Official Zoning District Map
(A) Official Zoning District Map Filing
(1) One original of the Zoning District Map shall be filed in the office of the City Secretary and labeled as Ordinance Number 11-04-09.
(2) This copy shall be the “Official Zoning District Map” and shall bear the signature of the Mayor and attestation of the City Secretary.
(B) Official Zoning District Map Management
(1) The Official Zoning District Map shall not be changed in any manner.
(2) In case of any question, the Official Zoning District Map, together with amending ordinances, shall be controlling.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 1: General Provisions Page | 11
1.03.03. Current Zoning District Map
(A) Chief Building Official Maintains the Current Zoning District Map
An additional copy of the original Zoning District Map shall be placed in the office of the Chief Building Official.
(1) The copy shall be used for reference and shall be maintained up-to-date by posting thereon all subsequent amendments and shall be identified as the Current Zoning District Map.
(2) In order to provide and maintain a current-to-date and accurate map of all zoning district boundaries, the City shall maintain electronic mapping files or other similar Geographic Information System (GIS) files of the Official Zoning District Map with all approved zoning amendments.
(3) In case of any question involving a district designation within the City, the updated copy of the Official Zoning District Map on file in the office of the Chief Building Official is presumed correct, and the person challenging the accuracy of that copy has the burden of presenting the Official Zoning Map, together with the ordinances amending the Map, to prove the inaccuracy of the updated copy.
(B) Zoning Map Reproductions
Reproductions for informational purposes may be made of the Official or Current Zoning District Map.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 12 Section 1: General Provisions
Subsection 1.04. Zoning District Boundaries
1.04.01. District Boundary Interpretation Rules
The district boundary lines shown on the Official Zoning District Map are usually along streets, alleys, property lines, or extensions thereof. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Zoning District Map, the following rules shall apply.
(A) Centerlines
Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerline.
(B) Platted Lot Lines
Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines.
(C) City Limits
Boundaries indicated as approximately following City limits shall be construed as following city limits.
(D) Railroad Lines
Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the right-of-way lines.
(E) Shore Lines
Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to follow such shore lines, and in the event of change in the shore line shall be construed as moving with the actual shore line; boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of streams, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerline, and in the event of change in the centerline, shall be construed to move with such centerline.
(F) Parallel to or Extensions of Features
Boundaries indicated as a parallel to or extensions of features indicated in Subsections (A) through (E) above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the original zoning maps shall be determined by the scale of the map.
(G) Vacated Public Way
Whenever any street, alley, or other public way is vacated by official action of the City Council or whenever such area is franchised for building purposes, the vacated area shall be rezoned according to Subsection 6.06 Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance / Districts and Administrative Procedures (Page 241).
(H) Boundary as a Condition of Zoning Approval
The zoning classification applied to a tract of land adjacent to a street shall extend to the centerline of the street, unless as a condition of zoning approval, it is stated that the zoning classification shall not apply to the street.
(I) Zoning Ambiguity
Where physical features on the ground conflict with information shown on the Official Zoning District Map, or when there arises a question as to how or whether a parcel of property is zoned and such question cannot be resolved by the application of Subsections (A) through (H), the property shall be considered as classified, AG – Agricultural District, in the same manner as provided for newly annexed territory and the issuance of a building permit and the determination of permanent zoning shall be in accordance with the provisions provided in Subsection 6.01. Zoning Upon Annexation (Page 228) for temporarily zoned areas.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 1: General Provisions Page | 13
Subsection 1.05. Compliance Required / Interpretation / Rules of Construction
1.05.01. Compliance Required
(A) Applicability
Compliance with the Zoning Ordinance shall apply to all land, buildings, structures or appurtenances located within the City which are hereafter:
(1) Occupied,
(2) Used,
(3) Erected,
(4) Altered,
(5) Removed,
(6) Placed,
(7) Demolished, or
(8) Converted.
(B) Compliance with Zoning District
The land, buildings, structures or appurtenances described in 1.05.01. (A) above shall be in conformance with the zoning regulations prescribed for the zoning district in which such land or building is located as hereinafter provided or subject to penalties as per Subsection 8.02. Penalty for Violations (Page 314) of this ordinance.
1.05.02. Interpretation
(A) Restrictiveness
Where the regulations imposed herein are either more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable conditions imposed by any other provision of any other applicable law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive and impose higher standards are the requirements that shall govern.
(B) Abrogation
The provisions of these regulations are not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or other private agreement, provided that where the requirements of these regulations are more restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than such easement, covenant or other private agreement, the requirements of these regulations shall govern.
(C) Cumulative Effect
The provisions of these regulations are cumulative and additional limitations upon all other laws and ordinances heretofore passed or which may be passed hereafter governing any subject matter set forth in the provisions of these regulations.
(D) Error Correction
In the event that any property or Zoning District set forth on the Zoning District Map as provided in Subsection 1.03 Zoning District Map (Page 10) of this ordinance is misnamed, designated incorrectly, the boundaries are incorrect or the property is omitted, in part or in whole, the Zoning District Map may be amended and/or supplemented according to the following.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 14 Section 1: General Provisions
(1) Applicants
The property owner of said tract, the City Council, or the Planning & Zoning Commission may submit an application to the Director to initiate the error correction process.
(2) Process
The error correction shall be processed as a zoning map or text amendment according Subsection 6.06 Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance / Districts and Administrative Procedures (Page 241).
(E) Director Authority to Interpret the Zoning Ordinance
(1) Unless specified within a section, the Director shall have the authority to interpret and enforce this Zoning Ordinance.
(2) A person aggrieved by the Director’s interpretation may appeal the interpretation to the Board of Adjustment pursuant to 6.19.07. Appeal of an Administrative Decision (Page 269).
1.05.03. Rules of Construction
The language set forth in these regulations shall be interpreted in accordance with the following rules of construction.
(A) Number
The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.;
(B) Tense
The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future the present.
(C) Mandatory and Permissive Language
The word "shall" and "must" are mandatory while the word "may" is permissive.
(D) Gender Terms
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
(E) Parentheses
Any word appearing in parentheses directly after a word herein defined shall be construed in the same sense as that word.
(F) Conflicts
If there is an expressed conflict:
(1) The text of this ordinance controls over the charts or any other graphic display in this ordinance; and
(2) The use regulations control over the district regulations in this ordinance.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 1: General Provisions Page | 15
Subsection 1.06. Nonconforming Uses and Structures
1.06.01. Intent of Provisions
(A) Existence of Nonconformities
(1) The purpose of this Subsection 1.06 is to establish provisions for the allowance and potential alteration of uses, lots and/or structures which do not conform to currently applicable standards or regulations, but which were in conformance with standards in place at the time of their inception, and have been rendered nonconforming due to a change in the applicable standards and regulations.
a. Nonconformities occur in three (3) general categories, or combinations thereof.
1. Nonconforming lots as described in 1.06.02. (A)(1). For example, a nonconforming lot can be nonconforming as to lot area or dimension requirement.
2. Nonconforming structures as described in 1.06.02. (A)(1). For example, a nonconforming structure can be nonconforming as to setback, yard, or height lot area or dimension requirement.
3. Nonconforming uses are uses as described in 1.06.02. (A)(1).
(2) It is the declared intent of this section that nonconforming uses and structures eventually be eliminated and be required to comply with the regulations of the Zoning Ordinance, having due regard for the property rights of the person affected, the public welfare, and the character of the surrounding area.
(B) Limit Incompatibility
It is further the intent of this Subsection 1.06 that nonconforming uses shall not be:
(1) Enlarged upon,
(2) Expanded or extended, or
(3) Used as a basis for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
(C) Incompatible Uses
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, nonconforming uses are hereby declared incompatible with the permitted uses in the districts involved.
1.06.02. Establishment of Legal Nonconforming Status
(A) Existence
For purposes of interpretation of this subsection, any uses, structures and/or lots which in whole or part are not in conformance with current zoning standards shall be considered as follows.
(1) Legal Nonconforming
Those uses, structures or lots which in whole or part are not in conformance with current zoning standards, but were legally established at a prior date at which time they were in conformance with applicable standards. Such uses, structures or lots may be maintained or potentially altered subject to the provisions of this subsection.
(2) Illegal Status
Those uses, structures or lots which in whole or part are not in conformance with current zoning standards and were not in conformance with applicable standards at the time of their inception shall not be considered nonconforming, but shall be considered illegal uses, structures, or lots and shall not be approved for any alteration or expansion, and shall undertake necessary remedial measures to reach conformance with current standards, or be discontinued.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 16 Section 1: General Provisions
(B) Time of Adoption
Any use, platted lot, and/or structure is a lawful use at the time of the adoption of any amendment to this ordinance but by such amendment is placed in a district wherein such use, platted lot, and/or structure is not otherwise permitted shall be deemed legal nonconforming.
(C) Annexation
If a use, platted lot and/or structure was in existence at the time of annexation to the City and has since been in regular and continuous use shall be deemed legal nonconforming.
1.06.03. Burden of Demonstration
The burden of establishing that any nonconformity is a legal nonconformity as defined in this subsection shall be borne by the owner or proponent of such nonconformity.
1.06.04. Continuing Lawful Use of Property and Existence of Structures
(A) Abandonment of Nonconforming Use
If a nonconforming use on a particular parcel of land shall cease operations for a period of more than six (6) months, then such nonconforming use shall be deemed to be permanently abandoned. Unless the Board of Adjustment reinstates the nonconforming rights pursuant to Subsection 6.12 Reinstatement of Nonconforming Rights (Page 253) of this Ordinance, such a use shall not be instituted on that parcel or other parcel in any district which does not permit the discontinued use. For the purpose of this paragraph, to “cease operations” shall mean to intentionally terminate operations of the nonconforming use. Any nonconforming use which does not involve a permanent type of structure or operation and which is moved from the premises shall be considered to have been abandoned.
(B) Reinstatement of Nonconforming Use Rights
An owner and/or operator of a nonconforming use that has been deemed permanently abandoned pursuant to 1.06.04. (A), may request that the nonconforming rights to the use be reinstated pursuant to Subsection 6.12 Reinstatement of Nonconforming Rights (Page 253) of this Ordinance.
(C) Prohibited Expansion or Reoccupation
A nonconforming use or structure shall not be expanded, reoccupied with another nonconforming use, or increased as of the effective date of this ordinance except as provided in 1.06.06. Expansion of Nonconforming Uses and Structures (Page 17).
(D) Single Family Residential Uses
(1) Conforming single family residential uses on platted lots approved prior to April 5, 2011, which may now be nonconforming due to stricter standards, shall be deemed in conformance with this ordinance as long as the use of the lot is allowed in the respective district.
(2) Only the lot size, depth, setbacks and width shall be allowed to be less than the regulations prescribed in the zoning district in which it is located. All other regulations of this ordinance shall be met, or the lot shall be considered nonconforming.
(E) Existing Platted Lots are Conforming Lots
Any existing vacant lot platted prior to April 5, 2011, which was legally conforming, shall be deemed a conforming lot.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 1: General Provisions Page | 17
1.06.05. Changing Uses and Nonconforming Rights
(A) Nonconforming Use to Conforming Use
Any nonconforming use may be changed to a conforming use, and once such change is made, the use shall not be changed back to a nonconforming use.
(B) Nonconforming Use to Another Nonconforming Use
A nonconforming use may not be changed to another nonconforming use.
(C) Conforming Use in a Nonconforming Structure
Where a conforming use is located in a nonconforming structure, the use may be changed to another conforming use by the process outlined in 1.06.06. Expansion of Nonconforming Uses and Structures (Page 17).
1.06.06. Expansion of Nonconforming Uses and Structures
An expansion of a nonconforming use or structure is allowed in accordance with the following.
(A) Nonconforming Use Expansion in Existing Building
A nonconforming use located within a building may be extended throughout the existing building, provided.
(1) No structural alteration, except as provided in 1.06.06. (E) below, may be made on or in the building except those required by law to preserve such building in a structurally sound condition.
(2) The number of dwelling units or rooms in a nonconforming residential use shall not be increased so as to exceed the number of dwelling units or rooms existing at the time said use became a nonconforming use.
(B) Nonconforming Use Prohibited from Expansion beyond Existing Building
Nonconforming use within a building shall not be extended to occupy any land outside the building.
(C) Off-Street Loading and Parking
Nonconforming use of land or building shall not be enlarged, increased, or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the time the land became a nonconforming use, except to provide off-street loading or off-street parking space.
(D) Residential Lot Exemption
The minimum residential lot areas for the various zoning districts shall be in accordance with their respective districts except that a lot having less area than herein required which was an official "lot of record" prior to April 5, 2011, may be used for a single family dwelling.
(E) Expansion of Nonconforming Buildings with Conforming Uses
Buildings or structures which do not conform to the area regulations or development standards in this ordinance but where the uses are deemed conforming shall not increase the gross floor area greater than ten (10) percent from the date when the building became nonconforming.
(F) Reuse of Abandoned or Vacant Buildings by Conforming Uses Allowed
Buildings or structures which have been vacant or abandoned for more than six (6) months and do not meet the current area regulations or development standards shall be allowed to be re-occupied by a conforming use.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 18 Section 1: General Provisions
1.06.07. Restoration of Nonconforming Structures
(A) Total Destruction
If a nonconforming structure is destroyed by fire, the elements, or other cause, it may not be rebuilt except to conform to the provisions of this Ordinance.
(B) Partial Destruction
In the case of partial destruction of a nonconforming structure not exceeding fifty-one (51) percent of its total appraised value as determined by the Appraisal District, reconstruction will be permitted, but the existing square footage or function of the nonconforming structure cannot be expanded.
1.06.08. Movement of Nonconforming Structures
(A) Relocation of a Nonconforming Structure within a Platted Lot
Nonconforming structures may be relocated within the same platted lot.
(B) Compliance
Nonconforming structures shall comply with all setback and screening requirements.
1.06.09. Completion of Structures
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, or designated use of the following.
(A) Approved Building
A building or structure for which a building permit has been issued or a Site Plan approved prior to April 5, 2011.
(B) Building in the Approval Process
A building or structure for which a complete application for a building permit was accepted by the Chief Building Official on or before the effective date of these regulations, provided however, that such building permit shall comply with all applicable ordinances in effect on the date such application was filed.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 2. Zoning Districts
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 20 Section 2: Zoning Districts
Subsection 2.01. Zoning Districts Established
2.01.01. Zoning Districts Established
The City is hereby divided into the following zoning districts. The use, height and area regulations as set out herein apply to each district. The districts established herein shall be known as the following.
ZONING DISTRICTS TABLE
Section
District Abbreviation – District Name
Page Number
Residential Zoning Districts
2.03.01.
AG – Agricultural District
22
2.03.02.
RE – Residential Estate District
23
2.03.03.
SF-16 – Single Family Residential-16 District
24
2.03.04.
SF-12.5 – Single Family Residential-12.5 District
25
2.03.05.
SF-10 – Single Family Residential-10 District
26
2.03.06.
SF-8.5 – Single Family Residential-8.5 District
27
2.03.07.
SF-7 – Single Family Residential-7 District
28
2.03.08.
OTR – Original Town Residential District
29
2.03.09.
PH – Patio Home District
31
2.03.10.
2F – Two Family Residential (Duplex) District
33
2.03.11.
TH – Townhome District
34
2.03.12.
MF-15 – Multifamily-15 District
36
2.03.13.
MF-19 – Multifamily-19 District
37
2.03.14.
MH – Manufactured Home District
38
Nonresidential Zoning Districts
2.04.01.
O-1 – Office-1 District
39
2.04.02.
O-2 – Office-2 District
40
2.04.03.
R – Retail District
42
2.04.04.
OTC – Original Town Commercial District
43
2.04.05.
H – Highway District
49
2.04.06.
C-1 – Commercial-1 District
50
2.04.07.
C-2 – Commercial-2 District
51
2.04.08.
IT – Information and Technology District
52
2.04.09.
I – Industrial District
53
Special Zoning Districts
2.05.01.
PD – Planned Development District
54
2.05.02.
SUP or “S” – Specific Use Permits
55
2.05.03.
HL – Historic Landmark District
56
2.05.04.
PRO – Preston Road Overlay District
57
2.05.05.
TO – Tollway Overlay District
80
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 2: Zoning Districts Page | 21
Subsection 2.02. Equivalency Table
The following table will identify zoning districts adopted in previous Ordinances and the District which now applies in this Ordinance to those Districts.
Equivalency Table
Prior To Ordinance 84-02-03
Abbreviated Designation Ord. 84-02-03
Abbreviated Designation Ord. 93-07-11 and This Ordinance
Abbreviated Designation Ord. 00-11-01
Current Zoning District
A
A
AG – Agricultural District
RE
RE – Residential Estate District
SF-1
R-1
SF-1
SF-16 – Single Family Residential-16 District
SF-1.5
R-2
SF-2
SF-12.5 – Single Family Residential-12.5 District
SF-3
SF-10 – Single Family Residential-10 District
SF-2
R-3
SF-4
SF-8.5 – Single Family Residential-8.5 District
SF-3
R-4 & R-5
SF-5
SF-7 – Single Family Residential-7 District
SF-6
OTR
OTR – Original Town Residential District
PH
PH
PH – Patio Home District
D-1 & D-2
2F
2F – Two Family Residential (Duplex) District
TH
TH
TH – Townhome District
MF-1
MF-1
MF-15 – Multifamily-15 District
MF-2
MF-2
MF-19 – Multifamily-19 District
MH
MH
MH – Manufactured Home District
O
O-1
O-1 – Office-1 District
O-2
O-2 – Office-2 District
NS
NS
SC & LR
R
R – Retail District
CB
OT
OTC
OTC – Original Town Commercial District
H
H – Highway District
LC
C-1
C-1 – Commercial-1 District
HC
C-2
C-2 – Commercial-2 District
IT – Information and Technology District
LI & HI
I
I – Industrial District
IP
PD
PD
PD – Planned Development District
S
SUP or S
SUP or “S” – Specific Use Permits
HL – Historic Landmark District
PRO – Preston Road Overlay District
TO – Tollway Overlay District
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 22 Section 2: Zoning Districts
Subsection 2.03. Residential Zoning Districts
2.03.01. AG – Agricultural District
(A) General Purpose and Descriptions
The AG – Agricultural District is intended to provide a location for principally undeveloped or vacant
land situated on the fringe of an urban area and used for agricultural purposes, but may become an urban area in the future.
Generally, the AG – Agricultural District, will be near development; therefore, the agricultural activities conducted in the AG – Agricultural District should not be detrimental to urban land uses.
The types of uses and the area and intensity of uses permitted in this District shall encourage and protect agricultural uses until urbanization is warranted and the appropriate change in district classification is made.
(B) Permitted Uses
Uses permitted in the AG – Agricultural District are outlined in Subsection 3.01. Use of Land and Buildings (Page 88).
(1) Barns or Stables
Barns and stables shall not be considered an accessory building or use and shall be treated according to Subsection 3.02 Use Chart (Page 89) under the definition Farm, Ranch, Stable, Garden, or Orchard (Page 286).
(C) Area Regulations
Property and buildings shall conform to the related standards listed within 2.06.04. Residential Districts Development Standards (Page 85) and the following regulations. If there is a conflict between 2.06.04. and the following regulations, the following regulations shall control.
(1) Front Yard Coverage
The cumulative area of any driveway plus any impermeable surface area located between the front property line and any front building wall shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the area between the front property line and any front building wall, as shown in Figure 9.01.01.4: Front Yard Coverage (Page 319).
(D) Other Regulations
(1) Subsection 4.03 Screening Standards (Page 135)
(2) Subsection 4.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements (Page 147)
(3) Subsection 4.06 Accessory Structure Standards (Page 166)
(4) Subsection 4.07 Supplementary Regulations (Page 172)
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 2: Zoning Districts Page | 23
2.03.02. RE – Residential Estate District
(A) General Purpose and Descriptions
The RE – Residential Estate District will provide single family detached dwelling units on large parcels of land.
(B) Permitted Uses
Uses permitted in the RE – Residential Estate District are outlined in Subsection 3.01. Use of Land and Buildings (Page 88).
(C) Area Regulations
Property and buildings shall conform to the related standards listed within 2.06.04. Residential Districts Development Standards (Page 85) and the following regulations. If there is a conflict between 2.06.04. and the following regulations, the following regulations shall control.
(1) Front Yard Coverage
The cumulative area of any driveway plus any impermeable surface area located between the front property line and any front building wall shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the area between the front property line and any front building wall, as shown in Figure 9.01.01.4: Front Yard Coverage (Page 319).
(D) Other Regulations
(1) Subsection 4.03 Screening Standards (Page 135)
(2) Subsection 4.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements (Page 147)
(3) Subsection 4.06 Accessory Structure Standards (Page 166)
(4) Subsection 4.07 Supplementary Regulations (Page 172)
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 24 Section 2: Zoning Districts
2.03.03. SF-16 – Single Family Residential-16 District
(A) General Purpose and Descriptions
The SF-16 – Single Family Residential-16 District is intended to provide for development of single family detached dwelling units on lots of not less than sixteen thousand (16,000) square feet.
Other uses, such as religious and educational facilities will be provided for to maintain a balanced, orderly, convenient and attractive residential area.
(B) Permitted Uses
Uses permitted in the SF-16 – Single Family Residential-16 District are outlined in Subsection 3.01. Use of Land and Buildings (Page 88).
(C) Area Regulations
Property and buildings shall conform to the related standards listed within 2.06.04. Residential Districts Development Standards (Page 85) and the following regulations. If there is a conflict between 2.06.04. and the following regulations, the following regulations shall control.
(1) Front Yard Coverage
The cumulative area of any driveway plus any impermeable surface area located between the front property line and any front building wall shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the area between the front property line and any front building wall, as shown in Figure 9.01.01.4: Front Yard Coverage (Page 319).
(D) Other Regulations
(1) Subsection 4.03 Screening Standards (Page 135)
(2) Subsection 4.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements (Page 147)
(3) Subsection 4.06 Accessory Structure Standards (Page 166)
(4) Subsection 4.07 Supplementary Regulations (Page 172)
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 2: Zoning Districts Page | 25
2.03.04. SF-12.5 – Single Family Residential-12.5 District
(A) General Purpose and Descriptions
The SF-12.5 – Single Family Residential-12.5 District is intended to provide for development of single family detached dwelling units on lots of not less than twelve thousand, five hundred (12,500) square feet.
(B) Permitted Uses
Uses permitted in the SF-12.5 – Single Family Residential-12.5 District are outlined in Subsection 3.01. Use of Land and Buildings (Page 88).
(C) Area Regulations
Property and buildings shall conform to the related standards listed within 2.06.04. Residential Districts Development Standards (Page 85) and the following regulations. If there is a conflict between 2.06.04. and the following regulations, the following regulations shall control.
(1) Front Yard Coverage
The cumulative area of any driveway plus any impermeable surface area located between the front property line and any front building wall shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the area between the front property line and any front building wall, as shown in Figure 9.01.01.4: Front Yard Coverage (Page 319).
(D) Other Regulations
(1) Subsection 4.03 Screening Standards (Page 135)
(2) Subsection 4.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements (Page 147)
(3) Subsection 4.06 Accessory Structure Standards (Page 166)
(4) Subsection 4.07 Supplementary Regulations (Page 172)
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 26 Section 2: Zoning Districts
2.03.05. SF-10 – Single Family Residential-10 District
(A) General Purpose and Descriptions
The SF-10 – Single Family Residential-10 District is intended to be similar to the SF-12.5 – Single Family Residential-12.5 District except composed of detached, single family residences on lots of not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
(B) Permitted Uses
Uses permitted in the SF-10 – Single Family Residential-10 District are outlined in Subsection 3.01. Use of Land and Buildings (Page 88).
(C) Area Regulations
Property and buildings shall conform to the related standards listed within 2.06.04. Residential Districts Development Standards (Page 85) and the following regulations. If there is a conflict between 2.06.04. and the following regulations, the following regulations shall control.
(1) Front Yard Coverage
The cumulative area of any driveway plus any impermeable surface area located between the front property line and any front building wall shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the area between the front property line and any front building wall, as shown in Figure 9.01.01.4: Front Yard Coverage (Page 319).
(D) Other Regulations
(1) Subsection 4.03 Screening Standards (Page 135)
(2) Subsection 4.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements (Page 147)
(3) Subsection 4.06 Accessory Structure Standards (Page 166)
(4) Subsection 4.07 Supplementary Regulations (Page 172)
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 2: Zoning Districts Page | 27
2.03.06. SF-8.5 – Single Family Residential-8.5 District
(A) General Purpose and Descriptions
The SF-8.5 – Single Family Residential-8.5 District is intended to be similar to the SF-12.5 and SF-10 Districts except composed of detached, single family residences on lots of not less than eight thousand five hundred (8,500) square feet.
(B) Permitted Uses
Uses permitted in the SF-8.5 – Single Family Residential-8.5 District are outlined in Subsection 3.01. Use of Land and Buildings (Page 88).
(C) Area Regulations
Property and buildings shall conform to the related standards listed within 2.06.04. Residential Districts Development Standards (Page 85) and the following regulations. If there is a conflict between 2.06.04. and the following regulations, the following regulations shall control.
(1) Front Yard Coverage
The cumulative area of any driveway plus any impermeable surface area located between the front property line and any front building wall shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the area between the front property line and any front building wall, as shown in Figure 9.01.01.4: Front Yard Coverage (Page 319).
(D) Other Regulations
(1) Subsection 4.03 Screening Standards (Page 135)
(2) Subsection 4.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements (Page 147)
(3) Subsection 4.06 Accessory Structure Standards (Page 166)
(4) Subsection 4.07 Supplementary Regulations (Page 172)
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 28 Section 2: Zoning Districts
2.03.07. SF-7 – Single Family Residential-7 District
(A) General Purpose and Descriptions
The SF-7 – Single Family Residential-7 District is designed to provide for a suitable residential environment for family life on parcels of land smaller and more compact in size, having a minimum lot area of seven thousand (7,000) square feet, while limiting the uses to single family residences and their community services and facilities.
(B) Permitted Uses
Uses permitted in the SF-7 – Single Family Residential-7 District are outlined in Subsection 3.01. Use of Land and Buildings (Page 88).
(C) Area Regulations
Property and buildings shall conform to the related standards listed within 2.06.04. Residential Districts Development Standards (Page 85) and the following regulations. If there is a conflict between 2.06.04. and the following regulations, the following regulations shall control.
(1) Front Yard Coverage
The cumulative area of any driveway plus any impermeable surface area located between the front property line and any front building wall shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the area between the front property line and any front building wall, as shown in Figure 9.01.01.4: Front Yard Coverage (Page 319).
(D) Other Regulations
(1) Subsection 4.03 Screening Standards (Page 135)
(2) Subsection 4.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements (Page 147)
(3) Subsection 4.06 Accessory Structure Standards (Page 166)
(4) Subsection 4.07 Supplementary Regulations (Page 172)
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 2: Zoning Districts Page | 29
2.03.08. OTR – Original Town Residential District
(A) General Purpose and Descriptions
The OTR – Original Town Residential District is designed specifically for the "Old Donation" section of the City, a recognized subdivision of land.
The OTR – Original Town Residential District standards will provide for a suitable residential environment for family life on small parcels of land.
Platted lots in the "Old Donation" are in twenty-five (25) foot widths with a preponderance of ownerships in multiples of this width. Therefore, standards are set forth in this District which accommodate the original platting, as well as the preferable standard for a minimum fifty (50) foot lot width, or two platted lots constituting a building site.
(B) Permitted Uses
Uses permitted in the OTR – Original Town Residential District are outlined in Subsection 3.01. Use of Land and Buildings (Page 88).
(C) Area Regulations
Property and buildings shall conform to the related standards listed within 2.06.04. Residential Districts Development Standards (Page 85) and the following regulations. If there is a conflict between 2.06.04. and the following regulations, the following regulations shall control.
(1) Minimum Side Yard
Six (6) feet; twelve (12) feet on corner lot adjacent to side street; twenty four (24) feet for swing-in garage.
(2) Minimum Rear Yard
Eight (8) feet; twenty (20) feet for garage facing alley (can be reduced to twelve (12) feet but requires additional parking surface); twenty-four (24) feet for swing-in garage.
(3) Front Yard Coverage
The cumulative area of any driveway plus any impermeable surface area located between the front property line and any front building wall shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the area between the front property line and any front building wall, as shown in Figure 9.01.01.4: Front Yard Coverage (Page 319).
(D) Other Regulations
(1) Subsection 4.03 Screening Standards (Page 135)
(2) Subsection 4.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements (Page 147)
(3) Subsection 4.06 Accessory Structure Standards (Page 166)
(4) Subsection 4.07 Supplementary Regulations (Page 172)
(5) "Lot of Record" in "Old Donation" – 4.07.01. Residential Lot Regulations (Page 172)
(6) 4.07.09. (E) OTR Façade Plan Requirement (Page 180)
(7) Non-combustible fiber cement siding allowed per Chief Building Official approval. (See 4.07.09. Exterior Construction of Main Buildings (Page 179))
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 30 Section 2: Zoning Districts
(8) Front Porch Required
a. Porches shall be a minimum of seven (7) feet deep and may extend ten (10) feet past front building line provided that such encroachment does not result in a threat to the occupant’s or public’s health, safety or welfare.
b. The porch shall have a minimum area of seventy (70) square feet.
(E) OTR – Downtown Architectural Design Standards
The Downtown Architectural Design Standards that apply to this district are contained in Subsection 9.06 Downtown Architectural Design Standards; OTC & OTR (Page 331), to this Zoning Ordinance and are incorporated as if fully set forth herein.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 2: Zoning Districts Page | 31
2.03.09. PH – Patio Home District
(A) General Purpose and Descriptions
The PH – Patio Home District is provided to allow for development of "zero-lot line" homes in a modified residential district, which encourages greater use of the side yard areas. Clustered lot patterns with a common usable open space system can be incorporated as an integral part of the development.
(B) Permitted Uses
Uses permitted in the PH – Patio Home District are outlined in Subsection 3.01. Use of Land and Buildings (Page 88). In addition, the following uses are permitted.
(1) Zero-lot line, or patio home, residential detached dwellings in a platted subdivision.
(2) Community Owned or Multiple Ownership Areas.
Open space, community center, an access gate, an entrance guard facility, recreational building and facilities are permitted uses provided they are incidental to the above-described residential uses, are approved on a Final Plat, and meet the following conditions.
a. In accordance with the Subdivision Ordinance, a HOA shall be established to maintain open space, recreational areas, and other commonly owned facilities.
1. The developer is responsible for drafting the HOA documents pertaining to the HOA’s responsibilities to maintain these areas.
2. Major creek areas delineated as the City’s linear park system shown on either the City’s Parks Master Plan or City’s Hike & Bike Trail Master Plan shall not count towards the required open space. The Major Creeks areas not shown as part of either plan may count toward the required open space where lots do not back to the open space.
b. Prior to approval of a Final Plat, a document establishing the HOA shall be submitted to the city for review and approved by the City Attorney for conformance with all requirements and other applicable ordinances.
1. The City Attorney shall review and approve the HOA documents pertaining to maintenance of the HOA areas prior to their recording at the County.
2. The developer is responsible for reimbursement of the City Attorney’s fees for reviewing these documents.
(C) Area Regulations
Property and buildings shall conform to the related standards listed within 2.06.04. Residential Districts Development Standards (Page 85) and the following regulations. If there is a conflict between 2.06.04. and the following regulations, the following regulations shall control.
(1) For lots with a zero (0) side yard setback
a. A roof overhang equipped with a gutter may extend a maximum of eight (8) inches into a neighboring property. No other roof overhangs or extensions from a wall may extend into a neighboring lot.
b. The closest exterior roofline to an adjacent property shall be storm guttered if the general slope of the roof falls toward the neighboring property. Gutters shall include returns to direct the water to the lot of origin.
c. The "zero” side shall be designated on the Final Plat. All access, maintenance, and use easements shall be provided on preliminary and Final Plats.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 32 Section 2: Zoning Districts
d. A five (5) foot wide access, maintenance, and use easement shall be dedicated on the Final Plat for all lots adjacent to lots with a “zero” side. The purpose of this easement is to give the adjoining owner access for maintenance of his/her dwelling.
e. The majority of one side of the structure shall be located within three (3) feet of one side lot line. Building walls which are located adjacent to the "zero" side of the lot shall not have any doors, windows, ducts, grills, vents, or other openings. This requirement precludes exterior walls forming enclosures for courts, patios, or similar indentations to the "zero" wall.
(2) Center Option Lots
a. Lots not using a zero (0) side yard setback shall be considered center option lots.
b. Center option lots shall conform to the related standards listed within 2.06.04. Residential Districts Development Standards (Page 85).
(3) Minimum Rear Yard
a. Twelve (12) feet
b. Twenty (20) feet for structures accommodating required off-street parking if provided from a dedicated street or private alley (also see 4.06.04. Area Regulations for Accessory Structure in Residential Districts (Page 167)).
(D) Other Regulations
(1) Subsection 4.03 Screening Standards (Page 135)
(2) Subsection 4.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements (Page 147)
(3) Subsection 4.06 Accessory Structure Standards (Page 166)
(4) Subsection 4.07 Supplementary Regulations (Page 172)
(5) Subsection 4.13 Usable Open Space Requirements (Page 212)
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 2: Zoning Districts Page | 33
2.03.10. 2F – Two Family Residential (Duplex) District
(A) General Purpose and Description
The 2F – Two Family Residential (Duplex) District is intended to promote quality duplex residential development. Individual ownership of the two family or duplex unit is encouraged.
This District may include neighborhoods consisting entirely of duplexes, or, when in accordance with the intent of the Comprehensive Plan, may provide a transition district between lower density residential areas and more intense residential, nonresidential areas, or Major Thoroughfares.
(B) Permitted Uses
Uses permitted in the 2F – Two Family Residential (Duplex) District are outlined in Subsection 3.01. Use of Land and Buildings (Page 88).
(C) Area Regulations
Property and buildings shall conform to the related standards listed within 2.06.04. Residential Districts Development Standards (Page 85).
(D) Other Regulations
(1) Subsection 4.03 Screening Standards (Page 135)
(2) Subsection 4.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements (Page 147)
(3) Subsection 4.06 Accessory Structure Standards (Page 166)
(4) Subsection 4.07 Supplementary Regulations (Page 172)
(E) Special District Requirements
(1) Land within the 2F District may be platted in a manner in which each dwelling unit is situated on a separately platted lot of record where the property line runs coincident with the common wall separating the dwelling units. This provision allows for the creation of two Single Family Residence, Attached (Page 305) dwelling units.
a. Where lots are platted in this manner, the subdivision plat shall designate the location of lot lines which run coincident with the common wall between the dwelling units and the lot lines which run between the structures.
b. There shall be only one dwelling unit per lot, and no dwelling unit shall cross a designated outside lot line.
c. No single family dwelling may be constructed on one of the designated pair of lots.
(2) All utilities shall be provided to each separate unit of each duplex in a 2F District such that each unit is individually metered.
(3) Special provisions shall be made when land is platted in a 2F District into lots consisting of Single Family Residence, Attached (Page 305) dwelling units permitting a separately owned building unit to be placed on a separately platted lot.
a. Plats shall be submitted and approved subject to a legal instrument(s) setting forth the manner in which common facilities or shared elements of a structure on a lot are to be maintained, or repaired, and shall include façades, roofs, and fencing.
b. Building permits shall only be issued for a structure comprised of two dwelling units to be built either as a duplex or as two single family attached dwelling units but not for a single family detached dwelling unit.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 34 Section 2: Zoning Districts
2.03.11. TH – Townhome District
(A) General Purpose and Descriptions
The TH – Townhome District provides for the development of attached residential dwelling units in structures built to accommodate three to eight units per structure.
Open space is encouraged in this District through provisions set forth in the standards for the District.
(B) Permitted Uses
Uses permitted in the TH – Townhome District are outlined in Subsection 3.01. Use of Land and Buildings (Page 88).
(1) Community Owned or Multiple Ownership Areas.
Common open space, community centers, an access gates, an entrance guard facilities, recreational buildings and facilities are permitted uses provided they are incidental to the above-described residential uses, are approved on a Final Plat, and meet the following conditions.
a. In accordance with the Subdivision Ordinance, a homeowners association (HOA) shall be established to maintain open space, recreational areas, and other commonly owned facilities.
1. The developer is responsible for drafting the HOA documents pertaining to the HOA’s responsibilities to maintain these areas.
b. Prior to approval of a Final Plat, a document establishing the HOA shall be submitted to the city for review and approved by the City Attorney for conformance with all requirements and other applicable ordinances.
1. The City Attorney shall review and approve the HOA documents pertaining to maintenance of the HOA areas prior to their recording at the County.
2. The developer is responsible for reimbursement of the City Attorney’s fees for reviewing these documents.
(C) Area Regulations
Property and buildings shall conform to the related standards listed within 2.06.04. Residential Districts Development Standards (Page 85) and the following regulations. If there is a conflict between 2.06.04. and the following regulations, the following regulations shall control.
(1) Minimum Front Yard: Twenty-five (25) feet
(2) Minimum Side Yard
a. Five (5) feet from a side property line when adjacent to open space lots or amenity center lots
b. Fifteen (15) feet from a side property line when adjacent to detached residential dwelling units
c. Twenty (20) feet from a side property line when adjacent to a dedicated street
(3) Minimum Rear Yard
Twenty (20) feet, sixty (60) feet when the building is in excess of one story and adjacent to a Single Family Zoning District.
(4) Structure Separation: Structures on the same parcel shall have the following setbacks and/or minimum distance between structures.
a. Minimum Front Yard: Twenty-five (25) feet
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 2: Zoning Districts Page | 35
b. Minimum Side Yard: Ten (10) feet between buildings without openings (windows); fifteen (15) feet between buildings with openings and when adjacent to side street; sixty (60) feet when building is in excess of one story in height and adjacent to Single Family Zoning District
c. Minimum Rear Yard: Twenty (20) feet; sixty (60) feet when the building is in excess of one story and adjacent to a Single Family Zoning District
(D) Other Regulations
(1) Subsection 4.03 Screening Standards (Page 135)
(2) Subsection 4.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements (Page 147)
(3) Subsection 4.06 Accessory Structure Standards (Page 166)
(4) Subsection 4.07 Supplementary Regulations (Page 172)
(5) Subsection 4.13 Usable Open Space Requirements (Page 212)
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 36 Section 2: Zoning Districts
2.03.12. MF-15 – Multifamily-15 District
(A) General Purpose and Description
The MF-15 – Multifamily-15 District is an attached residential district intended to provide a maximum residential density of fifteen (15) dwelling units per Net Acreage, Subdivision (Page 296). The principal permitted land uses will include multifamily dwellings.
(B) Permitted Uses
(1) Uses permitted in the MF-15 – Multifamily-15 District are outlined in Subsection 3.01. Use of Land and Buildings (Page 88).
(2) Single family residential development shall comply with the standards set forth in following districts.
(3) When a multifamily zoning district is developed as single family residential and is adjacent to a single family residential zoning district(s), the first two rows of lots shall be developed to standards not more than two Single Family Residential zoning districts more dense than the adjacent single family residential zoning district(s).
(C) Area Regulations
Property and buildings shall conform to the related standards listed within 2.06.04. Residential Districts Development Standards (Page 85) and Subsection 4.12 Multifamily Development Standards (Page 205).
(D) Maximum Density
Fifteen (15) dwelling units per net acre.
(E) Other Regulations
(1) Subsection 4.03 Screening Standards (Page 135)
(2) Subsection 4.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements (Page 147)
(3) Subsection 4.06 Accessory Structure Standards (Page 166)
(4) Subsection 4.07 Supplementary Regulations (Page 172)
(5) Subsection 4.12 Multifamily Development Standards (Page 205)
(6) Subsection 4.13 Usable Open Space Requirements (Page 212)
APPLICABLE ZONING DISTRICTS
Section
District Abbreviation – District Name
Page Number
2.03.02.
RE – Residential Estate District
23
2.03.03.
SF-16 – Single Family Residential-16 District
24
2.03.04.
SF-12.5 – Single Family Residential-12.5 District
25
2.03.05.
SF-10 – Single Family Residential-10 District
26
2.03.06.
SF-8.5 – Single Family Residential-8.5 District
27
2.03.07.
SF-7 – Single Family Residential-7 District
28
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 2: Zoning Districts Page | 37
2.03.13. MF-19 – Multifamily-19 District
(A) General Purpose and Description
The MF-19 – Multifamily-19 District is an attached residential district intended to provide a maximum residential density of nineteen (19) dwelling units per Net Acreage, Subdivision (Page 296). The principal permitted land uses will include multifamily dwellings.
(B) Permitted Uses
(1) Uses permitted in the MF-19 – Multifamily-19 District are outlined in Subsection 3.01. Use of Land and Buildings (Page 88).
(2) Single family residential development shall comply with the standards set forth in following districts.
(3) When a multifamily zoning district is developed as single family residential and is adjacent to a single family residential zoning district(s), the first two rows of lots shall be developed to standards not more than two single family residential zoning districts more dense than the adjacent single family residential zoning district(s).
(C) Area Regulations
Property and buildings shall conform to the related standards listed within 2.06.04. Residential Districts Development Standards (Page 85) and Subsection 4.12 Multifamily Development Standards (Page 205).
(D) Maximum Density
Nineteen (19) dwelling units per net acre.
(E) Other Regulations
(1) Subsection 4.03 Screening Standards (Page 135)
(2) Subsection 4.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements (Page 147)
(3) Subsection 4.06 Accessory Structure Standards (Page 166)
(4) Subsection 4.07 Supplementary Regulations (Page 172)
(5) Subsection 4.12 Multifamily Development Standards (Page 205)
(6) Subsection 4.13 Usable Open Space Requirements (Page 212)
Applicable Zoning Districts
Section
District Abbreviation – District Name
Page Number
2.03.02.
RE – Residential Estate District
23
2.03.03.
SF-16 – Single Family Residential-16 District
24
2.03.04.
SF-12.5 – Single Family Residential-12.5 District
25
2.03.05.
SF-10 – Single Family Residential-10 District
26
2.03.06.
SF-8.5 – Single Family Residential-8.5 District
27
2.03.07.
SF-7 – Single Family Residential-7 District
28
2.03.09.
PH – Patio Home District
31
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 38 Section 2: Zoning Districts
2.03.14. MH – Manufactured Home District
(A) General Purpose and Description
The MH – Manufactured Home District is a detached residential district establishing standards for the development of a manufactured home park, or a manufactured home subdivision.
A manufactured home park offers spaces for the placement of manufactured home units on a lease or rental basis. Manufactured home subdivisions include individually platted lots, for sale within the subdivision, for the placement of manufactured home units. The District establishes area and design requirements for both parks and subdivisions, as well as yard requirements for individual lots.
(B) Permitted Uses
Uses permitted in the MH – Manufactured Home District are outlined in Subsection 3.01. Use of Land and Buildings (Page 88).
(C) Area Regulations
Property and buildings shall conform to the related standards listed within 2.06.04. Residential Districts Development Standards (Page 85).
(D) Special District Requirements
(1) Area for Manufactured Home Park or a Recreational Vehicle Park
a. Minimum, five (5) acres; maximum, twenty-five (25) acres
(2) Minimum Average Vertical Clearance of Manufactured Home Frame above Finished Ground Elevation
a. Eighteen (18) inches
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 2: Zoning Districts Page | 39
Subsection 2.04. Nonresidential Zoning Districts
2.04.01. O-1 – Office-1 District
(A) General Purpose and Description
The O-1 – Office-1 District is established to create a flexible District for low intensity office and professional uses. The District can be used as a transition district between more intense uses and residential uses.
Permitted uses should be compatible with adjacent residential areas by limiting heights and utilizing buffers and landscape requirements Buildings in this District should be compatible and in height with residential uses and adjacent property.
(B) Permitted Uses
Uses permitted in the O-1 – Office-1 District are outlined in Subsection 3.01. Use of Land and Buildings (Page 88).
(C) Area Regulations
Property and buildings shall conform to the related standards listed within 2.06.05. Nonresidential Districts Development Standards (Page 86).
(D) Other Regulations
(1) Subsection 4.01 Tree Preservation Requirements (Page 116)
(2) Subsection 4.02 Landscape Requirements (Page 122)
(3) Subsection 4.03 Screening Standards (Page 135)
(4) Subsection 4.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements (Page 147)
(5) Subsection 4.05 Lighting Standards (Page 159)
(6) Subsection 4.06 Accessory Structure Standards (Page 166)
(7) Subsection 4.07 Supplementary Regulations (Page 172)
(8) Subsection 4.08 Nonresidential Development Standards (Page 190)
(9) Subsection 4.13 Usable Open Space Requirements (Page 212)
(10) Subsection 6.05 Site Plan Requirements (Page 232)
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 40 Section 2: Zoning Districts
2.04.02. O-2 – Office-2 District
(A) General Purpose and Description
The O-2 – Office-2 District is established to accommodate a variety of mid- and high-rise office developments providing for professional, financial, medical and similar services for local residents; corporate offices for regional and national operations; and major employment centers for city, county and state governmental entities. Limited retail establishments, incidental to the main uses, may be appropriate in association with large office complexes.
Areas zoned for O-2 – Office-2 District use must be located within the vicinity of a major thoroughfare such as S.H. 121 and U.S. 380, Preston Road or the Dallas North Tollway.
Since this District is intended for more intensive nonresidential uses, landscape treatment and other visual site treatments are anticipated. Multiple story buildings must be buffered from nearby single family zoned areas through the use of setbacks, landscape buffers, and screening.
(B) Permitted Uses
Uses permitted in the O-2 – Office-2 District are outlined in Subsection 3.01. Use of Land and Buildings (Page 88).
(C) Area Regulations
Property and buildings shall conform to the related standards listed within 2.06.05. Nonresidential Districts Development Standards (Page 86) and the following regulations. If there is a conflict between 2.06.05. and the following regulations, the following regulations shall control.
(1) Minimum Front Yard
Where buildings or structures are erected or altered to exceed two stories in height, such buildings or structures shall not be located closer to any single family, two family or patio home residential district boundary line than a distance equal to the sum of the required front yard specified plus twice the height of the building above two stories.
(2) Minimum Side Yard
a. None (interior).
b. Sixty (60) feet adjacent side property lines.
c. Fifty (50) feet on corner lot adjacent to a side property line when adjacent to a dedicated street.
d. Where buildings or structures are erected or altered to exceed two stories in height, such buildings or structures shall not be located closer to any single family, two family or patio home residential district boundary line than a distance equal to the sum of the required side yard specified plus twice the height of the building above two stories measured from the ground level.
(3) Minimum Rear Yard
a. Sixty (60) feet from any alley line.
b. Thirty (30) feet where no alley line, lot line or easement line abuts the rear yard.
c. Where buildings or structures are erected or altered to exceed two stories in height, such buildings or structures shall not be located closer to any single family, two family or patio home residential district boundary line than a distance equal to the sum of the required rear yard specified plus twice the height of the building above two stories measured from the ground level.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 2: Zoning Districts Page | 41
(D) Other Regulations
(1) Subsection 4.01 Tree Preservation Requirements (Page 116)
(2) Subsection 4.02 Landscape Requirements (Page 122)
(3) Subsection 4.03 Screening Standards (Page 135)
(4) Subsection 4.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements (Page 147)
(5) Subsection 4.05 Lighting Standards (Page 159)
(6) Subsection 4.06 Accessory Structure Standards (Page 166)
(7) Subsection 4.07 Supplementary Regulations (Page 172)
(8) Subsection 4.08 Nonresidential Development Standards (Page 190)
(9) Subsection 4.13 Usable Open Space Requirements (Page 212)
(10) Subsection 6.05 Site Plan Requirements (Page 232)
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 42 Section 2: Zoning Districts
2.04.03. R – Retail District
(A) General Purpose and Description
The R – Retail District is established to provide locations for various types of general retail trade, business and service uses for services to one or more neighborhoods. Developments are intended to have two points of access to adjacent neighborhoods.
The shopping areas developed within an R – Retail District should utilize established landscape and buffering requirements and be limited to two stories in height.
The "R" District and shopping areas should be located generally at the intersection of major thoroughfares and convenient to their residential trade area, with signage compatible with surrounding land use. In the R – Retail District, outside storage as defined in Outside Storage and Display (Page 299) shall be prohibited as a primary use.
(B) Permitted Uses
Uses permitted in the R – Retail District are outlined in Subsection 3.01. Use of Land and Buildings (Page 88).
(C) Area Regulations.
Property and buildings shall conform to the related standards listed within 2.06.05. Nonresidential Districts Development Standards (Page 86) and the following regulations. If there is a conflict between 2.06.05. and the following regulations, the following regulations shall control.
(1) Zero Side Yard for Attached Buildings
Side yard setbacks may be eliminated for a building if attached to an adjacent building and shown on an approved Site Plan.
(D) Other Regulations
(1) Subsection 4.01 Tree Preservation Requirements (Page 116)
(2) Subsection 4.02 Landscape Requirements (Page 122)
(3) Subsection 4.03 Screening Standards (Page 135)
(4) Subsection 4.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements (Page 147)
(5) Subsection 4.05 Lighting Standards (Page 159)
(6) Subsection 4.06 Accessory Structure Standards (Page 166)
(7) Subsection 4.07 Supplementary Regulations (Page 172)
(8) Subsection 4.08 Nonresidential Development Standards (Page 190)
(9) Subsection 4.13 Usable Open Space Requirements (Page 212)
(10) Subsection 6.05 Site Plan Requirements (Page 232)
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 2: Zoning Districts Page | 43
2.04.04. OTC – Original Town Commercial District
(A) General Purpose and Description
The development standards in the OTC – Original Town Commercial District are designed to maintain and encourage development with the commercial section of the original town site commonly referred to as the Old Donation, a recognized subdivision of land.
Standards for vehicle parking, building set-backs, and building height are similar to those existing on developed properties in this section of the City; therefore, these standards are only applicable to this section of the City.
(B) Permitted Uses
Uses permitted in the OTC – Original Town Commercial District are outlined in Subsection 3.01. Use of Land and Buildings (Page 88).
(C) Regulations for Property Platted or Vested
The following regulations are applicable only to property platted or vested prior to July 25, 2008, unless the plat expires, in which case the plat is no longer vested and the area regulations described in 2.04.04. (G) (Page 45) are applied.
(1) Size of Yards
a. Minimum Front Yard: None; Minimum of eighty (80) percent of a facade adjacent to a street must be on the property line or as referenced in 2.04.04. (G) (Page 45) (except west of the BNSF Railroad when "slip roads"/parallel roadways are provided).
b. Minimum Side Yard: None; Subject to provision of fire retardant wall as required by current adopted edition of International Building Code.
c. Minimum Rear Yard
1. Abutting nonresidentially zoned property and constructed with fire retardant wall and alley separation: None
2. Without fire retardant wall or alley: Twenty (20) feet
3. Abutting residentially zoned property: Ten (10) feet with screening
(2) Size of Lot
a. Minimum Lot Area: Five thousand (5,000) square feet unless platted as a lot of record prior to the adoption of this district.
b. Minimum Lot Width: Forty-five (45) feet unless platted as a lot of record prior to the adoption of this district.
c. Minimum Lot Depth: One hundred (100) feet unless platted as a lot of record prior to the adoption of this district.
(3) Maximum Lot Coverage: None.
(4) Parking Regulations: See Subsection 4.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements (Page 147).
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 44 Section 2: Zoning Districts
(D) OTC Sub-District Boundaries
(1) Sub-district 1
Main Street from the Dallas North Tollway to the BNSF Railroad and the Tollway Overlay District’s Historic Sub-district. (The boundary of the Historic Gateway sub-district extends from Cottonwood Creek to Stewart Creek.)
(2) Sub-District 2
Main Street east of the BNSF Railroad.
(3) Sub-District 3
All other streets, excluding those in Districts 1 & 2, that are within the OTC District.
(E) OTC Sub-District Map
Figure 2.04.04.1: OTC Sub-District Map
(F) Fire Suppression Requirement
A fire suppression system shall be installed in all new construction unless otherwise approved by the Fire Chief.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 2: Zoning Districts Page | 45
(G) OTC Regulations for Property not Platted or Vested
Regulations for Property not Platted or Vested
Regulation
Sub-District 1
Sub-District 2
Sub-District 3
Front Yard
Without a Slip Road – Twenty (20) foot build-to line measured from the back of curb at ultimate build-out of the street. (Note 1)
Minimum of eighty (80) percent of a facade adjacent to a street must be on the property line.
Fifteen(15) foot build-to line measured from the curb at ultimate build-out of the street. (Note 2)
With a Slip Road – Slip roads as described in the Preston Road Overlay District standards are permitted. A fifteen (15) foot sidewalk shall be located between the building and either the drive aisle or parking of the slip road, measured from the back of curb.
Side Yard
None. (Note 3)
Rear Yard
Abutting nonresidentially zoned property and constructed with fire retardant wall and alley separation – None.
Without fire retardant wall or alley - Twenty (20) feet.
Abutting residentially zoned property – Ten (10) feet with screening.
Minimum Lot Area
Five thousand (5,000) square feet unless platted as a lot of record prior to the adoption of this district.
Minimum Lot Width
Forty-five (45) feet unless platted as a lot of record prior to the adoption of this district.
Minimum Lot Depth
One hundred (100) feet unless platted as a lot of record prior to the adoption of this district.
Maximum Height
Four (4) stories or sixty-five (65) feet.
Four (4) stories or sixty-five (65) feet.
Four (4) stories or sixty-five (65) feet.
Maximum Lot Coverage
None
Pedestrian Area
A twenty (20) foot wide pedestrian area shall be constructed between the curb and building.
Design within this area shall comply with the regulations set forth in 2.04.04. (I) OTC – Downtown Architectural Design Standards (Page 47). (Note 4)
Design within the area between the back of curb and building shall comply with the regulations set forth in 2.04.04. (I) OTC – Downtown Architectural Design Standards (Page 47). (Note 4)
A fifteen (15) foot wide pedestrian area shall be constructed between the curb and building.
Design within this area shall comply with the regulations set forth in 2.04.04. (I) OTC – Downtown Architectural Design Standards (Page 47). (Note 4)
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 46 Section 2: Zoning Districts
Regulations for Property not Platted or Vested
Regulation
Sub-District 1
Sub-District 2
Sub-District 3
Parking Regulations
See Subsection 4.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements (Page 147).
See Subsection 4.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements (Page 147).
Parking is prohibited between the building and the street.
See Subsection 4.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements (Page 147).
Parking is prohibited between the building and the street except where slip roads are permitted.
Slip Roads
Slip roads as described in the Preston Road Overlay District standards are permitted.
Slip roads are prohibited.
Slip roads are prohibited except west of the BNSF Railroad.
Street Trees
Tree wells shall be installed in the pedestrian area at 30 feet on center or as otherwise approved by the Director.
Tree wells are not required; trees wells are recommended where feasible.
Tree wells shall be installed in the pedestrian area at 30 feet on center or as otherwise approved by the Director.
Other Regulations
See 2.04.04. (H) OTC – Other Regulations (below).
Notes:
1. Where the property line is greater than twenty (20) feet from the curb, the building shall be located on the property line.
2. Where the property line is greater than fifteen (15) feet from the curb, the building shall be located on the property line.
3. Subject to provision of fire retardant wall as required by current adopted edition of International Building Code as it exists or may be amended.
4. With Planning & Zoning Commission approval, a building may set back from the front yard line to provide a wider pedestrian area than required, if it is determined a benefit to the public realm (i.e., outdoor areas accessible to the public). Parking and drive aisles are prohibited in the increased building setback area.
(H) OTC – Other Regulations
(1) Outside Storage and Display
Outside Storage and Display (Page 299) is prohibited in the OTC – Original Town Commercial District.
(2) Minimum Residential Area
Minimum area of six-hundred fifty (650) square feet for residential units over retail or office.
(3) Projections into a Required Setback or Beyond the Street Lot Line
The following projections shall be permitted in a required setback or beyond the street lot line.
a. Ordinary building projections, including but not limited to water tables, sills, belt courses, and pilasters, may project up to twelve (12) inches into a required setback or beyond the Street Lot Line, or beyond the face of an architectural projection.
b. Balconies above the first floor may project up to sixty (60) inches in the right-of-way and have a minimum of nine (9) feet of clearance over the sidewalk.
1. At no time shall a projection extend over a public street.
c. Canopies, awnings, cinema or theater marquees, and/or kiosks may project from building face and may extend to, or be located within eight (8) inches of the back of curb.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 2: Zoning Districts Page | 47
1. Any vertical supports anchored to the ground must be located at least four (4) feet from the back of curb and have a minimum of nine (9) feet of clearance.
d. Roof eaves, soffits, cornices, and parapet treatments may project up to thirty-six (36) inches into a required setback or beyond the street lot line, or beyond the face of an architectural projection, provided that no portion extending below seven (7) feet-six (6) inches above the immediate adjacent grade may project more than twelve (12) inches.
e. Architectural projections, including bays, towers, and oriels; below grade vaults and areaways; and elements of a nature similar to the preceding; may project up to forty-two (42) inches. All projections shall be in compliance with the American with Disabilities Act (ADA).
f. Show windows at the first floor may project up to forty-two (42) inches.
(4) 4.07.09. (F) OTC Façade Plan Requirement (Page 181)
(5) The area delineated by the alley south of Elm Street to the north, 5th Street to the east (but excluding the lots on 5th Street), Ash Street to the south, and the BNSF Railroad to the west will have the following provisions.
a. Townhomes are allowed.
b. Redevelopment or infill development shall be two (2) stories with residential on both floors or residential above and office/retail uses below. Existing structures would not be required to add a second story. If a structure is destroyed, it may be rebuilt as originally constructed with no usage change, otherwise structure must comply with redevelopment criteria.
(I) OTC – Downtown Architectural Design Standards
The Downtown Architectural Design Standards that apply to this district are contained in Subsection 9.06 Downtown Architectural Design Standards; OTC & OTR (Page 331), to this Zoning Ordinance and are incorporated as if fully set forth herein.
(J) Illustrations
Figure 2.04.04.2: District 1 - Optional Slip Road Design
Property LineProperty lineVaries8'4 storiesor65' max.64' optional slip road with parking15'TYPICAL SECTION MAIN STREET Varies20'ROW Varies
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 48 Section 2: Zoning Districts
Property lineProperty lineThe building may be set back to widen the pedestrian area with P&Z approval.TYPICAL SECTION MAIN STREET 20'ROW VariesVaries20'Varies4 stories or 65' max.Property lineProperty lineTYPICAL SECTION MAIN STREET80' ROW9'-6"9'-6"2 Stories or 40' max.Property lineProperty lineTYPICAL STREET SECTIONS 60' ROW11'-6"15'11'-6"15'2 Stories or 40' max.
Figure 2.04.04.3: District 1 - Design
Figure 2.04.04.4: District 2 - Design
Figure 2.04.04.5: District 3 - Design
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 2: Zoning Districts Page | 49
2.04.05. H – Highway District
(A) General Purpose and Description
This H – Highway District is intended to provide for a variety of office, retail, and service uses for the purpose of creating a high quality mixture of land uses along S.H. 121 and U.S. Highway 380.
This District is also designed to allow multiple story construction. Uses requiring outside storage will be prohibited.
(B) Permitted Uses.
Uses permitted in the H – Highway District are outlined in Subsection 3.01. Use of Land and Buildings (Page 88).
(C) Area Regulations.
Property and buildings shall conform to the related standards listed within 2.06.05. Nonresidential Districts Development Standards (Page 86) and the following regulations. If there is a conflict between 2.06.05. and the following regulations, the following regulations shall control.
(1) Zero Side Yard for Attached Buildings
Side yard setbacks may be eliminated for a building if attached to an adjacent building and shown on an approved Site Plan.
(D) Other Regulations
(1) Subsection 4.01 Tree Preservation Requirements (Page 116)
(2) Subsection 4.02 Landscape Requirements (Page 122)
(3) Subsection 4.03 Screening Standards (Page 135)
(4) Subsection 4.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements (Page 147)
(5) Subsection 4.05 Lighting Standards (Page 159)
(6) Subsection 4.06 Accessory Structure Standards (Page 166)
(7) Subsection 4.07 Supplementary Regulations (Page 172)
(8) Subsection 4.08 Nonresidential Development Standards (Page 190)
(9) Subsection 4.13 Usable Open Space Requirements (Page 212)
(10) Subsection 6.05 Site Plan Requirements (Page 232)
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 50 Section 2: Zoning Districts
2.04.06. C-1 – Commercial-1 District
(A) General Purpose and Description
The C-1 – Commercial-1 District is intended predominately for heavy retail, and light intensity wholesale and commercial uses of a service but excluding any type of warehousing or the outside storage of building, construction or other materials.
The nature of uses in this District have operating characteristics and traffic service requirements generally compatible with typical office, retail, shopping, and some residential environments.
(B) Permitted Uses
Uses permitted in the C-1 – Commercial-1 District are outlined in Subsection 3.01. Use of Land and Buildings (Page 88).
(C) Area Regulations
Property and buildings shall conform to the related standards listed within 2.06.05. Nonresidential Districts Development Standards (Page 86) and the following regulations. If there is a conflict between 2.06.05. and the following regulations, the following regulations shall control.
(1) Zero Side Yard for Attached Buildings
Side yard setbacks may be eliminated for a building if attached to an adjacent building and shown on an approved Site Plan.
(D) Other Regulations
(1) Subsection 4.01 Tree Preservation Requirements (Page 116)
(2) Subsection 4.02 Landscape Requirements (Page 122)
(3) Subsection 4.03 Screening Standards (Page 135)
(4) Subsection 4.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements (Page 147)
(5) Subsection 4.05 Lighting Standards (Page 159)
(6) Subsection 4.06 Accessory Structure Standards (Page 166)
(7) Subsection 4.07 Supplementary Regulations (Page 172)
(8) Subsection 4.08 Nonresidential Development Standards (Page 190)
(9) Subsection 4.13 Usable Open Space Requirements (Page 212)
(10) Subsection 6.05 Site Plan Requirements (Page 232)
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 2: Zoning Districts Page | 51
2.04.07. C-2 – Commercial-2 District
(A) General Purpose and Description
The C-2 – Commercial-2 District is intended to provide a centrally located and convenient location for small scale service and commercial related establishments.
The uses envisioned for the District will typically utilize smaller sites and have operation characteristics which are not compatible with residential uses and some nonresidential uses. Uses in this District may require open, but screened, storage areas for materials. Convenient access to thoroughfares and collector streets is also a primary consideration.
The C-2 – Commercial-2 District is to be suitable for properties along and adjacent to major thoroughfares and as a unified district of variable acreage to create a commercial center of a number of varied types of uses in one location.
(B) Permitted Uses
Uses permitted in the C-2 – Commercial-2 District are outlined in Subsection 3.01. Use of Land and Buildings (Page 88).
(C) Area Regulations
Property and buildings shall conform to the related standards listed within 2.06.05. Nonresidential Districts Development Standards (Page 86) and the following regulations. If there is a conflict between 2.06.05. and the following regulations, the following regulations shall control.
(1) Zero Side Yard for Attached Buildings
Side yard setbacks may be eliminated for a building if attached to an adjacent building and shown on an approved Site Plan.
(D) Other Regulations
(1) Subsection 4.01 Tree Preservation Requirements (Page 116)
(2) Subsection 4.02 Landscape Requirements (Page 122)
(3) Subsection 4.03 Screening Standards (Page 135)
(4) Subsection 4.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements (Page 147)
(5) Subsection 4.05 Lighting Standards (Page 159)
(6) Subsection 4.06 Accessory Structure Standards (Page 166)
(7) Subsection 4.07 Supplementary Regulations (Page 172)
(8) Subsection 4.08 Nonresidential Development Standards (Page 190)
(9) Subsection 4.13 Usable Open Space Requirements (Page 212)
(10) Subsection 6.05 Site Plan Requirements (Page 232)
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 52 Section 2: Zoning Districts
2.04.08. IT – Information and Technology District
(A) General Purpose and Description
The IT – Information and Technology District is intended for light assembly and manufacturing, research and laboratory facilities, and service uses.
Uses should be located along collector-size streets or larger and/or railroads. Location should be such that trips generated will minimize commercial traffic in residential neighborhoods.
Permitted uses are appropriate next to residential uses with appropriate screening.
(B) Permitted Uses
Uses permitted in the IT – Information and Technology District are outlined in Subsection 3.01. Use of Land and Buildings (Page 88).
(C) Area Regulations
Property and buildings shall conform to the related standards listed within 2.06.05. Nonresidential Districts Development Standards (Page 86) and the following regulations. If there is a conflict between 2.06.05. and the following regulations, the following regulations shall control.
(1) Minimum District Size: Twenty-five (25) gross acres
(2) Setback from Residentially Zoned Property
a. Seventy-five (75) feet for buildings of thirty (30) feet in height or less.
b. The setback shall be increased by an additional two (2) feet for each foot that the building exceeds thirty (30) feet in height.
(3) Access to Public Street
a. Each lot shall have direct access to a street.
b. An access easement shall not be considered direct access.
(4) Maximum Floor Area Ratio: 1:1 (excluding parking garages)
(D) Other Regulations
(1) Subsection 4.01 Tree Preservation Requirements (Page 116)
(2) Subsection 4.02 Landscape Requirements (Page 122)
(3) Subsection 4.03 Screening Standards (Page 135)
(4) Subsection 4.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements (Page 147)
(5) Subsection 4.05 Lighting Standards (Page 159)
(6) Subsection 4.06 Accessory Structure Standards (Page 166)
(7) Subsection 4.07 Supplementary Regulations (Page 172)
(8) Subsection 4.08 Nonresidential Development Standards (Page 190)
(9) Subsection 4.13 Usable Open Space Requirements (Page 212)
(10) Subsection 6.05 Site Plan Requirements (Page 232)
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 2: Zoning Districts Page | 53
2.04.09. I – Industrial District
(A) General Purpose and Description
The I – Industrial District is intended primarily for uses in the conduct of light manufacturing, assembling and fabrication, and for warehousing, wholesaling and service operations that do not depend upon frequent customer or client visits.
Such uses do require accessibility to major highways, rail lines or other means of transportation.
(B) Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted in the I – Industrial District, provided that such manufacturing or industrial operation shall not disseminate dust, fumes, gas, noxious odor, smoke, glare, or other atmospheric influence beyond the boundaries of the property on which such use is located and which produces no noise exceeding the average intensity of noise of street traffic at that point and provided that such use does not create fire hazards on surrounding property.
(1) Uses permitted in the I – Industrial District are outlined in Subsection 3.01. Use of Land and Buildings (Page 88).
(C) Area Regulations
Property and buildings shall conform to the related standards listed within 2.06.05. Nonresidential Districts Development Standards (Page 86) and the following regulations. If there is a conflict between 2.06.05. and the following regulations, the following regulations shall control.
(1) Additional Setback
a. For structures requiring railroad access, setback requirements from the centerline of the railroad right-of-way shall be in accordance with applicable State law.
(D) Other Regulations
(1) Subsection 4.01 Tree Preservation Requirements (Page 116)
(2) Subsection 4.02 Landscape Requirements (Page 122)
(3) Subsection 4.03 Screening Standards (Page 135)
(4) Subsection 4.04 Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements (Page 147)
(5) Subsection 4.05 Lighting Standards (Page 159)
(6) Subsection 4.06 Accessory Structure Standards (Page 166)
(7) Subsection 4.07 Supplementary Regulations (Page 172)
(8) Subsection 4.08 Nonresidential Development Standards (Page 190)
(9) Subsection 4.13 Usable Open Space Requirements (Page 212)
(10) Subsection 6.05 Site Plan Requirements (Page 232)
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 54 Section 2: Zoning Districts
Subsection 2.05. Special Zoning Districts
2.05.01. PD – Planned Development District
(A) General Description and Purpose
The PD – Planned Development District is a district which accommodates coordinated development that provides a more flexible means than the zoning districts outlined in this ordinance. A PD – Planned Development District may be used to permit new or innovative concepts in land utilization or diversification that could not be achieved under conventional zoning approaches. Procedures are established herein to ensure appropriate use of PD zoning.
(1) The PD designation shall be used for the following purpose(s):
a. Master planning;
b. To carry out specific goals of the comprehensive plan, City or public/private partnered special projects, and City Council strategic focus areas;
c. Development of mixed use, transit-oriented, or traditional neighborhoods with a variety of uses and housing types; and/or
d. To preserve natural features, open space, and other topographical features of the land.
(2) The PD designation shall not be used for the following purpose(s):
To obtain variances and waivers from existing development standards; to secure agreements between an applicant and nearby property owners to receive zoning approval; and/or to assign responsibility to the City of private deed restrictions or covenants.
(B) Area Requirement
A PD district requires a minimum of fifteen (15) contiguous acres. Acreage may be less than fifteen (15) acres when carrying out the recommendations of the Comprehensive Plan.
(C) Permitted Uses
(1) Any use permitted in this Zoning Ordinance shall be permitted in a PD District if such use is:
a. Specified in the amending ordinance granting a PD District, or
b. The amending ordinance shall reference a zoning district that will maintain base requirements for the PD.
(2) The size, location, appearance, and method of operation may be specified to the extent necessary to ensure compliance with the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance base zoning district.
(3) Unless specified in the amending ordinance, all buildings and uses shall comply with all City development requirements.
(D) Updated Standards to the Base Zoning District
(1) If the standards of the base zoning district are amended, then the most recently amended standards shall apply to a PD district unless the standards have been individually listed within the PD adoption ordinance as being different from the base zoning district.
(2) Base zoning district amendments are applicable to PD districts and do not require special notice to be provided to the properties within a PD district.
(E) PD Application and Review Process
See Subsection 6.14 PD Application and Review (Page 255).
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 2: Zoning Districts Page | 55
2.05.02. SUP or “S” – Specific Use Permits
(A) General Description and Authorization
The uses listed under the various zoning districts as Specific Use Permits are so classified because they more intensely dominate the area in which they are located than do other uses permitted in the district.
(1) Consideration for Compatibility
With consideration given to setting, physical features, compatibility with surrounding land uses, traffic, and aesthetics, certain uses may locate in an area where they will be compatible with existing or planned land uses.
(2) Review and Approval Authorities
a. The City Council shall review each case on its own merit, apply the criteria established herein, and, if appropriate, authorize said use by granting a Specific Use Permit for the use.
b. The Planning & Zoning Commission shall recommend to the City Council approval, approval with modifications, or denial for each Specific Use Permit.
(B) Application and Site Plan Required
Application and public hearing procedures for a Specific Use Permit shall be completed in the same manner as an application for rezoning. A Preliminary Site Plan or Site Plan shall be included with the application as outlined in Subsection 6.05 Site Plan Requirements (Page 232).
(1) The Planning & Zoning Commission or City Council may require additional information or drawings (such as building floor plans), operating data and expert evaluation or testimony concerning the location, function and characteristics of any building or use proposed.
(2) The Preliminary Site Plan or Site Plan shall comply with the standards of Subsection 6.05 Site Plan Requirements (Page 232).
(C) SUP Procedure and Other Regulations
See Subsection 6.15 Specific Use Permit (SUP) Application and Review (Page 261) for procedures and other regulations.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 56 Section 2: Zoning Districts
2.05.03. HL – Historic Landmark District
(A) General Purpose and Description
The HL – Historic Landmark District is designed to provide for the preservation and protection of those areas, places, buildings, structures, works of art, and other objects having significant historical, archaeological, or cultural interests and values; portions of certain districts are designated with the letters “HL”.
(B) Permitted Uses
Uses permitted shall be those permitted by the base zoning district where the tract of land being designated is located.
(1) Example
The uses permitted on a tract zoned OTC – Original Town Commercial District would be those uses permitted in the OTC – Original Town Commercial District. Additional uses may be permitted where deemed appropriate by the City Council, upon recommendation by the Planning & Zoning Commission.
(C) “HL” Modification of Standards
In making the “HL” designation, the Planning & Zoning Commission and City Council may reduce, increase, or revise the height, yard, area, coverage, and any other developmental standards, if such action is determined necessary for the preservation or protection of the “HL” designation property.
(D) Historic Landmark Procedures
(1) See Subsection 6.17 Historic Landmark Procedures (Page 265).
(E) Ordinary Maintenance for Historic Landmarks
Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance and repair of any exterior architectural feature of a landmark or property within a historic district which does not involve a change in design or material. In-kind replacement or repair is included in this definition of ordinary maintenance.
(F) Demolition by Neglect for Historic Landmarks
No owner or person with an interest in real property that has received an “HL” designation shall permit the property to fall into a serious state of disrepair so as to result in the deterioration of any exterior architectural feature which would, in the judgment of the City Council and/or the Chief Building Official, produce a detrimental effect upon the character of the historic district as a whole or the life and character of the property itself.
(1) Examples of such deterioration include but are not limited to:
a. Deterioration of exterior walls or other vertical support;
b. Deterioration of roofs or other horizontal members;
c. Deterioration of exterior chimneys;
d. Deterioration or crumbling of exterior stucco or mortar;
e. Ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roofs, or foundations, including broken windows or doors; or
f. Deterioration of any feature so as to create a hazardous condition which could lead to the claim that demolition is necessary for public safety.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 2: Zoning Districts Page | 57
2.05.04. PRO – Preston Road Overlay District
(A) General Purpose and Description
Preston Road is a primary thoroughfare within the City. The PRO – Preston Road Overlay District establishes development standards for properties within the Preston Road corridor regarding land uses, site and architectural design, building materials, landscaping, lighting, and signage.
The PRO – Preston Road Overlay District is intended to substantially advance a legitimate governmental interest that includes enhancing the quality of life in Frisco, to regulate the character of growth along the Preston Road corridor, and to ensure the careful and orderly growth of a historical trail and entryway to the City.
(B) Boundary
The PRO – Preston Road Overlay District includes all property within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of the centerline of Preston Road (Figure 2.05.04.1: Preston Road Overlay District Map (Page 68)).
The District excludes all single family subdivisions platted prior to August 15, 2000. Some lots or tracts may be fully or partially located in the District.
It is the intent of the Preston Road Overlay District to transition from those lots or tracts located fully in the District to those lots or tracts not located in the District by extending building materials and landscape standards to those lots or tracts partially located in the District.
Transitioning concepts will be developed on a project by project basis through the, Preliminary Site Plan, and/or Site Plan review process.
(C) Preston Road Overlay Sub-districts
The PRO – Preston Road Overlay District is divided into five sub-districts, as shown in Figure 2.05.04.1: Preston Road Overlay District Map (Page 68). The sub-districts and their boundaries are:
(1) U.S. 380 Gateway
The boundary of the U.S. 380 Gateway sub-district extends from U.S. 380 to C.R. 26.
(2) Rural Corridor
The boundary of the Rural Corridor sub-district extends from C.R. 26 to Panther Creek.
(3) Main Street
The boundary of the Main Street Gateway sub-district extends from Camfield Way to Hickory Street.
(4) Retail Corridor
Two Retail Corridor sub-districts are established. The northern Retail Corridor sub-district extends from Panther Creek to Camfield Way. The southern Retail Corridor sub-district extends from Hickory Street to Gaylord Parkway.
(5) S.H. 121 Gateway
The boundary for the S.H. 121 Gateway sub-district extends from Gaylord Parkway to S.H. 121.
Each sub-district shall comply with the general requirements listed in 2.05.04. (D) General Requirements of the PRO - Preston Road Overlay District (Page 58) and the sub-district requirements listed in 2.05.04. (E) Preston Road Overlay Sub-District Requirements (Page 62). Where Preston Road Overlay District requirements conflict with base zoning requirements, the Preston Road Overlay District shall apply. Otherwise, the base zoning of a property shall not be affected by the Preston Road Overlay District.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 58 Section 2: Zoning Districts
(D) General Requirements of the PRO - Preston Road Overlay District
(1) PRO Permitted Uses
Uses permitted in the PRO – Preston Road Overlay District are outlined in Subsection 3.01. Use of Land and Buildings (Page 88).
(2) PRO Development Standards
a. Dismantled or Wrecked Vehicle Screening and Storage within the PRO
1. Dismantled or wrecked vehicles must be parked and/or stored in the building or screened from adjacent streets and properties with a landscape island around the perimeter of the storage area.
(i) The landscape island shall include a combination of minimum three (3) inch caliper evergreen and deciduous trees, ornamental trees and/or minimum five (5) gallon shrubs to form a solid, living screen.
(ii) If the landscape island is located on the perimeter of the property, perimeter landscaping requirements may be applied towards this requirement.
(3) PRO Landscaping
a. Maintenance
Property owners are responsible for installing, maintaining, and replacing required landscaping with the exception of landscaping within Punctuation Points (see 2.05.04. (D)(11)d PRO Punctuation Points (Page 61).
b. Side and Rear Yards
1. In order to meet the planting requirements for landscape buffers or slip roads, planting requirements for side and rear yards (excluding required landscaping adjacent to residential uses) may be reduced by fifty (50) percent.
2. If additional landscaping is needed, tree requirements for landscaped parking islands may be reduced by fifty (50) percent.
c. Escrow Fund
Due to street construction, adverse weather, or other constraints as approved by the City, escrow funds may be paid to the City for the required landscaping for street medians and associated labor.
d. Irrigation
All landscaping shall be mechanically irrigated.
e. Tree Grates
Tree grates shall be used in high pedestrian traffic areas.
f. Tree Guards
1. Tree guards are to be installed in urban streetscape areas where tree grates are not required, as well as other areas deemed necessary through review by City staff.
2. Tree guards shall take the form of a low fence of twelve (12) to fourteen (14) inches in height of ornamental metal defining the edge of the tree wells.
3. Gauge of metal utilized should not be less than three-eighths (3/8) of an inch diameter.
g. Bollards
1. Bollards shall be used to protect trees and pedestrians in any curb-less condition.
2. Bollards shall have a nominal height of twenty four (24) inches and a nominal diameter of eighteen (18) inches.
3. Bollards shall be native or cast stone, granite, or cast iron.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 2: Zoning Districts Page | 59
h. Additional landscaping specifications are listed in Subsection 4.02 Landscape Requirements (Page 122)
(4) PRO Site Development
a. Building Presence
1. Development shall be sited as to maximize presence.
2. The primary façade of all buildings shall face a public or quasi-public street.
b. Building Location and Placement
The location and placement of buildings on individual sites shall reflect consideration for roadway access, the preservation of major existing natural vegetation, visual impact, and the relationship to surrounding developments.
(5) PRO Exterior Appearance of Buildings and Structures
a. A Façade Plan shall be submitted for the following requirements according to Subsection 6.16 Façade Plan Review (Page 263).
b. Architectural Finish
All buildings shall be architecturally finished on all four sides with a higher level of finish on the front façades.
1. A front façade shall be those façades directly visible from an adjacent street and the façade used as the primary entrance.
c. All buildings shall comply with Subsection 4.09 Nonresidential Design Standards (Page 193).
(6) PRO Building Materials and Colors
a. A Façade Plan shall be submitted for the following requirements according to Subsection 6.16 Façade Plan Review (Page 263).
b. Limited Number of Material Types
A variety of exterior materials may be selected for use as the primary material on the façade of a building, but the number of materials on a single building shall be limited to no more than three (3) materials in order to achieve a "clean" design style.
c. Maximum Material Building Coverage
With the exception of the Main Street sub-district, no single building material shall cover more than eighty (80) percent of the front of any building, with the exception of on-site utility or service structures.
d. Windows
Windows shall not be glazed or re-glazed with mirrored or reflective glass.
(7) PRO Parking
a. Structured Parking Exterior Materials and Colors
Exterior materials and colors for structured parking shall match or be compatible with the buildings within the same development.
b. Subterranean parking is permitted.
c. Slip Roads
1. For an illustration and standards see Figure 2.05.04.7: Slip Road Dimensions (Page 71).
2. Slip roads introduce opportunities for variety in the streetscape.
3. Slip roads extend the street zone into the parking area, making parking lots more plaza-like and integrated.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 60 Section 2: Zoning Districts
4. Slip roads combine parking, uniform tree plantings, enhanced paving, seating areas and access to retail stores, making these spaces lively and pedestrian-friendly.
5. Where required, slip roads shall be designed in accordance with Figure 2.05.04.7: Slip Road Dimensions (Page 71) and as follows.
(i) The first row of parking shall be located eight (8) feet from the property line. The minimum depth of each parking space within the first row of parking is eighteen (18) feet. The width of the adjacent driveway and/or fire lane shall be twenty-four (24) feet. A second row of parking shall be provided on the opposite side of the driveway and/or fire lane. These parking spaces shall be twenty (20) feet deep, or eighteen (18) feet deep when adjacent to landscaping or a sidewalk with a minimum width of six (6) feet to accommodate a two (2) foot parking overhang. The second row of parking is optional, but the trees required for this area shall be planted regardless of the existence or non-existence of parking.
(ii) Within each row of parking, a landscape island with dimensions equal to the adjacent parking spaces shall be constructed after every third parking space. A minimum three (3) inch caliper large tree shall be planted on each landscape island.
(iii) A row of minimum three (3) inch caliper large trees shall be planted on the property two (2) feet from the front property line nominally thirty six (36) feet on-center. These trees shall align with minimum three (3) inch caliper trees planted on each landscape island located within the slip road. These trees will be centered on each landscape island and located seventeen (17) feet and sixty (60) feet from the front property line.
(iv) The trees planted sixteen (16) feet from the back of the street curb shall align with the trees planted both thirty (30) feet and seventy-two (72) feet from the back of the street curb.
(v) The drive lane and parking areas of the slip road shall be defined with enhanced paving such as brick, stone or scored concrete.
(vi) Slip road parking shall be screened from Preston Road with a low row of shrubs. Shrubs shall be minimum five (5) gallon shrubs planted three (3) feet on center.
(vii) With the exception of the Rural Corridor sub-district, the area between the slip road and the property line may be improved with enhanced paving, rather than landscaping.
(viii) Slip roads shall be interrupted by building placement or other means prior to intersection with a street that intersects with Preston Road.
(8) PRO Commercial and Utility Vehicles
a. Commercial and utility vehicles in conjunction with the business or being utilized for delivery or transport that are stored or parked on a property overnight shall be located inside an enclosed building or screened from the view of adjacent streets and properties.
b. These vehicles shall not be located between the building and an adjacent street.
c. Screening shall be a solid masonry wall to match the building, earthen berms, or landscaping.
d. Screening shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in height.
e. A landscape screen shall be solid and reach the minimum height of six (6) feet within two (2) years of the issue date of the Certificate of Occupancy for the building.
(9) PRO Building Entry Areas
a. Landscaping shall be used to emphasize building entries. (See Figure 2.05.04.4 (Page 69))
b. Special paving such as brick, exposed aggregate or patterned concrete shall be used to define building entries.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 2: Zoning Districts Page | 61
c. Sidewalk connections shall be provided from building entries to parking areas and public sidewalks.
(10) PRO Lighting
a. On-site lighting for vehicular and pedestrian purposes shall be installed by the property owner in accordance with City design standards for the PRO – Preston Road Overlay District.
b. The City shall coordinate the installation of the street lights in and along major thoroughfares in accordance with City design standards for the PRO – Preston Road Overlay District.
(11) PRO Streetscape Elements
In addition to the form-giving rows of street trees, a framework of streetscape elements will tie together the sub-districts. These elements include gateway bridges; a series of monuments, pedestals, and light standards; street furniture; and landscape punctuation points.
a. PRO Gateway Monuments
1. Gateway monuments shall occur at sub-district boundaries.
2. The monument materials should be native or cast stone (Figure 2.05.04.8 Page 72)).
3. Wherever possible, bridges shall feature split roadways (Figure 2.05.04.9 (Page 73)).
4. The Main Street gateway should feature an intersection of enhanced paving of stone, brick or patterned concrete. In addition, an intensified amount of shrubs and/or trees should be planted to provide a sense of enclosure (Figure 2.05.04.11 (Page 74)).
b. PRO Entrance Monuments
1. Entrance monuments shall occur at major intersections and landscape punctuation points (Figure 2.05.04.8 (Page 72)).
2. The entrance monument materials should be native or cast stone.
3. Entrance monuments at major intersections shall be nominally twelve (12) feet in height.
4. Pedestals with a height of three (3) feet to five (5) feet may be used at punctuation points.
c. PRO Enhanced Light Standards
1. Light standards shall be manufactured by Bega, or an equivalent (see Figure 2.05.04.10 (Page 74)), and be a dark color as approved by the City Council.
2. The light standard monument in the street median and parkways are nominally thirty (30) feet in height and may support seasonal banners.
3. The vehicular-scale light standard monuments in parking areas shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height. The vehicular-scale light standard may be placed on a stone pedestal.
4. The pedestrian-scale light standard is nominally ten (10) feet in height, may feature a hanging basket, and should be placed in pairs flanking the sidewalk.
d. PRO Punctuation Points
1. The City shall coordinate the implementation of punctuation points with property owners through the provision of landscape buffers prior to or during the development process.
2. Location of the punctuation points shall be generally consistent with Figure 2.05.04.12 (Page 75).
3. The punctuation points in the Rural Corridor sub-district shall have a rural character and feature native plant materials arranged in informal patterns.
4. The punctuation points in the Retail Corridor sub-district shall have a commercial character and feature formal, upright trees arranged in bold, graphic patterns.
5. Punctuation points (see Figure 2.05.04.13 (Page 76), Figure 2.05.04.14 (Page 77), and Figure 2.05.04.15 (Page 78)) shall, if possible
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 62 Section 2: Zoning Districts
(i) Be approximately two hundred (200) feet in length along Preston Road and one hundred (100) feet deep.
(ii) Span the width of Preston Road incorporating the parkways and the median.
(iii) Utilize raised planting areas to lift and separate these areas from the adjacent streetscape.
(E) Preston Road Overlay Sub-District Requirements
(1) “U.S. 380 Gateway” Sub-District
a. Setbacks
1. The minimum front yard is fifty (50) feet and shall include a fifty (50) foot landscape buffer.
(i) No parking or drive aisles may occur in the landscape buffer.
2. Buildings containing a nonresidential use may be located five (5) feet from the right-of-way of street, other than major thoroughfare, intersecting with Preston Road.
(i) Seventy five (75) percent of the building shall be constructed on the five (5) foot building line, with the additional twenty five (25) percent setback a maximum of ten (10) feet. (See Figure 2.05.04.17 (Page 79))
(ii) Buildings not utilizing the five (5) foot reduced setback shall be setback as stated in 2.05.04. (E)(1)a.1. (Page 62)
3. Alternative setbacks may be approved by Subsection 6.18 Alternative Compliance Standards (Page 267).
b. Landscaping
1. Slip Roads
(i) Landscaping shall be planted in accordance with the slip road detail shown in Figure 2.05.04.7 (Page 71).
2. Landscape Buffer
(i) Two (2) rows of minimum three (3) inch caliper large trees shall be planted nominally thirty (30) feet on center in the landscape buffer.
(ii) The first row of trees shall be located ten (10) feet from the front property line.
(iii) The second row of trees shall be located forty (40) feet from the property line.
c. Building Materials
1. Primary exterior construction materials (see Figure 2.05.04.16 (Page 79)) shall be:
(i) Natural Dimensional Stone (minimum of twenty (20) percent per wall with the exception of walls containing a loading dock or service area);
(ii) Brick; or
(iii) Tinted, split-face concrete masonry units (maximum fifteen (15) percent per wall).
2. Secondary exterior construction materials (see Figure 2.05.04.16 (Page 79)) shall be used to accent primary exterior construction materials, but shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the façade area. Secondary exterior construction materials shall include:
(i) Aluminum;
(ii) Other metals;
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 2: Zoning Districts Page | 63
(iii) EIFS; or
(iv) Stucco.
3. The use of natural texture and colors shall be used to the greatest extent possible. Lighter tones and colors are recommended. Required dominant colors include light-to-medium earth tones illustrated in pages 46 through 155 of the Pittsburgh Paint Voice of Color Sampler.
(i) City staff will maintain this referenced color sampler.
(ii) Light colors include colors 1-2 of each sample page.
(iii) Medium colors include values 3-4.
(iv) Prohibited colors are black and stark white.
(2) “Rural Corridor” Sub-District
a. Setbacks
1. The minimum front yard is fifty (50) feet and shall include a fifty (50) foot landscape buffer.
2. No parking or drive aisles may occur in the landscape buffer.
3. The landscape buffer is also required for future single family developments along Preston Road, but shall be provided a right-of-way for landscaping purposes.
b. Landscaping
1. Slip Roads
(i) Landscaping shall be planted in accordance with the slip road detail shown in Figure 2.05.04.7 (Page 71).
2. Landscape Buffer
(i) Two (2) rows of minimum three (3) inch caliper large trees shall be planted nominally thirty (30) feet on center in the landscape buffer.
(ii) The first row of trees shall be located ten (10) feet from the front property line.
(iii) The second row of trees shall be located forty (40) feet from the front property line.
c. Building Materials
1. Primary exterior construction materials (see Figure 2.05.04.16 (Page 79)) shall be:
(i) Natural Dimensional Stone (minimum of twenty-five (25) percent per wall with the exception of walls containing a loading dock or service area);
(ii) Brick; or
(iii) Tinted, split-face concrete masonry units (maximum fifteen (15) percent per wall).
2. Secondary exterior construction materials (see Figure 2.05.04.16 (Page 79)) shall be used to accent primary exterior construction materials, but shall not exceed ten (10) percent the of façade area. Secondary exterior construction materials shall include:
(i) Fiber cement siding;
(ii) Stucco; or
(iii) EIFS.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 64 Section 2: Zoning Districts
3. Medium tones and colors are recommended to darker ones. Required dominant colors are medium earth tones illustrated in pages 46 through 155 of the Pittsburgh Paint Voice of Color Sampler.
(i) City staff will maintain this referenced color sampler.
(ii) Medium colors include values 3-4.
(iii) Prohibited colors are black and stark white.
(3) “Main Street” Sub-District
a. Setbacks
1. Slip roads are required adjacent to Preston Road with buildings placed accordingly (See 2.05.04. (D)(7)c Slip Roads (Page 59) and Figure 2.05.04.7 (Page 71)).
2. Where development constraints prevent the use of slip road, the minimum front yard is thirty (30) feet and shall include a thirty (30) foot landscape buffer.
(i) No parking or drive aisles may occur in the landscape buffer.
3. Buildings containing a nonresidential use may be located five (5) feet from the right-of-way of street, other than a major thoroughfare, intersecting with Preston Road.
(i) Seventy-five (75) percent of the building shall be constructed on the five (5) foot building line, with the additional twenty-five (25) percent setback a maximum of ten (10) feet. (See Figure 2.05.04.17 (Page 79))
(ii) Buildings not utilizing the five (5) foot reduced setback shall setback as stated in 2.05.04. (E)(3)a.2 (Page 64).
b. Landscaping
1. Slip Roads
(i) Landscaping shall be planted in accordance with the slip road detail shown in Figure 2.05.04.7 (Page 71).
2. Landscape Buffer
(i) Where development constraints prevent the use of a slip road, a single row of minimum three (3) inch caliper large trees shall be planted nominally thirty (30) feet on center in the landscape buffer.
(ii) The trees shall be planted ten (10) feet from the back of the property line.
c. Building Materials
1. Brick is the required primary exterior construction material (see Figure 2.05.04.16 (Page 79)).
2. Secondary exterior construction materials (see Figure 2.05.04.16 (Page 79)) shall be used to accent primary exterior construction materials, but shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the façade area of each elevation. Secondary exterior construction materials shall include:
(i) Natural Dimensional Stone;
(ii) Tinted, split-face concrete masonry units;
(iii) Aluminum;
(iv) Metals;
(v) EIFS; or
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 2: Zoning Districts Page | 65
(vi) Stucco.
3. Lighter tones and colors are recommended to darker ones. Required dominant colors are light-to-medium earth tones illustrated in pages 46 through 155 of the Pittsburgh Paint Voice of Color Sampler.
(i) City staff will maintain this referenced color sampler.
(ii) Light colors include colors 1-3 of each sample page.
(iii) Medium colors include values 4-5.
(iv) Prohibited colors are black and stark white.
(4) “Retail Corridor” Sub-District
a. Setbacks
1. Slip roads are required adjacent to Preston Road with buildings placed accordingly (See 2.05.04. (D)(7)c Slip Roads (Page 59) and Figure 2.05.04.7 (Page 71)).
2. Where development constraints prevent the use of slip road, the minimum front yard is fifty (50) feet and shall include a thirty (30) foot landscape buffer.
(i) No parking or drive aisles may occur in the landscape buffer.
3. The minimum front yard may be reduced to thirty (30) feet, but the building must be constructed on the thirty (30) foot building line and no parking or drive aisles may occur between the building and adjacent street.
4. Buildings containing a nonresidential use may be located five (5) feet from the right-of-way of street, other than a major thoroughfare, intersecting with Preston Road.
(i) Seventy five (75) percent of the building shall be constructed on the five (5) foot building line, with the additional twenty-five (25) percent setback a maximum of ten (10) feet. (See Figure 2.05.04.17 (Page 79))
5. Buildings not utilizing the reduced thirty (30) foot or five (5) foot setback shall setback as stated in 2.05.04. (E)(4)a.2 (Page 65).
b. Landscaping
1. Slip Roads
(i) Landscaping shall be planted in accordance with the slip road detail shown in Figure 2.05.04.7 (Page 71).
2. Landscape Buffer
(i) Where development constraints prevent the use of a slip road, two (2) rows of minimum three (3) inch caliper large trees shall be planted nominally thirty (30) feet on center in the landscape buffer.
(ii) The first row of trees shall be located four (4) feet from the front property line.
(iii) The second row of trees shall be located twenty-six (26) feet from the front property line.
c. Building Materials
1. Primary exterior construction materials (see Figure 2.05.04.16 (Page 79)) shall be:
(i) Natural Dimensional Stone (minimum of twenty (20) percent per wall with the exception of walls containing a loading dock or service area);
(ii) Brick;
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 66 Section 2: Zoning Districts
(iii) Tinted, split-faced concrete masonry units (maximum fifteen [15] percent per wall); or
(iv) Stucco.
2. Secondary exterior construction materials (see Figure 2.05.04.16 (Page 79)) shall be used to accent primary exterior construction materials, but shall not exceed ten (10) percent the of façade area. Secondary exterior construction materials shall include:
(i) Natural Dimensional Stone;
(ii) Tinted, split-face, concrete masonry units;
(iii) Aluminum;
(iv) Metals;
(v) EIFS; or
(vi) Stucco.
3. In general, medium tones and colors are recommended to darker ones. Required dominant colors are medium earth tones illustrated in pages 46 through 155 of the Pittsburgh Paint Voice of Color Sampler.
(i) City staff will maintain this referenced color sampler.
(ii) Medium colors include values 4-5.
(iii) Prohibited colors are black and stark white.
(5) “S.H. 121 Gateway” Sub-District
a. Setbacks
1. The minimum front yard is fifty (50) feet and shall include a thirty (30) foot landscape buffer.
(i) No parking or drive aisles may occur in the landscape buffer.
2. The minimum front yard may be reduced to thirty (30) feet, but the building must be constructed on the thirty (30) foot building line and no parking or drive aisles may occur between the building and adjacent street.
3. Buildings containing a nonresidential use may be located five (5) feet from the right-of-way of street, other than a major thoroughfare, intersecting with Preston Road.
(i) Seventy-five (75) percent of the building shall be constructed on the five (5) foot building line, with the additional twenty-five (25) percent setback a maximum of ten (10) feet. (See Figure 2.05.04.17 (Page 79))
4. Buildings not utilizing the reduced thirty (30) foot or five (5) foot setback shall setback as stated in 2.05.04. (E)(5)a.1 (Page 66).
b. Landscaping
1. Landscape Buffer
(i) Two (2) rows of minimum three (3) inch caliper large trees shall be planted nominally thirty (30) feet on center in the landscape buffer.
(ii) The first row of trees shall be located four (4) feet from the front property line.
(iii) The second row of trees shall be located twenty-six (26) feet from the front property line.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 2: Zoning Districts Page | 67
c. Building Materials
1. Primary exterior construction materials (see Figure 2.05.04.16 (Page 79)) shall be:
(i) Natural Dimensional Stone (minimum of twenty (20) percent per wall with the exception of walls containing a loading dock or service area);
(ii) Brick;
(iii) Tinted, split-face concrete masonry units (maximum fifteen (15) percent per wall); or
(iv) Stucco.
2. Secondary exterior construction materials (see Figure 2.05.04.16 (Page 79)) shall be used to accent primary exterior construction materials, but shall not exceed ten (10) percent the of façade area. Secondary exterior construction materials shall include:
(i) Aluminum;
(ii) Other metals;
(iii) EIFS; or
(iv) Stucco.
3. The use of natural texture and colors shall be used to the greatest extent possible. Lighter tones and colors are recommended. Required dominant colors include light-to-medium earth tones illustrated in pages 46 through 155 of the Pittsburgh Paint Voice of Color Sampler.
(i) City staff will maintain this referenced color sampler.
(ii) Light colors include colors 1-2 of each sample page.
(iii) Medium colors include values 3-4.
(iv) Prohibited colors are black and stark white.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 68 Section 2: Zoning Districts
Figure 2.05.04.1: Preston Road Overlay District Map
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 2: Zoning Districts Page | 69
Figure 2.05.04.2: Expression of Building Form
Figure 2.05.04.4: Special Planting at Building Entry
Figure 2.05.04.3: Façades Facing Preston Road
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 70 Section 2: Zoning Districts
Figure 2.05.04.5: Entry Median and Stacking Area
Figure 2.05.04.6: Drive Lanes Defining Streetscape Experience
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 2: Zoning Districts Page | 71
Figure 2.05.04.7: Slip Road Dimensions
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 72 Section 2: Zoning Districts
Figure 2.05.04.8: Monuments
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 2: Zoning Districts Page | 73
Figure 2.05.04.9: Prototypical Overpass / Bridge Plan and Section
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 74 Section 2: Zoning Districts
Figure 2.05.04.10: Enhanced Lighting Standards
Figure 2.05.04.11: Design Standards – Urbanized Intersections
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 2: Zoning Districts Page | 75
Figure 2.05.04.12: Gateway and Punctuation Points
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 76 Section 2: Zoning Districts
Figure 2.05.04.13: Punctuation Points – Circle Grove
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 2: Zoning Districts Page | 77
Figure 2.05.04.14: Punctuation Points – Tree Field
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 78 Section 2: Zoning Districts
Figure 2.05.04.15: Punctuation Points – Pecan Grove
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 2: Zoning Districts Page | 79
Figure 2.05.04.17: Setback for Nonresidential Uses to Streets that Connect with Preston Road
Figure 2.05.04.16: Primary/Secondary Exterior Cladding Materials
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 80 Section 2: Zoning Districts
2.05.05. TO – Tollway Overlay District
(A) General Purpose and Description
The Dallas North Tollway is a primary thoroughfare within the City. The TO – Tollway Overlay District establishes design and development standards for properties within the Tollway corridor regarding land uses, building orientation, site amenities, access, site and building architectural design, building materials, landscaping, lighting, and signage. The TO – Tollway Overlay District is intended to substantially advance a legitimate governmental interest that includes enhancing the quality of life in Frisco, to regulate the character of growth along the Tollway corridor, and to create a unique Tollway corridor.
(B) Boundary and Applicability
(1) Geographic Boundary
The TO – Tollway Overlay District is defined as the land included within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of the Right-of-Way Line on either side of the Tollway. See Figure 2.05.05.1 (Page 81) for a comprehensive view of the District.
(2) Certain Standards Apply Beyond Geographic Boundary
For properties extending beyond the seven hundred fifty (750) foot boundary, the overlay architectural elements, building materials, and landscaping requirements shall be incorporated unless otherwise approved by the Director.
(3) Land Uses Regulations Apply Only within Geographic Boundary
Land use requirements shall not apply to that portion of the properties beyond the seven hundred fifty (750) foot boundary.
(C) Tollway Overlay Sub-Districts Established
The TO – Tollway Overlay District is divided into four sub-districts. The sub-districts and their boundaries are the following.
(1) “U.S. 380 Gateway”
The boundary of the U.S. 380 Gateway sub-district extends from U.S. Highway 380 to C.R. 26 (future Virginia Parkway).
(2) “Typical”
The boundaries of the Typical Corridor sub-districts extend from C.R. 26 to Cottonwood Creek and from Stewart Creek to Gaylord Parkway.
(3) “Historic”
The boundary of the Historic Gateway sub-district extends from Cottonwood Creek to Stewart Creek.
(4) “S.H. 121 Gateway”
The boundary for the S.H. 121 Gateway sub-district extends from Gaylord Parkway to S.H. 121.
(D) Tollway Overlay District Boundary Map
(1) See boundary map on next page.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 2: Zoning Districts Page | 81
Figure 2.05.05.1: Tollway Overlay Zoning District Map
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 82 Section 2: Zoning Districts
(E) Tollway Overlay Sub-district Compliance
(1) Compliance Sections
Each sub-district shall comply with the general requirements listed in 2.05.05. (F) General Requirements of the Tollway Overlay District (Page 82) and the sub-district requirements listed in 2.05.05. (G) Tollway Overlay Sub-District Requirements (Page 82).
(2) Conflicts between Zoning Districts
Where TO – Tollway Overlay District requirements conflict with base zoning requirements, excluding requirements contained within a PD – Planned Development District, the TO – Tollway Overlay District shall apply. Otherwise, the TO – Tollway Overlay District shall not affect the base zoning of a property.
(F) General Requirements of the Tollway Overlay District
(1) Permitted Uses
a. The base zoning district of a property determines the permitted land uses in the TO – Tollway Overlay District.
b. Permitted land uses are outlined in Subsection 3.02 Use Chart (Page 89).
(2) Tollway Overlay Exterior Appearance of Buildings/Structures
a. A Façade Plan shall be submitted for the following requirements according to Subsection 6.16 Façade Plan Review (Page 263).
b. Windows shall conform to the following criteria
1. Pink or gold glass is not permitted.
c. Primary exterior materials shall conform to the requirements found in 4.07.09. Exterior Construction of Main Buildings (Page 179). In addition to these requirements, the following criteria shall apply.
1. The use of Exterior Insulated Finishing System (EIFS) is not permitted below nine (9) feet above finished grade. The use of EIFS above nine (9) feet is limited to high impact EIFS.
2. In the Historic Sub-District, one hundred (100) percent of the first floor façade shall consist of clay-fired brick.
3. Secondary materials used on the façade of a building are those that comprise less than ten (10) of an elevation area. Permitted secondary materials are all primary materials, aluminum or other metal, or other materials as approved by the Director.
4. Structured parking garages must be finished on all four sides in the same materials as the main building, or another material as approved by the Director.
d. All retail/commercial buildings shall comply with Subsection 4.09 Nonresidential Design Standards (Page 193).
e. Corporate identities that conflict with the building design criteria shall be reviewed on a case by case basis and approved by the Director.
(G) Tollway Overlay Sub-District Requirements
(1) U.S. 380 Gateway
a. Setbacks
1. The minimum front yard is fifty (50) feet and shall include a thirty (30) foot landscape buffer.
2. No parking or drive aisles may occur in the landscape buffer.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Section 2: Zoning Districts Page | 83
3. The minimum front yard for buildings of six (6) or more stories may be reduced to twenty-five (25) feet with a twenty-five (25) foot landscape buffer.
(2) S.H. 121 Gateway
a. Setbacks
1. The minimum front yard is fifty (50) feet and shall include a thirty (30) foot landscape buffer.
2. No parking or drive aisles may occur in the landscape buffer.
3. The minimum front yard for buildings of six (6) or more stories may be reduced to twenty-five (25) feet with a twenty-five (25) foot landscape buffer.
(3) Historic Sub-District
a. Setbacks
Setbacks in the Historic sub-district shall meet the requirements of the OTC – Original Town Commercial District (see 2.04.04. (C) Regulations (Page 43)).
(4) Typical Sub-District
a. Setbacks
The minimum front yard is fifty (50) feet and shall include a thirty (30) foot landscape buffer. No parking or drive aisles may occur in the landscape buffer.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 84 Section 2: Zoning Districts
Subsection 2.06. Development Standards Tables
2.06.01. Purpose
The purpose of this section is to establish common area regulations and standards for each zoning district. This section provides one location within this Ordinance where the common area regulations and standards can be found. The common area regulations and standards are divided into two sections, the residential section, 2.06.04. Residential Districts Development Standards (Page 85), and nonresidential section, 2.06.05. Nonresidential Districts Development Standards (Page 86).
2.06.02. Establishment of Area Regulations and Standards
The area regulations and standards for each zoning districts are established within 2.06.04. Residential Districts Development Standards (Page 85) and 2.06.05. Nonresidential Districts Development Standards (Page 86).
2.06.03. Additional Area Regulations and Standards
Additional area regulations and standards may apply to specific zoning districts and may be found within the other sections of this Ordinance.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 2: Zoning Districts Page | 85
2.06.04. Residential Districts Development Standards
Residential Districts Development Standards Chart
Development Standards AG – Agricultural District RE – Residential Estate District SF-16 – Single Family Residential-16 District SF-12.5 – Single Family Residential-12.5 District SF-10 – Single Family Residential-10 District SF-8.5 – Single Family Residential-8.5 District SF-7 – Single Family Residential-7 District OTR – Original Town Residential District PH – Patio Home District 2F – Two Family Residential (Duplex) District TH – Townhome District MF-15 – Multifamily-15 District MF-19 – Multifamily-19 District MH – Manufactured Home District
North of Main
South of Elm
Zero Side Option
Center Option
MH Park
MH Subdivision
Minimum Front Yard Setback
40'
40'
40'
30'
30'
25'
25'
20' + 5' Utility Easement Adjacent to ROW
25'
25'
See
2.03.11. (B)(1) (Page 34)
See
4.12.01. (A) (Page 205)
See
4.12.01. (A) (Page 205)
30' from a dedicated street/
15' from a private street
Minimum Side yard Setback
20'/
25' on corner lots
15'/
25' on corner lots
15'/
20' on corner lots
15'/
20' on corner lots
10'/
15' on corner lots
7'/
15' on corner lots
7'/
15' on corner lots
6'/
12' on corner lots
0' on one side and 10' on other side/
15' on corner lots
7' on both sides/
15' on corner lots
8'/
15' on corner lots
See
2.03.11. (B)(1) (Page 34)
See
4.12.01. (B) (Page 205)
See
4.12.01. (B) (Page 205)
5'/
20' between units/
25' from zoning district line
Minimum Rear Yard Setback
25'
25'
25'
25'
25'
20'
20'
8'/
20' for garage facing alley
12'/
20' if off-street parking required
20'
See
2.03.11. (B)(1) (Page 34)
See
4.12.01. (C) (Page 206)
See
4.12.01. (C) (Page 206)
5'/
20' between units/
25' from zoning district line
Minimum Lot Area
2 Acres
1 Acre
16,000 SF
12,500 SF
10,000 SF
8,500 SF
7,000 SF
4,500 SF
2,250 SF
5,000 SF
6,000 SF
8,000 SF per duplex or 4,000 SF per Dwelling Unit
2,500 SF
See
4.12.01. (D) (Page 206)
See
4.12.01. (D) (Page 206)
2,500 SF
4,500 SF
Minimum Lot Width
150'
150'
90'
90'
80'
70'
60'
50'
25'
50'
55'
76' per duplex or 38' per Dwelling Unit
25'
80'
80'
40'
Minimum Lot Depth
250'
200'
140'
120'
100'
100'
100'
90'
90'
100'
100'
120'
120'
N/A
100'
Minimum Dwelling Area
800 SF
800 SF
800 SF
800 SF
800 SF
800 SF
800 SF
800 SF
650 SF
800 SF
800 SF
800 SF
See
4.12.01. (E) (Page 206)
See
4.12.01. (E) (Page 206)
650 SF
Maximum Height Feet/
Stories
40'/
2.5
40'/
2.5
40'/
2.5
40'/
2.5
40'/
2.5
40'/
2.5
40'/
2.5
40'/
2.5
40'/
2.5
40'/
2.5
40'/
2
50'
50'
20'
Maximum Lot Coverage (All Buildings)
N/A
20%
30%
40%
45%
45%
45%
55%
55%
50%
65%
50%
50%
N/A
(A) See Subsection 6.18 Alternative Compliance Standards (Page 267) for alternative setbacks and heights.
(B) The minimum front yard setback shall be reduced five (5) feet when street trees are provided, see 4.07.02. (J) Front Yard Setback Reduction for Specific Thoroughfares (Page 175).
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 2: Zoning Districts Page | 86
2.06.05. Nonresidential Districts Development Standards
Nonresidential Districts Development Standards Chart
Development Standards O-1 – Office-1 District O-2 – Office-2 District R – Retail District OTC – Original Town Commercial District H – Highway District C-1 – Commercial-1 District C-2 – Commercial-2 District IT – Information and Technology District I – Industrial District
Adjacent to RE through PH Districts
Adjacent to Other Districts
Adjacent to Dedicated Street
Adjacent to RE-PH
Adjacent to Other Districts
Adjacent to Dedicated Street
Adjacent to RE-PH
Adjacent to Other Districts
Adjacent to Dedicated Street
Adjacent to RE-PH
Adjacent to Other Districts
Adjacent to Dedicated Street
Adjacent to RE-PH
Adjacent to Other Districts
Adjacent to Dedicated Street
Minimum Front Yard
25'
50'/
See 2.04.02. (C)(1) Minimum Front Yard (Page 40)
30'
See
2.04.04.
(Page 43)
50'
30'
30'
50'/
See 2.04.08. (Page 52)
25'
Minimum Side Yard
1 story = 25'
1 story = 20'
1 story = 25'
See 2.04.02. (C)(2)
Minimum Side Yard (Page 40)
1 story = 25'
1 story = 20'
1 story = 25'
See
2.04.04.
(Page 43)
1 story = 25'
1 story = 20'
1 story = 30'
1 story = 25'
1 story = 20'
1 story = 30'
1 story = 25'
1 story = 20'
1 story = 30'
15'/
See 2.04.08. (Page 52)
15'/
25' corner lots
2 story = 60'
2 story = 20'
2 story = 25'
2 story = 60'
2 story = 20'
2 story = 25'
2 story = 60'
2 story = 20'
2 story = 30'
2 story = 60'
2 story = 20'
2 story =30'
2 story = 60'
2 story = 20'
2 story =30'
3 story = 60'
3 story = 20'
3 story = 30'
Minimum Rear Yard
1 story = 30'
1 story = 30'
1 story = 25'
See 2.04.02. (C)(3)
Minimum Rear Yard (Page 40)
1 story = 30'
1 story = 30'
1 story = 25'
See
2.04.04.
(Page 43)
1 story = 25'
1 story = 30'
1 story = 30'
1 story = 30'
1 story = 30'
1 story = 25'
1 story = 30'
1 story = 30'
1 story = 25'
30'/
See 2.04.08. (Page 52)
30'
2 story = 60'
2 story = 30'
2 story = 25'
2 story = 60'
2 story = 30'
2 story = 25'
2 story = 60'
2 story = 30'
2 story = 30'
2 story = 60'
2 story = 60'
2 story = 25'
2 story = 60'
2 story = 60'
2 story = 25'
3 story = 85'
3 story = 30'
3 story = 30'
Minimum Lot Area
10,000 SF
12,500 SF
10,000 SF
2.04.04. (Page 43)
12,500 SF
8,000 SF
5,000 SF
None
43,560 SF
Minimum Lot Width
60'
100'
100'
2.04.04. (Page 43)
125'
100'
100'
None
200'
Minimum Lot Depth
N/A
125'
140'
2.04.04. (Page 43)
125'
100'
100'
None
200'
Maximum Height
1 story no greater than 30’;
2 story no greater than 40’ within 60’ from a property zoned or developed as single family or two family
None
40'
See
2.04.04. (Page 43)
None, unless single family or two family zoning districts or developments are within 200’ of the property line, in which a 40’ height maximum shall apply.
40'
40'
175'
None
Maximum Lot Coverage
25%
50%, max. 30% for accessory structures
40%
None
50%
50%
60%
55%/
70% if parking garages are constructed
80%
Maximum FAR
0.5:1
1:1
0.5:1
None
4:1
0.5:1
0.6:1
1:1
None
(A) See Subsection 6.18 Alternative Compliance Standards (Page 267) for alternative setbacks.
Section 3. Land Uses
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 88 Section 3: Land Uses
Subsection 3.01. Use of Land and Buildings
3.01.01. Uses Permitted by District
Land and buildings in each of the zoning districts may be used for any of the indicated uses but no land shall hereafter be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, altered, or converted, which is arranged or designed or used for other than those uses specified as permitted uses in the district in which it is located, according to the Subsection 3.02 Use Chart (Page 89) and in accordance with Subsection 1.05 Compliance Required / Interpretation / Rules of Construction (Page 13) and the provisions of this ordinance.
(A) Legend for Use Chart within Subsection 3.01. Use of Land and Buildings (Page 88)
Base Zoning
P
Use is permitted in district indicated
Use is prohibited in district indicated
S
Use is permitted in district upon approval of a Specific Use Permit
#
Use is permitted in the district indicated if the use complies with conditional development standards or limitations in the corresponding numeric end note in 3.02.01. Conditional Development Standards (Page 95).
Overlay Zoning Districts (Preston Road and Tollway)
Use is subject to base zoning standards
X
Use is prohibited in the Overlay District
3.01.02. Classification of New and Unlisted Uses
It is recognized that new types of land use will develop and forms of land use not presently anticipated may seek to locate in the City. If the Director is unable to classify the use under one of the existing listed uses, then the director shall initiate a zoning text amendment pursuant to procedures set forth in this ordinance.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 3: Land Uses Page | 89
Subsection 3.02. Use Chart
The use of land or buildings shall be in accordance with those listed in the following Use Chart. No land or building shall hereafter be used and no building or structure shall be erected, altered, or converted other than for those uses specified in the zoning district in which it is located. (Amended by Ordinances 11-08-29, 12-12-81, 13-xx-xx)
USE CHART
Base Zoning District Legend
Residential
Nonresidential
Special Parking Requirement Based on Use
P
Indicates Permitted Use AG – Agricultural District RE – Residential Estate District SF-16 – Single Family Residential-16 District SF-12.5 – Single Family Residential-12.5 District SF-10 – Single Family Residential-10 District SF-8.5 – Single Family Residential-8.5 District SF-7 – Single Family Residential-7 District OTR – Original Town Residential District PH – Patio Home District 2F – Two Family Residential (Duplex) District TH – Townhome District MF-15 – Multifamily-15 District MF-19 – Multifamily-19 District MH – Manufactured Home District O-1 – Office-1 District O-2 – Office-2 District R – Retail District OTC – Original Town Commercial District H – Highway District C-1 – Commercial-1 District C-2 – Commercial-2 District IT – Information and Technology District I – Industrial District PD – Planned Development District SUP or “S” – Specific Use Permits HL – Historic Landmark District PRO – Preston Road Overlay District TO – Tollway Overlay District
Indicates Prohibited Use
S
Indicates Specific Use Permit Required
#
Indicates Conditional Use (See Section 3.02.01. )
US 380 Gateway
Rural Corridor
Main Street
Retail Corridor
S.H. 121 Gateway
Special Zoning District Legend
Indicates Use subject to Base Zoning District
X
Indicates Prohibited Use in Overlay District
Indicates Regulation by District (See Individual Section)
USE TYPE
Residential Uses (Use Chart Section 1 of 2)
Caretaker's/Guard's Residence
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (5) (49)
Garage Apartment
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (17)
Guest House
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (17)
Manufactured Home
P
X (30)
Model Home
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (49)
Multifamily Residence
P
P
P
P (18)
Private Street Development (26) (26) (26) (26) (26) (26) (26) (26) (26) (26) (26) (26) (26) (1)
Retirement Housing
P
P
P
P
P
P (1)
Single Family Residence, Detached
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (17)
Studio Residence
P
P (18)
Townhome (33)
P
P
P (17)
Two Family Residence (Duplex)
P (17)
Nonresidential Uses (Use Chart Section 2 of 2)
Accessory Structure
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (1)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
None
Airport/Heliport
S
X
X
X
X
X
X (49)
Alcoholic Beverage Establishment (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) (38) (49)
Alcoholic Beverage Sales (Ord. 12-12-81; 12/18/02) (24) (24) (24) (24) (24) (42)
Amenity Center
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (40)
Antenna and/or Antenna Support Structure, Commercial (3) (3) (3) (3) (3) (3) (3) (3) (3) (3) (3) (3) (3) (3) (3) (3) (3) (3) (3) (3) (3) (3) (3) (49)
Antenna and/or Antenna Support Structure, Non-Commercial
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (4)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (4)
P
P
P
P
P (49)
Antenna, Stealth (5) (5) (5) (5) (5) (5) (5) (5) (5) (5) (5) (5) (5) (5) (5) (5) (5) (5) (5) (5) (5) (5) (5) (49)
Antique Shop and Used Furniture
P
P
P
P
P (42)
Artisan's Workshop
P
P
P
P
P (42)
Assisted Living Facility
P
P
P
S
S
S
S
S
S (1)
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 3: Land Uses Page | 90
USE CHART
Base Zoning District Legend
Residential
Nonresidential
Special Parking Requirement Based on Use
P
Indicates Permitted Use AG – Agricultural District RE – Residential Estate District SF-16 – Single Family Residential-16 District SF-12.5 – Single Family Residential-12.5 District SF-10 – Single Family Residential-10 District SF-8.5 – Single Family Residential-8.5 District SF-7 – Single Family Residential-7 District OTR – Original Town Residential District PH – Patio Home District 2F – Two Family Residential (Duplex) District TH – Townhome District MF-15 – Multifamily-15 District MF-19 – Multifamily-19 District MH – Manufactured Home District O-1 – Office-1 District O-2 – Office-2 District R – Retail District OTC – Original Town Commercial District H – Highway District C-1 – Commercial-1 District C-2 – Commercial-2 District IT – Information and Technology District I – Industrial District PD – Planned Development District SUP or “S” – Specific Use Permits HL – Historic Landmark District PRO – Preston Road Overlay District TO – Tollway Overlay District
Indicates Prohibited Use
S
Indicates Specific Use Permit Required
#
Indicates Conditional Use (See Section 3.02.01. )
US 380 Gateway
Rural Corridor
Main Street
Retail Corridor
S.H. 121 Gateway
Special Zoning District Legend
Indicates Use subject to Base Zoning District
X
Indicates Prohibited Use in Overlay District
Indicates Regulation by District (See Individual Section)
USE TYPE
Athletic Stadium or Field, Private (6) (6) (6) (6) (6) (6) (6) (6) (6) (6) (6) (6) (6) (6)
S
S
S
S
S
S
P
P (2)
Athletic Stadium or Field, Public
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (2)
Auto Parts Sales, Outside
P
X
X
X
X
X (49)
Automobile Paid Parking Lot/Garage
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (49)
Automobile Parking Lot/Garage
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (49)
Automobile Repair, Major
S
S
P
P
X
X
X
X (33)
Automobile Repair, Minor
P
P
P
P
P
X
X
X
X (33)
Automobile Sales, Used
S
S
S
X
X
X
X (33)
Automobile Sales/Leasing, New
S
S
S
P
X
X
X
X (33)
Automobile Storage
P
P
X
X
X
X
X
X (33)
Bank, Savings and Loan, or Credit Union
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (3)
Beauty Salon/Barber Shop
P
P
P
P
P
P (42)
Bed and Breakfast Inn
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
P
P
P (4)
Big Box Retail Development (7) (7) (7) (7) (7) (42)
Boarding or Rooming House
P
P
P
P
P
P (5)
Body Art Studio (8) (42)
Building Material and Hardware Sales, Major
S
S
S
P
P
X
X
X
X
X
X (42)
Building Material and Hardware Sales, Minor
P
P
P
P
P
P
X (42)
Bus Terminal (9) (9) (9) (9) (9)
X
X
X
X
X (49)
Business Service
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (49)
Cabinet/Upholstery Shop
P
P
P
P
P (42)
Campground or Recreational Vehicle Park
S
S (49)
Car Wash, Full Service (10) (10)
P
P
P (10)
P
X (7)
Car Wash, Self Service
S
P
X
X
X
X
X
X (8)
Cemetery or Mausoleum
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S (49)
Child-Care: Foster Family Home (Independent)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
None
Child-Care: Foster Group Home (Independent)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
None
Child-Care: Licensed Child-Care Center (11) (11) (11) (11) (11) (11) (11) (11) (11) (11) (11) (11) (11) (11) (11) (11) (11) (11) (11) (11) (11) (11) (11) (9)
Child-Care: Licensed Child-Care Home (12) (12) (12) (12) (12) (12) (12) (12) (12)
None
Child-Care: Listed Family Home (12) (12) (12) (12) (12) (12) (12) (12) (12)
None
Child Care: Registered Child-Care Home (12) (12) (12) (12) (12) (12) (12) (12) (12)
None
Church, Temple, Synagogue, Mosque, or Other Place of
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
P
P
P
S
P
P
P
P
P (9)
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 3: Land Uses Page | 91
USE CHART
Base Zoning District Legend
Residential
Nonresidential
Special Parking Requirement Based on Use
P
Indicates Permitted Use AG – Agricultural District RE – Residential Estate District SF-16 – Single Family Residential-16 District SF-12.5 – Single Family Residential-12.5 District SF-10 – Single Family Residential-10 District SF-8.5 – Single Family Residential-8.5 District SF-7 – Single Family Residential-7 District OTR – Original Town Residential District PH – Patio Home District 2F – Two Family Residential (Duplex) District TH – Townhome District MF-15 – Multifamily-15 District MF-19 – Multifamily-19 District MH – Manufactured Home District O-1 – Office-1 District O-2 – Office-2 District R – Retail District OTC – Original Town Commercial District H – Highway District C-1 – Commercial-1 District C-2 – Commercial-2 District IT – Information and Technology District I – Industrial District PD – Planned Development District SUP or “S” – Specific Use Permits HL – Historic Landmark District PRO – Preston Road Overlay District TO – Tollway Overlay District
Indicates Prohibited Use
S
Indicates Specific Use Permit Required
#
Indicates Conditional Use (See Section 3.02.01. )
US 380 Gateway
Rural Corridor
Main Street
Retail Corridor
S.H. 121 Gateway
Special Zoning District Legend
Indicates Use subject to Base Zoning District
X
Indicates Prohibited Use in Overlay District
Indicates Regulation by District (See Individual Section)
USE TYPE
Worship
Civic/Convention Center
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (12)
College, University, Trade, or Private Boarding School
P
P
S
P
P
P
P
P (11) (20)
Commercial Amusement, Indoor
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (13)
Commercial Amusement, Outdoor
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
X
X
X
X
X (14)
Community Center
S
S
S
P
P
P
S
P
P
P
P
P (12)
Concrete/Asphalt Batching Plant, Permanent
S
X
X
X
X
X
X (28)
Concrete/Asphalt Batching Plant, Temporary (13) (13) (13) (13) (13) (13) (13) (13) (13) (13) (13) (13) (13) (13) (13) (13) (13) (13) (13) (13) (13) (13) (13) (28)
Construction Yard and Field Office, Temporary
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (48)
Contractor’s Shop and/or Storage Yard
P
P
X
X
X
X
X (48)
Convenience Store with Gas Pumps (Ord. 11-08-27; 8/01/11) (14) (14) (14) (14) (14) (14) (14)
X
X
X (14) (15) (21)
Convenience Store without Gas Pumps
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (42)
Day Services, Adult
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (49)
Dry Cleaning, Major
P
P
X
X
X
X
X (42)
Dry Cleaning, Minor
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (42)
Electrical Power Generating Plant
S (49)
Equipment and Machinery Sales and Rental, Major
S
S
P
X
X
X
X
X
X (42)
Equipment and Machinery Sales and Rental, Minor
P (15)
P
P
P
P (42)
Fairgrounds/Exhibition Area
S
S
S
S (16)
Farm, Ranch, Stable, Garden, or Orchard
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (49)
Farmer's Market
P
P
P
P
P (42)
Feed Store
P
P
P
P
P
P (42)
Flea Market, Inside
P
P
X
X
X
X
X
X (19)
Flea Market, Outside
S
X
X
X
X
X
X (19)
Fortune Teller/Psychic
P (42)
Fraternal Organization, Lodge, Civic Club, Fraternity, or Sorority
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (27)
Furniture Restoration
S
P
P
P
P (28)
Gas Pumps (Accessory Use) (16) (16) (16) (16)
X
X
X (16) (15) (21)
General Manufacturing/Industrial Use Complying with Performance Standards
P
P
P
X
X
X
X
X (28)
Golf Course and/or Country Club
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (22)
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 3: Land Uses Page | 92
USE CHART
Base Zoning District Legend
Residential
Nonresidential
Special Parking Requirement Based on Use
P
Indicates Permitted Use AG – Agricultural District RE – Residential Estate District SF-16 – Single Family Residential-16 District SF-12.5 – Single Family Residential-12.5 District SF-10 – Single Family Residential-10 District SF-8.5 – Single Family Residential-8.5 District SF-7 – Single Family Residential-7 District OTR – Original Town Residential District PH – Patio Home District 2F – Two Family Residential (Duplex) District TH – Townhome District MF-15 – Multifamily-15 District MF-19 – Multifamily-19 District MH – Manufactured Home District O-1 – Office-1 District O-2 – Office-2 District R – Retail District OTC – Original Town Commercial District H – Highway District C-1 – Commercial-1 District C-2 – Commercial-2 District IT – Information and Technology District I – Industrial District PD – Planned Development District SUP or “S” – Specific Use Permits HL – Historic Landmark District PRO – Preston Road Overlay District TO – Tollway Overlay District
Indicates Prohibited Use
S
Indicates Specific Use Permit Required
#
Indicates Conditional Use (See Section 3.02.01. )
US 380 Gateway
Rural Corridor
Main Street
Retail Corridor
S.H. 121 Gateway
Special Zoning District Legend
Indicates Use subject to Base Zoning District
X
Indicates Prohibited Use in Overlay District
Indicates Regulation by District (See Individual Section)
USE TYPE
Governmental Office
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (36)
Gymnastics/Dance Studio
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (16)
Hall, Dance
S
S
S
S (16)
Hall, Reception/Banquet/Meeting (17) (17) (17) (17) (16)
Health/Fitness Center
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (24)
Helistop (Accessory Use)
S
S
S
S (49)
Home Occupation (18) (18) (18) (18) (18) (18) (18) (18) (18) (18) (18) (18) (18) (18)
None
Homebuilder Marketing Center (19) (19) (19) (19) (19) (19) (19) (19) (19) (19)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (49)
Hospital
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (25)
Hotel
P
P
P
P
P
P (26)
Household Care Facility (Ord. 13-06-36; 06/18/13) (35) (35) (35) (35) (35) (35) (35) (35) (35) (35) (35) (35) (35) (49)
Indoor Gun or Archery Range
P
X
X
X
X
X
X (49)
Landfill
S
X
X
X
X
X
X (49)
Laundromat
P
P
P
P
P (42)
Limited Assembly and Manufacturing Use Complying with Performance Standards
P
P
P (28)
Locksmith/Security System Company
P
P
P
P
P
P (42)
Machine Shop
P
P (28)
Massage Therapy, Licensed
P
P
P
P
P
P (42)
Massage Therapy, Unlicensed
S (42)
Mini-Warehouse/Self-Storage
S
S
P
X
X
X
X
X
X (29)
Miscellaneous Hazardous Industrial Use
S
X
X
X
X
X (28)
Mobile Food Vendor (20) (20) (20) (20)
None
Mortuary/Funeral Parlor (Ord. 11-08-29; 08/01/11) (34) (34) (34) (34) (34)
P
P
P
P (31)
Motel (21) (21) (21) (32)
Motorcycle Sales/Service
S
S
P
X
X
X
X (42)
Municipal Uses Operated by the City
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (49)
Museum/Art Gallery
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (12)
Nursery, Major (22)
P
P
P
P
X
X
X (22)
X (35)
Nursery, Minor
P
P
P
P
P (35)
Nursing/Convalescent Home
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S (1)
Office and Storage Area for Public/Private Utility
P
P (49)
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 3: Land Uses Page | 93
USE CHART
Base Zoning District Legend
Residential
Nonresidential
Special Parking Requirement Based on Use
P
Indicates Permitted Use AG – Agricultural District RE – Residential Estate District SF-16 – Single Family Residential-16 District SF-12.5 – Single Family Residential-12.5 District SF-10 – Single Family Residential-10 District SF-8.5 – Single Family Residential-8.5 District SF-7 – Single Family Residential-7 District OTR – Original Town Residential District PH – Patio Home District 2F – Two Family Residential (Duplex) District TH – Townhome District MF-15 – Multifamily-15 District MF-19 – Multifamily-19 District MH – Manufactured Home District O-1 – Office-1 District O-2 – Office-2 District R – Retail District OTC – Original Town Commercial District H – Highway District C-1 – Commercial-1 District C-2 – Commercial-2 District IT – Information and Technology District I – Industrial District PD – Planned Development District SUP or “S” – Specific Use Permits HL – Historic Landmark District PRO – Preston Road Overlay District TO – Tollway Overlay District
Indicates Prohibited Use
S
Indicates Specific Use Permit Required
#
Indicates Conditional Use (See Section 3.02.01. )
US 380 Gateway
Rural Corridor
Main Street
Retail Corridor
S.H. 121 Gateway
Special Zoning District Legend
Indicates Use subject to Base Zoning District
X
Indicates Prohibited Use in Overlay District
Indicates Regulation by District (See Individual Section)
USE TYPE
Office, Administrative, Medical, or Professional
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (36) (37)
Office/Showroom
P
P
P
P
P (48)
Office/Warehouse/Distribution Center
S
S
S
P
X
X
X
X
X (48)
Oil Well/Gas Well and Mineral Extraction (23) (23) (23) (23) (23) (23) (23) (23) (23) (23) (23) (23) (23) (23) (23) (23) (23) (23) (23) (23) (23) (23) (23) (28)
Outside Storage and Display (Incidental Use)
P
P
P
P
P
None
Outside Storage and Display (Primary Use)
P
X
X
X
X
X
X (48)
Park or Playground
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (49)
Pawn Shop
P
X
X
X
X
X
X (42)
Portable Building Sales
S (42)
Print Shop, Major
S
P
P
P
P (36)
Print Shop, Minor
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (42)
Private Club (25) (25) (25) (25) (25) (25) (25) (25) (25) (25) (25) (25) (25) (25) (25) (25) (25) (25) (25) (25) (38)
Private Utility (other than listed)
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (49)
Recreational Vehicle Sales and Service, New/Used
S
S
P
X
X
X
X
X
X (49)
Recreational Vehicle/Truck Parking Lot or Garage
S
P
X
X
X
X
X
X (34)
Recycling Center
S
P (39)
Recycling Collection Point
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (39)
Recycling Plant
P (39)
Rehabilitation Care Facility (Ord. 13-06-36; 06/18/13) (27) (27) (27) (27) (27) (27) (27) (27) (27) (27) (27) (27) (27) (27)
X (43)
Rehabilitation Care Institution
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
X
X
X
X
X
X (43)
Research and Development Center (28) (28) (28) (28) (28) (28) (28) (28)
Residence Hotel (Extended Stay Hotel) (29) (29) (29) (29) (32)
Restaurant (30) (30) (30) (30) (30) (30) (30) (30) (30) (30) (30) (30) (30) (30) (30) (30) (30) (30) (30) (30) (41)
Restaurant, Drive-In
P
P
P
P
P (38) (41)
Retail Stores and Shops
P
P
P
P
P (42)
Retail/Service, Incidental
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (42)
Salvage Yard
S
X
X
X
X
X
X (49)
School District Bus Yard (31) (31) (31) (31) (31) (31) (31) (31) (31) (31) (31) (31) (31) (31) (31) (31) (31) (31) (31) (31) (31) (31) (31)
X
X
X
X
X (49)
School, Private
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (44) (45)
School, Public
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (44) (45)
Sewage Treatment Plant/Pumping Station
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S (49)
Sexually Oriented Uses
S (49)
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 3: Land Uses Page | 94
USE CHART
Base Zoning District Legend
Residential
Nonresidential
Special Parking Requirement Based on Use
P
Indicates Permitted Use AG – Agricultural District RE – Residential Estate District SF-16 – Single Family Residential-16 District SF-12.5 – Single Family Residential-12.5 District SF-10 – Single Family Residential-10 District SF-8.5 – Single Family Residential-8.5 District SF-7 – Single Family Residential-7 District OTR – Original Town Residential District PH – Patio Home District 2F – Two Family Residential (Duplex) District TH – Townhome District MF-15 – Multifamily-15 District MF-19 – Multifamily-19 District MH – Manufactured Home District O-1 – Office-1 District O-2 – Office-2 District R – Retail District OTC – Original Town Commercial District H – Highway District C-1 – Commercial-1 District C-2 – Commercial-2 District IT – Information and Technology District I – Industrial District PD – Planned Development District SUP or “S” – Specific Use Permits HL – Historic Landmark District PRO – Preston Road Overlay District TO – Tollway Overlay District
Indicates Prohibited Use
S
Indicates Specific Use Permit Required
#
Indicates Conditional Use (See Section 3.02.01. )
US 380 Gateway
Rural Corridor
Main Street
Retail Corridor
S.H. 121 Gateway
Special Zoning District Legend
Indicates Use subject to Base Zoning District
X
Indicates Prohibited Use in Overlay District
Indicates Regulation by District (See Individual Section)
USE TYPE
Small Engine Repair Shop
P
S
P
P
P (42)
Stable, Commercial
S
P (49)
Storage or Wholesale Warehouse
P
P
X
X
X
X
X (48)
Taxidermist
P
P (49)
Telephone Exchange
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P (49)
Temporary Building (32) (32) (32) (32) (32) (32) (32) (32) (32) (32) (32) (32) (32) (32) (32) (32) (32) (32) (32) (32) (32) (32) (32) (49)
Theater, Drive-In
S
S
X
X
X
X
X
X (46)
Theater, Neighborhood
P
P
P
P
P
P (46)
Theater, Regional
P
P
P
P
P (46)
Trailer Rental
S
S
P
X
X
X
X
X
X (49)
Trailer/Manufactured Home Display and Sales
P (49)
Transit Center
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
X
X
X
X
X (49)
Truck Sales, Heavy Trucks
S
S
P
X
X
X
X
X
X (34)
Truck Terminal
P
X
X
X
X
X (49)
Truck/Bus Repair
P
X
X
X
X
X
X (34)
Utility Distribution/Transmission Line
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S (49)
Veterinarian Clinic and/or Kennel, Indoor
P
P
P
P
P
P (49)
Veterinarian Clinic and/or Kennel, Outdoor
S
P
P
P (49)
Water Treatment Plant
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S (49)
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 3: Land Uses Page | 95
3.02.01. Conditional Development Standards
(A) A use is permitted in the zoning district as indicated in the Use Chart, Subsection 3.02 Use Chart (Page 89), if the following conditional development standards or limitations are met.
(1) Accessory Structure
Accessory buildings shall match the scale and character of the main structure when in the OTR – Original Town Residential District.
(2) Alcoholic Beverage Establishment
a. Alcoholic Beverage Establishments shall be subject to compliance with the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended and any applicable local option elections.
b. Specific Use Permit Required
1. An Alcoholic Beverage Establishment is permitted only by Specific Use Permit in the following zoning districts.
Zoning Districts Permitting an Alcoholic Beverage Establishment by SUP
Section
District Abbreviation – District Name
Page Number
2.04.02.
O-2 – Office-2 District
40
2.04.03.
R – Retail District
42
2.04.04.
OTC – Original Town Commercial District
43
2.04.05.
H – Highway District
49
2.04.06.
C-1 – Commercial-1 District
50
2.04.07.
C-2 – Commercial-2 District
51
2.04.08.
IT – Information and Technology District
52
2.04.09.
I – Industrial District
53
2. An Alcoholic Beverage Establishment is also permitted in the following zoning districts only as an accessory use when in conjunction with the operation of a golf course.
Zoning Districts Permitting a Private Club as an Accessory Use by SUP
Section
District Abbreviation – District Name
Page Number
2.03.01.
AG – Agricultural District
22
2.03.02.
RE – Residential Estate District
23
2.03.03.
SF-16 – Single Family Residential-16 District
24
2.03.04.
SF-12.5 – Single Family Residential-12.5 District
25
2.03.05.
SF-10 – Single Family Residential-10 District
26
2.03.06.
SF-8.5 – Single Family Residential-8.5 District
27
2.03.07.
SF-7 – Single Family Residential-7 District
28
2.03.09.
PH – Patio Home District
31
2.03.10.
2F – Two Family Residential (Duplex) District
33
2.03.11.
TH – Townhome District
34
2.03.12.
MF-15 – Multifamily-15 District
36
2.03.13.
MF-19 – Multifamily-19 District
37
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 96 Section 3: Land Uses
c. An Alcoholic Beverage Establishment shall not be located within:
1. Eight hundred (800) feet from a church, public hospital, public school, private school, and/or residential zoning district;
(i) For this purpose, residential zoning districts shall include, but are not limited to, properties that are zoned Neighborhood Service (see Subsection 2.02 Equivalency Table (Page 21) and residential Planned Development Districts.
(ii) Separation from residential zoning districts does not apply to Alcoholic Beverage Establishments that are an accessory use in conjunction with the operation of a golf course.
2. One thousand (1,000) feet from a public school if the City Council receives a request for this additional spacing requirement from the school district, and the City Council adopts such additional spacing requirements by resolution; and
3. One thousand (1,000) feet from a private school if the City Council receives a request for this additional spacing requirement from the board of the private school, and the City Council adopts the additional spacing requirements by resolution.
d. Measurement for the distance between an Alcoholic Beverage Establishment and the uses listed above or the nearest residential zoning district shall be in a straight line from the nearest property line of the lot where the Alcoholic Beverage Establishment is located, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the nearest property line of the lot where the church, public hospital, public school, and/or private school is located.
e. If a use were operating as a private club in accordance with Frisco’s Zoning Ordinance and pursuant to a valid Specific Use Permit before August 18, 2009, and now only qualifies as an Alcoholic Beverage Establishment, the use shall be reclassified as an Alcoholic Beverage Establishment, the SUP shall be treated as if it were originally issued for an Alcoholic Beverage Establishment, and if the use fails to comply with the new regulations set forth in this Paragraph, that Alcoholic Beverage Establishment shall be allowed to continue operating in the same location, subject to the continued rights of the City Council to terminate the use’s Specific Use Permit, in accordance with the law.
f. In accordance with Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code Section 109.33, in this section, “private school” means a private school, including a parochial school, that:
1. Offers a course of instruction for students in one or more grades from kindergarten through grade twelve; and
2. Has more than 100 students enrolled and attending courses at a single location.
g. If at the time an original alcoholic beverage permit or license is granted by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission for a premises, the premises satisfies the requirement regarding distance from public schools, private schools, churches, public hospitals, and/or residential zoning districts, then the premises shall be deemed to satisfy the distance requirements for all subsequent renewals of the license or permit. This shall not be the case if the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission revokes the license or permit.
(3) Antenna and/or Antenna Support Structure, Commercial
a. All commercial antennae and antenna support structures located on property owned by the City shall be permitted with a Specific Use Permit in any district.
b. All commercial antennae and antenna support structures shall be permitted by Specific Use Permit the following zoning districts:
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 3: Land Uses Page | 97
Districts Permitting by Specific Use Permit
Section
District Abbreviation – District Name
Page Number
2.04.01.
O-1 – Office-1 District
39
2.04.02.
O-2 – Office-2 District
40
2.04.03.
R – Retail District
42
2.04.05.
H – Highway District
49
2.04.06.
C-1 – Commercial-1 District
50
2.04.07.
C-2 – Commercial-2 District
51
2.04.08.
IT – Information and Technology District
52
2.04.09.
I – Industrial District
53
c. All commercial antennae and antenna support structures allowed by an SUP shall be subject to the following regulations.
1. Antenna support structures shall be setback a distance equal to or greater than the tower’s height measured from the property lines.
2. Antenna support structures shall be constructed to support at least two carriers.
3. Antenna facilities shall be screened by a six (6) foot masonry screening wall or a six (6) foot Open Ornamental Fence (Page 298) with living screen.
d. An antenna located on an existing antenna support structure is permitted by right upon site substantially conforming plan approval.
(4) Antenna and/or Antenna Support Structure, Non-Commercial
a. Free-standing antenna and/or antenna support structures shall be prohibited within the OTR – Original Town Residential District or the OTC – Original Town Commercial District.
b. All antenna and/or antenna support structures shall be attached to a building.
(5) Antenna, Stealth
a. Commercial Stealth Antennas are permitted by right in the Residential Districts only as a secondary use when the primary use on the lot is a church, school, athletic stadium or field, or public utility structure.
b. Commercial Stealth Antennas are permitted by right in the Nonresidential Districts.
c. Approval of a Listed Commercial Stealth Antenna
1. The Director may approve a request to install a stealth antenna when the proposed stealth antenna is of a type that is specifically listed in the definition of Antenna, Stealth (Page 275).
d. Approval of an Unlisted Commercial Stealth Antenna
1. For commercial stealth antenna requests of a type that are not specifically listed in this definition, the Planning & Zoning Commission may determine if a proposed commercial antenna is a stealth antenna or not when considering Site Plan approval for the proposal.
e. For appeals, see Subsection 6.19 Appeals and the Appeal Process (Page 268).
(6) Athletic Stadium or Field, Private
Permitted by Specific Use Permit when developed as an accessory use with a School, Private or Parochial.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 98 Section 3: Land Uses
(7) Big Box Retail Development
a. Big Box Permitted by Right Criteria
Big Box uses are permitted by right if:
1. The lot has frontage on the Dallas North Tollway, S.H. 121, or U.S. 380;
2. The use is located within a retail center that has frontage on F.M. 423 and the entire Big Box building, all of its required parking, and its required loading area are located within 1,650 feet of F.M. 423; or
3. The use is located within the area bounded by the Dallas North Tollway, Warren Parkway, Ohio Drive, and S.H. 121.
b. Big Box Permitted by Specific Use Permit (SUP)
Big Box uses are permitted by Specific Use Permit (SUP) in all other areas where zoning is indicated on the Subsection 3.02 Use Chart (Page 89).
(8) Body Art Studio
Must be set back 1,000 feet, as measured by a singular straight line (i.e., air distance), from any other Body Art Studio, Residential Zoning District, church, Public, Private, or Parochial School, and day care. The measurement for this distance requirement shall be in a straight line from the nearest property line of the lot where the Body Art Studio is located without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the nearest property line of the lot where the Residential Zoning District, church, Public, Private, or Parochial School, and day care is located.
(9) Bus Terminal
a. Permitted by right in the H – Highway District.
b. Permitted by Specific Use Permit in the C-1 – Commercial-1 District, C-2 – Commercial-2 District, and I – Industrial District.
c. Bus parking and storage areas shall be screened with a six (6) foot ornamental metal fence, three (3) inch caliper evergreen trees on twenty (20) foot centers, and five (5) gallon evergreen shrubs on three (3) foot centers.
(10) Car Wash
Permitted as an accessory use to Convenience Store with Gas Pumps.
(11) Child-Care: Licensed Child-Care Center
a. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, a public independent school district is not required to obtain a SUP for the operation of a day-care in a public school.
b. A day-care not operated by a public independent school district is permitted by SUP in all districts except OTR – Original Town Residential District and I – Industrial District, where it is prohibited.
c. The approved SUP shall establish the maximum enrollment capacity for a Child-Care: Licensed Child-Care Center (Page 281).
d. Day-care facilities shall provide annual reporting data, upon request, that confirms child-care is provided for less than 24 hours a day.
e. Outdoor Play Space Requirement
1. All centers shall provide outdoor play space at a rate of sixty-five (65) square feet per child.
2. This requirement shall be based on the maximum licensed capacity of the facility.
3. The outdoor play space shall have no dimension of less than thirty (30) feet.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 3: Land Uses Page | 99
4. If the facility provides care to all children for less than four hours per day, then the facility shall be exempt from this requirement.
f. Outdoor Play Space Defined
1. Outdoor play space is defined as the area used for outside recreational purposes for children.
2. The outdoor play area must be enclosed by a fence of at least four (4) feet in height with at least two exits.
3. One exit may be an entrance to the building.
g. Pre-Existing Exemption
3.02.01. (A)(11)e (Page 98) and 3.02.01. (A)(11)f (Page 99) shall not apply to a day care center with a Certificate of Occupancy, Site Plan, or Specific Use Permit issued or approved prior to February 15, 2000.
(12) Child-care: Home
Permitted by right as a home occupation in the designated zoning districts and is subject to the regulations of Home Occupation.
(13) Concrete/Asphalt Batching Plan, Temporary
Temporary building permit issued by the building official.
(14) Convenience Store with Gas Pumps
(Ord. No. 11-08-27; 08/01/2011)
Convenience Stores with Gas Pumps shall be subject to the following development standards:
a. Gas pumps are permitted by right at a maximum of two (2) corners at an intersection of two (2) major thoroughfares. Within the TO - Tollway Overlay District, if two gas pumps are currently located at two corners at an intersection of two (2) major thoroughfares, then a convenience store with gas pumps may be located at a third corner of said intersection along the Dallas North Tollway upon approval of a Specific Use Permit.
b. Gas pumps shall be located at least two hundred and fifty (250) feet from a property line of a residential lot.
1. For the purposes of this section, a residential lot means a lot on which a residential use is located, a lot zoned residential, or a lot designated as residential on the Comprehensive Land Use Plan.
2. This provision intends to alter 4.07.12. (A) Structures in Conjunction with any Automotive Use (Page 182) as it would apply to gas pumps.
3. Gas pumps do not have to meet the spacing requirement if:
(i) A major thoroughfare separates the accessory gas pumps from the residential lot; or
(ii) The Future Land Use Plan designates a lot as residential, but City Council subsequently rezones the property to a nonresidential zoning district and no residential use is located on the lot.
c. Roofs of convenience stores and pump canopies shall be pitched. Within the TO - Tollway Overlay District, the requirement for a pitched roof on the canopy or convenience store shall be determined during preliminary site plan or site plan review depending on the existing or planned architectural style of adjacent development.
d. Within the TO – Tollway Overlay District, a maximum of ten (10) pump islands shall be permitted. This restriction shall not limit the number of fuel dispensers per pump island.
e. The maximum length of the canopy shall not exceed one hundred sixty (160) feet.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 100 Section 3: Land Uses
f. Within the TO – Tollway Overlay District, the clearance height of the canopy, measured from the finished grade to the lowest point on the canopy facia, shall not exceed fourteen (14) feet. The maximum clearance height of the canopy may be increased to sixteen (16) feet where grade changes under the canopy necessitate the increase in height.
g. Within the TO – Tollway Overlay District, the color of the various components of the pump islands, including dispensers, bollards and all appurtenances shall be consistent with the color of the main structure within the TO - Tollway Overlay District.
h. Within the TO – Tollway Overlay District, a three (3) foot water course shall be provided on the base of the main building and the columns of the canopy. During preliminary site plan or site plan review, alternate designs may be considered by the Planning & Zoning Commission.
i. Canopy support columns shall be fully encased with masonry materials that are complementary to that used on the main building.
j. The canopy band face shall be of a color consistent with the main structure or an accent color and may not be backlit or used as signage.
k. Convenience stores with gas pumps shall be prohibited in a vertical mixed-use development except where permitted along S.H. 121, U.S. 380, FM 423, and the Dallas North Tollway.
l. Special landscaping is required from the curb cut on Preston Road to the curb cut on the intersecting street. The landscaping shall include the following.
1. A thirty (30) foot landscape buffer shall be provided adjacent to the right-of-way rather than a slip road.
2. A double row of minimum three (3) inch caliper large trees shall be planted nominally twenty five (25) feet on center along the frontage of both streets.
(i) The first row of trees shall be planted sixteen (16) feet from the back of the street curb.
(ii) The second row of trees shall be planted thirty (30) feet from the back of the curb.
3. Shrubs and annual plants shall be planted and maintained adjacent to Preston Road and the intersecting street.
m. Within the TO – Tollway Overlay District, convenience stores with gas pumps shall be permitted by right within the Historic, Typical, and U.S. 380 Gateway Sub-Districts.
n. Within the TO – Tollway Overlay District U.S. 380 Gateway Sub-District, the following additional landscape elements are required.
1. A fifty (50) foot front landscape edge
(i) Twenty (20) feet of this landscape edge may be counted toward the seven (7) percent open space requirement.
2. The front landscape edge tree requirement is increased by fifty (50) percent.
(15) Equipment and Machinery Sales and Rental, Minor
Use must be completely maintained within the main structure.
(16) Gas Pumps as Accessory Use
Accessory gas pumps are only allowed as an accessory use to a big box tenant and are subject to the following development standards.
a. Accessory gas pumps must be located on the same lot as a big box tenant.
b. Gas Pumps are permitted at a maximum of two corners at an intersection of two major thoroughfares.
c. A sales kiosk servicing the accessory gas pumps shall be less than five hundred (500) square-feet in floor area.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 3: Land Uses Page | 101
d. Accessory gas pumps shall be located at least two hundred and fifty (250) feet from a property line of a residential lot.
1. For the purposes of this section, a residential lot means a lot on which a residential use is located, a lot zoned residential, or a lot designated as residential on the Comprehensive Land Use Plan.
2. This provision intends to alter 4.07.12. (A) Structures in Conjunction with any Automotive Use (Page 182) as it would apply to accessory gas pumps.
3. Accessory gas pumps do not have to meet the spacing requirement if:
(i) A major thoroughfare separates the accessory gas pumps from the residential lot; or
(ii) The Future Land Use Plan designates a lot as residential, but City Council subsequently rezones the property to a nonresidential zoning district and no residential use is located on the lot.
e. Canopies shall have pitched roofs.
f. Canopy support columns shall be fully encased with masonry materials that are complementary to that used on the main building.
g. The canopy band face shall be of a color consistent with the main structure or an accent color and may not be backlit or used as signage.
h. Special landscaping is required from the curb cut on Preston Road to the curb cut on the intersecting street. The landscaping shall include the following.
1. A thirty (30) foot landscape edge shall be provided adjacent to the right-of-way rather than a slip road.
2. A double row of minimum three (3) inch caliper large trees shall be planted nominally twenty five (25) feet on center along the frontage of both streets.
(i) The first row of trees shall be planted sixteen (16) feet from the back of the street curb.
(ii) The second row of trees shall be planted thirty (30) feet from the back of the curb.
3. Shrubs and annual plants shall be planted and maintained adjacent to Preston Road and the intersecting street.
i. Within the TO – Tollway Overlay District gas pumps shall be permitted by right within the Historic, Typical, and U.S. 380 Gateway Sub-Districts.
j. Within the TO – Tollway Overlay District U.S. 380 Gateway Sub-District, the following additional landscape elements are required.
1. A fifty (50) foot front landscape edge.
2. A three (3) foot earthen berm located within the front landscape edge.
3. The front landscape edge tree requirement is increased by fifty (50) percent.
(17) Hall, Reception/Banquet/Meeting
a. Reception, banquet or meeting halls may provide live or recorded entertainment, and, may serve catered meals and alcoholic beverages when the owner or operator holds the appropriate licenses and permits.
b. Reception, banquet or meeting halls shall minimize disturbances to surrounding properties which includes restricting activities inside the structure or if located outside, no electronically amplified sound generated shall be audible at any time beyond the boundary of the property on which the facility is located.
c. Pre-purchased tickets and ticket sales at the door are not allowed.
d. Non-profit events (i.e., political fundraisers or a registered charitable program in compliance with all state statutes) held at a reception, banquet or meeting hall are allowed to be open to the general public and have pre-purchased tickets and ticket sales at the door.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 102 Section 3: Land Uses
e. The certificate of occupancy, occupant load, and hours of operation shall at all times be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises.
(18) Home Occupation
(Ord. No. 13-03-18; 03/05/2013)
A home occupation, in districts where allowed, shall meet the following standards to maintain the residential character of the neighborhood while providing opportunities for home-based businesses.
a. Unless specifically permitted by this section, home occupations shall be conducted entirely within the main building.
b. Home occupations shall not produce any alteration or change in the exterior appearance of the residence which is inconsistent with the typical appearance of a residential dwelling.
1. No external evidence of the occupation shall be detectable at any lot line, including advertising, signs, smoke, dust, noise, fumes, glare, vibration, or electrical disturbance beyond the property line;
2. No exterior storage of material, equipment, vehicles, and/or supplies used in conjunction with the home occupation;
3. No storage of hazardous materials for business purposes shall be allowed on the premises;
4. The home occupation shall not have a separate entrance;
5. Not more than two (2) patron- or business-related vehicles shall be present at any one time, and the proprietor shall provide adequate off-street parking for such vehicles;
6. A maximum of one (1) commercial vehicle, capacity one (1) ton or less, may be used or parked on the property in connection with the home occupation. The commercial vehicle shall not be parked on the street;
7. The home occupation shall not require regular or frequent deliveries by large delivery trucks or vehicles in excess of one and one-half (1½) tons. This shall not be construed to prohibit deliveries by commercial package delivery companies;
8. The home occupation shall not display advertising signs or other visual or audio devices which call attention to the business use;
9. Merchandise shall not be offered or displayed for sale on the premises. Sales incidental to a service shall be allowed; and orders previously made via the telephone, internet, or at a sales party may be filled on the premises; and
10. No traffic shall be generated by a home occupation in greater volumes than normally expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking must be accommodated within the off-street parking provided for the residence (i.e. the driveway or garage) and along the street frontage of the lot.
c. The home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the premises for residential purposes.
d. The home occupation shall employ no more than two (2) individuals who are not an occupant of the residence. This shall not include the coordination or supervision of employees who do not regularly visit the house for purposes related to the business.
e. The home occupation shall not offer a ready inventory of any commodity for sale, except as specifically listed under 3.02.01. (A)(18)h.3 Author, artist, sculptor; (Page 103).
f. The home occupation shall not accept clients or customers before 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. This limitation on hours of operation shall not apply to allowed childcare home occupations. Hours of operation shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. for outdoor activities.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 3: Land Uses Page | 103
g. Outdoor activities are not allowed, unless the activities are screened from neighboring property and public rights-of-way.
h. Uses allowed as home occupations shall include the following:
1. Office of an accountant, architect, attorney, engineer, realtor, minister, rabbi, clergyman, or similar profession;
2. Office of a salesman or manufacturer’s representative, provided that no retail or wholesale transactions or provision of services may be personally and physically made on premises;
3. Author, artist, sculptor;
4. Dressmaker, seamstress, tailor, milliner;
5. Music/dance teacher, tutoring, or similar instruction, provided that no more than three (3) pupils may be present at any one time;
6. Swimming lessons or water safety instruction provided that a maximum of six (6) pupils may be present at any one time;
7. Home crafts, such as weaving, model making, etc.;
8. Repair shop for small electrical appliances, cameras, watches, or other small items, provided that items can be carried by one person with no special equipment, and provided that no internal combustion engine repair is allowed;
9. Child-Care: Licensed Child-Care Home, Child-Care: Listed Family Home, or Child Care: Registered Child-Care Home;
(i) Homes with six (6) or more children shall meet the City’s building and/or fire codes.
10. Barbershop, beauty salon, or manicure studio, provided that no more than one (1) customer is served at any one time;
11. Community home and other residential care facility that qualifies as a community home under the Community Homes for Disabled Persons Location Act, Chapter 123 of the Texas Human Resources Code and as amended, provided such facilities meet the requirements set out within this Ordinance;
12. Internet based businesses; and
13. Food Production Operations that produce non-potentially hazardous food. Examples of non-potentially hazardous foods include; bread, rolls, biscuits, sweet breads, muffins, cakes, pastries, cookies, fruit pies, jams, jellies, dry herbs, and dry herb mixes.
i. Uses prohibited as home occupations shall include the following:
1. Animal hospital, commercial stable, kennel;
2. Boardinghouse or roominghouse;
3. Schooling or instruction with more than five (5) pupils;
4. Restaurant or on-premise food/beverage consumption of any kind;
5. Automobile, boat, or trailer repair, small engine or motorcycle repair, large appliance repair, repair of any items with internal combustion engines, or other repairs shops;
6. Cabinetry, metal work, or welding shop;
7. Office for doctor, dentist, veterinarian, or other medical-related profession;
8. On-premise retail or wholesale sale of any kind, except home craft items produced entirely on premises;
9. Commercial clothing laundering or cleaning;
10. Mortuary or funeral home;
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 104 Section 3: Land Uses
11. Trailer, vehicle, tool, or equipment rental;
12. Antique, gift, or specialty shop;
13. Any use defined by the building code as assembly, factory/industrial, hazardous, institutional, or mercantile occupancy; and
j. Determination of a Home Occupation Use not Specifically Listed:
1. The Director shall determine whether a proposed use not specifically listed is appropriate as a home occupation. The Director shall evaluate the proposed home occupation in terms of its impact on neighboring property, its similarity to other allowed and prohibited uses, and its conformance with the regulations herein.
k. Appeal of the Director’s Home Occupation Determination:
1. If the applicant disagrees with the determination of the Director, the applicant may appeal to the Planning & Zoning Commission.
l. Any home occupation that was legally in existence as of the effective date of this Ordinance and that is not in full conformity with these provisions shall be deemed a legal nonconforming use.
(19) Homebuilder Marketing Center
a. Shall be used only to market homes/lots in the development where it is located when located in a residential zoning district.
b. The use must be removed when all homes/lots in the development have been sold.
(20)Mobile Vendor
Mobile food vendors are subject to the following regulations:
a. Mobile food vendors are permitted in R – Retail District, H – Highway District, C-1 – Commercial-1 District, C-2 – Commercial-2 District, or PD – Planned Development District with O-1 – Office-1 District or O-2 – Office-2 District as the base zoning only;
b. Mobile food vendors shall be located on private property where an existing, permanent business operates in a building with a certificate of occupancy;
c. Mobile food vendors shall provide the City with a copy of written permission from the property owner on an annual basis to allow the operation of a mobile vendor and to allow the mobile vendor and their customers access to a commercially plumbed public restroom on-site;
d. A mobile food vendor shall submit a Site Plan depicting the location of the mobile food vendor on the property, shall secure a health permit from the Health and Food Safety Division, and a permit from Building Inspections prior to the operation of such use;
e. Temporary connections to potable water are prohibited. Water shall be from an internal tank, and electricity shall be from a generator or an electrical outlet via a portable cord that is in conformance with the Electrical Code as adopted by the City;
f. Mobile food vendors shall be located within 50 feet of an entrance of a primary building that holds the Certificate of Occupancy;
g. Mobile food vendors shall be setback a minimum of 100 feet from major thoroughfares, as designated on the City’s Thoroughfare Plan;
h. Mobile food vendors may operate only during the business hours of the primary business on the property;
i. The operator shall possess a City tax certificate showed as paid;
j. A drive through is not permitted in conjunction with the mobile food vendor;
k. Mobile food vendors shall not operate in parking spaces, driveways, fire lanes or public roads;
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 3: Land Uses Page | 105
l. Sales of food from a stationary vehicle excludes catering trucks; and
m. Mobile food vendors are prohibited in a temporary building.
(21)Motel
Motel developments shall be subject to the following development standards.
a. Shall provide staff on-site 24 hours a day.
b. Shall provide at least three amenities from the list below.
1. Indoor/Outdoor Pool
2. Spa/Sauna
3. Weight Room/Fitness Center
4. Playground
5. Sports Court
6. Plaza/Atrium
7. Game Room
8. Conference Room (1,000 square foot minimum)
c. Full Service Restaurant (minimum seating capacity of 35)
d. Shall maintain a minimum separation of one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet measured linearly from property line to property line from any other Hotel, Motel, or Residence Hotel property.
(22) Nursery, Major
Permitted by Specific Use Permit in an AG – Agricultural District if designated as nonresidential on the Future Land Use Plan. Major nurseries may be permitted by City Council approval of a Specific Use Permit in the Retail Corridor subdistrict of the PRO – Preston Road Overlay District, south of Wade Boulevard with the following conditions, including but not limited to the following.
a. Major nurseries must be located beyond one thousand (1,000) feet of a major intersection.
b. Only allowed as infill development with directly adjacent properties already developed. See Figure 3.02.01.1 Infill Development.
c. All landscape inventory must be screened from Preston Road with an eight (8) foot masonry screening wall and plant material or a combination four foot masonry wall with an Open Ornamental Fence (Page 298) and plant material. See
d. and Figure 3.02.01.3 Landscape Buffer.
e. Landscape inventory must be screened from adjacent properties with an eight (8) foot Open Ornamental Fence (Page 298) with a living screen. See Figure 3.02.01.4 Screening Wall (Page 106).
Figure 3.02.01.1 Infill Development
Figure 3.02.01.2 Landscape Buffer
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 106 Section 3: Land Uses
Figure 3.02.01.3 Landscape Buffer
Figure 3.02.01.4 Screening Wall
f. Non-plant inventory (i.e., hardscape packages, supplies) shall not extend above the height of the screening fence/wall. Only live plant materials, trees, and shrubs may extend above the screening wall/fence.
g. All structures and greenhouses must comply with the exterior material requirements of the PRO – Preston Road Overlay District.
(23) Oil Well/Gas Well and Mineral Extraction
Refer to the International Fire Code currently adopted by the City for a complete list of procedures and requirements.
(24) Alcoholic Beverage Sales
(Ord. No. 12-12-81; 12/18/2012)
Alcoholic Beverage Sales, as defined by the Zoning Ordinance, as amended, shall mean any establishment, place of business or person engaged in the selling of alcoholic beverages, as defined in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended, to the general public for off-premise personal or household consumption.
a. Alcoholic Beverage Sales shall be subject to compliance with the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended, and any applicable local option elections.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 3: Land Uses Page | 107
b. Alcoholic Beverage Sales are permitted only in the following districts.
Zoning Districts Permitting Alcoholic Beverage Sales
Section
District Abbreviation – District Name
Page Number
2.04.03.
R – Retail District
42
2.04.04.
OTC – Original Town Commercial District
43
2.04.05.
H – Highway District
49
2.04.06.
C-1 – Commercial-1 District
50
2.04.07.
C-2 – Commercial-2 District
51
c. Alcoholic Beverage Sales in the 2.04.04. OTC – Original Town Commercial District are permitted as follows:
1. Alcoholic Beverage Sales are only permitted in the OTC – Original Town Commercial District, between North and South County Road and the BNSF Rail Line; and
2. Only two (2) places of business engaged in Alcoholic Beverage Sales may be located in the OTC – Original Town Commercial District, and only one (1) place of business engaged in Alcoholic Beverage Sales may be located on any given block.
d. Beer sales are not permitted in residential zoning districts.
e. Alcoholic Beverage Sales shall not be located within the following:
1. Three hundred (300) feet from a church, public school, and/or private school. However, Alcoholic Beverage Sales may be located within three hundred (300) feet of a private school if minors are prohibited from entering the place of business, as required by Section 109.53 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended; and
2. One thousand (1,000) feet from a private school if the City Council receives a request for this additional spacing requirement from the board of the private school, and the City Council adopts the additional spacing requirements by resolution. But, the City Council may not adopt this additional spacing requirement if minors are prohibited from entering the place of business engaged in Alcoholic Beverage Sales, pursuant to Section 109.53 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended.
f. Measurement of the distance between the place of business engaged in Alcoholic Beverage Sales and the church or public hospital shall be along the property line of the street fronts, from front door to front door, and in a direct line across intersections. Measurement for the distance between the place of business engaged in Alcoholic Beverage Sales and a public or private school shall be:
1. In a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of business, and in a direct line across intersections; or
2. If Alcoholic Beverage Sales are located on or above the fifth (5th) story of a multistory building, in a direct line from the property line of the public or private school to the property line of the place of business, in a direct line across intersections, and vertically up the building at the property line to the base floor on which Alcoholic Beverage Sales are located.
g. In accordance with Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code Section 109.33, in this section, “private school” means a private school, including a parochial school, that:
1. Offers a course of instruction for students in one or more grades from kindergarten through grade twelve; and
2. Has more than one hundred (100) students enrolled and attending courses at a single location.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 108 Section 3: Land Uses
h. If at any time an original alcoholic beverage permit or license is granted by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission to an establishment, place of business, or person and the establishment, place of business or person satisfies the requirements regarding the distance requirements in this section, then the same shall be deemed to satisfy the distance requirements for all subject renewals of the license or permit. This shall not be the case if the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission revokes the license or permit.
(25) Private Club
a. Private Clubs shall be subject to compliance with the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended and any applicable local option elections.
b. Specific Use Permit Required
1. A Private Club is permitted only by Specific Use Permit in the following zoning districts.
Zoning Districts Permitting a Private Club by SUP
Section
District Abbreviation – District Name
Page Number
2.04.02.
O-2 – Office-2 District
40
2.04.03.
R – Retail District
42
2.04.04.
OTC – Original Town Commercial District
43
2.04.05.
H – Highway District
49
2.04.06.
C-1 – Commercial-1 District
50
2.04.07.
C-2 – Commercial-2 District
51
2.04.08.
IT – Information and Technology District
52
2.04.09.
I – Industrial District
53
2. A Private Club is also permitted by Specific Use Permit in the following zoning districts only as an accessory use when in conjunction with the operation of a golf course.
Zoning Districts Permitting a Private Club as an Accessory Use by SUP
Section
District Abbreviation – District Name
Page Number
2.03.01.
AG – Agricultural District
22
2.03.02.
RE – Residential Estate District
23
2.03.03.
SF-16 – Single Family Residential-16 District
24
2.03.04.
SF-12.5 – Single Family Residential-12.5 District
25
2.03.05.
SF-10 – Single Family Residential-10 District
26
2.03.06.
SF-8.5 – Single Family Residential-8.5 District
27
2.03.07.
SF-7 – Single Family Residential-7 District
28
2.03.09.
PH – Patio Home District
31
2.03.10.
2F – Two Family Residential (Duplex) District
33
2.03.11.
TH – Townhome District
34
2.03.12.
MF-15 – Multifamily-15 District
36
2.03.13.
MF-19 – Multifamily-19 District
37
c. A Private Club shall not be located within the following.
1. Eight hundred (800) feet from a church, public hospital, public school, private school, and/or residential zoning district.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 3: Land Uses Page | 109
(i) Separation from residential zoning districts does not apply to Alcoholic Beverage Establishments that are an accessory use in conjunction with the operation of a golf course.
2. One thousand (1,000) feet from a private school if the City Council receives a request for this additional spacing requirement from the board of the private school, and the City Council adopts the additional spacing requirements by resolution.
d. Measurement for the distance between a Private Club and the uses listed above or the nearest residential zoning district shall be in a straight line from the nearest property line of the lot where the alcoholic beverage establishment is located, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the nearest property line of the lot where the church, public hospital, public school, and/or private school is located.
e. In accordance with Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code Section 109.33, in this section, “private school” means a private school, including a parochial school, that:
1. Offers a course of instruction for students in one or more grades from kindergarten through grade twelve; and
2. Has more than 100 students enrolled and attending courses at a single location.
f. If at any time an original alcoholic beverage permit or license is granted by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission for a premises, the premises satisfies the requirements regarding the distance requirements in this section, then the premises shall be deemed to satisfy the distance requirements for all subsequent renewals of the license or permit. This shall not be the case if the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission revokes the license or permit.
(26) Private Street Development
Private Street Developments are subject to provisions of the Thoroughfare Design Standards Ordinance, as it exists or may be amended. Private Street Developments are permitted by Specific Use Permit in the referenced districts. Private Street Developments that exist as of the adoption of this ordinance and properties that are zoned by a planned development that permits Private Street Developments are excluded from the requirement for a Specific Use Permit.
In considering requests for 2.05.02. SUP or “S” – Specific Use Permits (Page 55) for Private Street Developments, the City Council shall use any of the following criteria.
a. New Development
1. Non-disruption of planned public roadways or facilities/projects (thoroughfares, parks, park trails, public pedestrian pathways, etc.);
2. Non-disruption to and from properties of future developments either on-site or off-site to the proposed subdivision;
3. No negative effect on traffic circulation on public streets;
4. No impairment of access to and from public facilities including schools or parks;
5. Adequate and timely provision of essential municipal services (emergency services, water/sewer improvements or maintenance, etc.);
6. Existence of natural and/or man-made boundaries around the development (creeks, floodplain, golf courses, parks); and/or
7. Absence of a concentration of Private Street Developments in the vicinity of the requested Private Street Development.
b. Conversion of Existing Subdivision to Private Streets
1. Criteria would include all the issues and procedures involved with new developments;
2. Petition signed by one hundred (100) percent of the owners in the existing subdivision requesting approval to convert to private streets;
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 110 Section 3: Land Uses
3. Formation of a property owners’ association, if none exists, that would be responsible for owning and maintaining the converted streets and rights-of-way;
4. Re-platting of existing subdivision to reflect changes; and/or
5. Applicant agreeing to contract with the City for purchase of the converted infrastructure and rights-of-way from the City.
(27) Rehabilitation Care Facility
(Ord. No. 13-06-36; 06/18/13)
Shall maintain a minimum separation of one thousand (1,000) feet measured linearly from property line to property line from any other Rehabilitation Care Facility or Household Care Facility. The distance requirement shall be verified by the Director.
(28) Research and Development Center
Any Research and Development Center that includes animal or biological testing will be permitted by Specific Use Permit in the designated districts.
(29) Residence Hotel
Residence Hotel developments shall be subject to the following development standards:
a. Not more than 23 room units per acre.
b. Shall maintain laundry facilities on-site for guest use.
c. Shall provide staff on-site 24 hours a day.
d. Shall provide at least three amenities from the list below.
1. Indoor/Outdoor Pool
2. Spa/Sauna
3. Weight Room/Fitness Center
4. Playground
5. Sports Court
6. Plaza/Atrium
7. Game Room
8. Jogging Trail
9. Conference Room (1,000 square foot minimum)
10. Full Service Restaurant (minimum seating capacity of 35)
e. Shall be set back a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any residential district.
f. Shall maintain fifteen (15) percent of the lot area as open space, exclusive of required setbacks and parking areas, but including amenities from the above list except for Conference Room and Full Service Restaurant.
g. Shall maintain a minimum separation of one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet measured linearly from property line to property line from any other Hotel, Motel, or Residence Hotel property.
h. A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the room units shall contain kitchen facilities.
i. Location
1. Shall be permitted only with frontage along S.H. 121, Preston Road, the Dallas North Tollway, FM 423, or US 380.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 3: Land Uses Page | 111
(30) Restaurant
a. A Restaurant is permitted by right in the following zoning districts.
Restaurants are Permitted by Right within the Following Districts
Section
District Abbreviation – District Name
Page Number
2.04.02.
O-2 – Office-2 District
40
2.04.03.
R – Retail District
42
2.04.04.
OTC – Original Town Commercial District
43
2.04.05.
H – Highway District
49
2.04.06.
C-1 – Commercial-1 District
50
2.04.07.
C-2 – Commercial-2 District
51
2.04.08.
IT – Information and Technology District
52
2.04.09.
I – Industrial District
53
b. A Restaurant is also permitted in the following zoning districts only as an accessory use when in conjunction with the operation of a golf course.
Zoning Districts Permitting a Restaurant as an Accessory Use by SUP
Section
District Abbreviation – District Name
Page Number
2.03.01.
AG – Agricultural District
22
2.03.02.
RE – Residential Estate District
23
2.03.03.
SF-16 – Single Family Residential-16 District
24
2.03.04.
SF-12.5 – Single Family Residential-12.5 District
25
2.03.05.
SF-10 – Single Family Residential-10 District
26
2.03.06.
SF-8.5 – Single Family Residential-8.5 District
27
2.03.07.
SF-7 – Single Family Residential-7 District
28
2.03.09.
PH – Patio Home District
31
2.03.10.
2F – Two Family Residential (Duplex) District
33
2.03.11.
TH – Townhome District
34
2.03.12.
MF-15 – Multifamily-15 District
36
2.03.13.
MF-19 – Multifamily-19 District
37
c. Except as otherwise provided, restaurants with drive-through are permitted in any zoning district where a Restaurant is permitted.
1. Restaurants with drive-through are not permitted in the O-2 – Office-2 District and are only permitted in the PRO – Preston Road Overlay District with conditions.
d. Restaurants that sell alcohol shall be subject to compliance with the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended and any applicable local option elections.
e. Except along Main Street in the OTC – Original Town Commercial District, a Restaurant that sells alcohol shall not be located within the following.
1. Three hundred (300) feet from a church, public hospital, and/or public school.
f. Measurement for the distance between a Restaurant where alcohol beverages are sold and a church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts, from front door to front door, and in a direct line across intersections.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 112 Section 3: Land Uses
g. Measurement for the distance between a Restaurant where alcoholic beverages are sold and a public school shall be:
1. In a direct line from the property line of the public school to the property line of the place of business, and in a direct line across intersections; or
2. If the restaurant that sells alcohol is located on or above the fifth story of a multistory building, in a direct line from the property line of the public school to the property line of the place of business, in a direct line across intersections, and vertically up the building at the property line to the base of the floor on which the Restaurant is located.
h. If a Restaurant receives seventy-five (75) percent or more of its gross revenue on a quarterly basis from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption, the use will no longer qualify as a Restaurant and will be classified and regulated by the City as an Alcoholic Beverage Establishment (Page 274) under the Frisco Zoning Ordinance.
i. If at any time an original alcoholic beverage permit or license is granted by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission for a premises, the premises satisfies the requirements regarding the distance requirements in this section, then the premises shall be deemed to satisfy the distance requirements for all subsequent renewals of the license or permit. This shall not be the case if the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission revokes the license or permit.
(31) School District Bus Yard
A School District Bus Yard shall be owned and/or operated by a public Independent School District. Unless otherwise approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission, School District Bus Yards shall be screened using one of the following methods.
a. Option 1
1. A six-foot ornamental metal fence,
2. Three-inch caliper evergreen trees on 20-foot centers, and
3. Five-gallon evergreen shrubs on three-foot centers.
b. Option 2
1. A six-foot clay-fired brick wall, and
2. Three-inch caliper evergreen trees on 20-foot centers.
(32) Temporary Buildings
a. Temporary buildings may be utilized by houses of worship (churches), public schools, and government agencies only. See Temporary Building (Page 306)
b. Houses of worship (churches), public schools (Kindergarten (K) through Twelfth (12th) grade), and government agencies may apply for a permit to erect a temporary building for an initial period of three (3) years provided the applicant submits.
1. An application with documented evidence of an immediate need for space to the Chief Building Official, who shall evaluate each application for a temporary building based on the following criteria:
(i) Capacity of the existing permanent building(s), which is located or planned to be located on the same property for which the temporary building permit is being sought, compared to the enrollment, employment, and/or number of people attending the existing permanent building(s) at one time;
(ii) Total enrollment, employment, and/or membership size;
(iii) Documentation of growth records depicting the number of people in the congregation, school and/or office;
(iv) Whether the facility is a start-up church, or school, or new government facility;
(v) Indication of alternative options that were explored before a temporary building application was considered;
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 3: Land Uses Page | 113
(vi) Acts of nature; and/or
(vii) Any other evidence which is reasonably related to the immediate need for additional space.
2. A Preliminary Site Plan to the Development Services Department, providing for a permanent solution to the immediate need for a new temporary building(s) showing the permanent building(s), the temporary building(s), and the required parking, which is subject to the review and approval of the Planning & Zoning Commission; and
3. A Site Plan for the temporary building(s) to the Development Services Department, which is subject to the review and approval of the Planning & Zoning Commission
c. The temporary building(s) shall be removed within thirty (30) calendar days of the date:
1. A Certificate of Occupancy is issued for the permanent building; or
2. The permit for the temporary building expires, whichever occurs first.
d. A request for a one (1) year extension of the temporary building permit may be granted by the Planning & Zoning Commission provided the applicant:
1. Has an approved and valid Preliminary Site Plan for the permanent building(s) and an approved and valid Site Plan for the temporary building(s); and
2. Has a specific plan of how an additional year would allow the applicant to construct the permanent building(s) by providing:
(i) Evidence of numeric growth, beyond that which was specifically anticipated by the applicant;
(ii) House of worship (church), school, or government membership, enrollment, and/or employment growth records;
(iii) Evidence that alternative options were explored before an extension of the temporary building permit was requested; and
(iv) Any other criteria reasonably deemed appropriate by the Planning & Zoning Commission.
e. For appeals, see Subsection 6.19 Appeals and the Appeal Process (Page 268).
(33) Townhome (Single Family Residence, Attached)
Only allowed in the OTR – Original Town Residential District, if south of Main Street.
(34)Mortuary/Funeral Parlor
(Ord. No. 11-08-29; 08/01/2011)
Permitted by Specific Use Permit and subject to the following development standards:
a. The site shall front or side to a minor or major thoroughfare;
b. Parking and drive aisles shall be screened from adjacent residential uses by a screening wall, minimum of six (6) feet in height, or by a combination of open fencing and living screening materials;
c. The number and location of driveways shall be determined by Engineering Services;
d. The application shall contain information indicating how the traffic generated by the use will not negatively impact the residential neighborhood;
e. Additional screening, landscape buffers and other development criteria may be required by the Planning & Zoning Commission and City Council to address potential impacts of the use on adjacent properties;
f. The maximum height shall be one story, 30 feet;
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 114 Section 3: Land Uses
g. All buildings shall be designed to have an appearance of a single family dwelling including the pitch and composition of the roof; and
h. Unless otherwise noted, all other requirements of the applicable Single Family District shall apply.
(35) Household Care Facilities
(Ord. No. 13-06-36; 06/18/13)
Shall maintain a minimum separation of one thousand (1,000) feet measured linearly from property line to property line from any other Household Care Facility or Rehabilitation Care Facility. The distance requirement shall be verified by the Director.
Section 4. Site Development Requirements
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 116 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
Subsection 4.01. Tree Preservation Requirements
4.01.01. Purpose
The terms and provisions of the Subsection 4.01 Tree Preservation Requirements are intended to accomplish the following public purposes:
(A) To encourage preservation of shade and ornamental trees through incentives and penalties;
(B) To define reasonable protective measures required to preserve the Protected Tree (See Tree, Protected (Page 308)) population;
(C) To increase the number of Protected Trees and the projected residual life span of Protected Trees;
(D) To improve the quality of life and comfort of both business and residential citizens while educating them in current basic tree cultivation and management techniques;
(E) To reduce the erosive effects of rainfall, protect water resources, mitigate ambient air temperatures and improve air quality;
(F) To prevent clear cutting; and
(G) To maintain or increase property values by preserving visually pleasing and desirable site features.
4.01.02. Purpose
The scope of this Subsection 4.01 Tree Preservation Requirements includes the removal and/or transplanting of any tree and mitigation for the removal of Protected Trees and the scope of the project and/or activity authorized by a Tree Removal Permit is limited to removing and/or transplanting trees or required mitigation. A permit approved by the Director is required before removing and/or transplanting any tree and mitigation for the removal of Protected Trees.
4.01.03. Tree Removal Permit
(A) Tree Removal Permit
A Tree Removal Permit approved by the Director shall be required for the transplanting and/or removal of all trees within the City, regardless of size or species, except for trees located on a single family or two family lot contained within a plat of record.
(B) Application for a Tree Removal Permit
An application for a Tree Removal Permit may be submitted at any time and is not required to be submitted in conjunction with development plans, Preliminary Plat or a Building Permit. An application for Tree Removal Permit shall be submitted to the Director and shall include:
(1) A letter signed by the property owner allowing the City access to the property for verification of all tree survey information;
(2) A written document indicating the reasons for transplanting and/or removal of Protected Trees;
(3) Two (2) copies of a legible site or planting plan; and
(4) A detailed tree survey and/or tree preservation plan if required in 4.01.07. Tree Surveys and Tree Preservation Plans (Page 120).
(C) Review of the Application for a Tree Removal Permit
(1) Upon receipt of an application for a Tree Removal Permit, the Director shall review the application and may conduct field inspections of the site or development and/or refer the permit application
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 117
to other departments for review and recommendations as deemed necessary and appropriate by the City.
(2) Protected Trees may not be removed or transplanted unless the Director approves the Tree Removal Permit. The removal of protected trees is subject to the mitigation requirements of 4.01.05. Mitigation for Trees Removed (Page 118).
(3) If the Director determines that the tree(s) are not protected as defined herein, then the applicant may remove the tree(s) from their property without mitigation.
4.01.04. Exceptions
(A) Director Authority to Remove Protected Trees
The Director may authorize, in writing, removal of a Protected Tree without mitigation under the following circumstances.
(1) A Protected Tree is determined by an arborist to be in a hazardous or dangerous condition so as to endanger the public health, welfare or safety, such as a tree that is damaged or diseased.
(2) A Protected Tree is located in a right-of way or easement and hinders or obstructs the construction, maintenance, repair, and/or replacement of major and minor thoroughfares as defined by the Thoroughfare Design Standards Ordinance, water and sewer lines, drainage and storm sewer infrastructure, or other public improvement projects.
(B) Single Family or Two Family Lots
A Tree Removal Permit shall be required to remove and/or transplant a Protected Tree (see definition Tree, Protected (Page 308)), except for a Protected Tree located on a single family or two family lot contained within a plat of record. If a tree required by the Zoning Ordinance is removed, it shall be replaced with a three (3) inch caliper or greater tree of an approved species from the City’s recommended large and medium tree lists. Street trees if removed shall be replaced with a three and one-half (3½) inch caliper or greater trees by the adjacent property owner.
(C) Nurseries
All retail, commercial, and wholesale nurseries are exempt from the terms and provisions of this Subsection 4.01 Tree Preservation Requirements in relation to those trees planted and growing on the premises of said business and that are planted and growing for the sale or intended sale in the ordinary course of business only.
(D) Utility Companies
(1) Utility companies franchised by the City in easements or rights-of-way accepted by the City or otherwise authorized to provide utility service may remove Protected Tree(s) that endanger public safety and welfare by interfering with utility service;
(2) Any trimming and/or removal of Protected Tree(s) by a utility company requires prior written approval from the Director, except in the case of emergency repairs; and
(3) A utility company shall notify the Director of any trimming and/or removal of Protected Trees done while making emergency repairs on the first business day following the emergency.
(E) Mowing and Clearing
The mowing and clearing of brush located within or under the drip lines of Protected Trees is allowed, provided such mowing or clearing is accomplished by hand or by mechanical mowers with turf tires.
(F) Golf Courses and Pedestrian Trails
Development or redevelopment of golf courses and pedestrian trails shall be responsible for fifty (50) percent of the requirements for Replacement Trees.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 118 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
(G) Agricultural Users
(1) Agricultural users can remove Protected Tree(s) for agricultural production with prior written permission from the Director.
(2) A Protected Tree inventory summary is required to list tree(s) proposed to be removed and preserved.
(3) Replacement requirements of Protected Tree(s) being removed for agricultural production will be prorated equally over a period of ten (10) years.
(4) Should the property be developed prior the full ten (10) years the remainder of required trees shall be planted on the property in addition to the required trees.
4.01.05. Mitigation for Trees Removed
(A) Replacement Requirements for Protected Trees
Protected Trees shall be replaced by planting trees on the property equal to the total caliper inches as calculated using the following replacement rate.
Size of Protected Tree*
Percentage Replacement Trees**
Less than 6"
0%
6" – 12"
100%
12.1" - 20"
150%
20.1" or greater
300%
*All existing tree measurements are in caliper inches as measured four and one-half (4½) feet DBH above the natural ground level.
For multiple trunk trees, combine the diameter of largest stem or trunk with one-half of the diameter of each additional stem or trunk, all measured at four and one half (4½) feet above ground level.
** All replacement tree measurements are in caliper inches in accordance with the American Standards for Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60.1-2004) and shall be minimum three (3) inch caliper trees unless otherwise noted.
All replacement trees shall be selected from and conform to the standards of 4.02.03. Approved Plant Materials and Landscape Standards (Page 124).
(B) Transplanted Trees
(1) Protected Trees on a property may be transplanted to another location on the same property without being subject to the above replacement rates.
(2) All Transplanting shall be in accordance with industry standards. Should a transplanted tree die, it shall be removed and replacement trees shall be planted at a rate of one hundred (100) percent of the caliper inches of the transplanted tree(s).
(C) Replacement Trees on a Different Property
If any replacement tree cannot be located on the property, the applicant may plant the replacement tree(s) on City property, and/or common open space and/or pay a fee, as approved by the Director. The cash value of replacement trees will be set by the Director annually.
(D) Trees Located in Proposed Driveways, Right Turn Lanes, and/or in Median Openings
The person(s) or entity responsible for making any improvements that causes or results in the removal of tree(s) in proposed non-single or two family driveways, right turn lanes, and/or in proposed median
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 119
openings, shall plant replacement tree(s) at a rate of one-hundred (100) percent of the total diameter of the tree(s) being removed.
(E) Mitigation of all Trees in Riparian Buffer and Floodplain
All trees six (6) inches or larger in diameter regardless of species in a pre-reclamation Riparian Buffer (Page 304)or floodplain shall be mitigated. Replacement trees of less than three (3) inches are allowed for mitigation of trees removed from Riparian Buffer and floodplains.
4.01.06. Tree Protection Measures
All Protected Tree(s) shall be protected by the owners as follows, unless otherwise directed by the Director.
(A) Plastic or Silt Fencing
Before development or redevelopment the owner shall install a four (4) foot tall plastic fence or where approved, silt fencing around the drip line of the Protected Tree(s).
(B) Construction Entrance Location
Before development or redevelopment the owner shall establish and maintain a construction entrance that avoids Protected Trees.
(C) Equipment or Materials Disposal
Cleaning equipment or materials and/or the disposal of any waste material, including, but not limited to, paint, oil, solvents, asphalt, concrete, mortar, etc., is prohibited under the canopy or drip line of any Protected Tree.
(D) Attachment to Protected Trees
(1) Attachments or wires are prohibited from being attached to any Protected Tree.
(2) Cables, tree rods, and similar hardware installation that aid structural integrity of a Protected Tree are exempt from this section when approved in writing by the Director.
(E) Canopy or Drip Line Protection
(1) Fill or excavation shall not occur within the canopy or drip line of a Protected Tree.
(2) Major changes of grade (i.e., three [3] inches or greater) within the canopy or drip line will require additional measures to maintain proper oxygen and water exchange with the roots.
(3) Construction or construction related activity is prohibited under the canopy or drip line of Protected Trees, unless otherwise approved in writing by the Director.
(F) Root Pruning Requirements
(1) Root pruning will be required when disturbance will occur under the drip line of protected Trees.
(2) This root pruning shall be completed a minimum of two (2) weeks prior to any construction activity within the drip line.
(G) Disposal of Removed Trees
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 120 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
(1) Any trees removed shall be chipped and used for mulch on site or hauled off-site within 72 hours of cutting.
(2) Burning of removed trees, stumps, or foliage requires written approval by the Fire Chief.
(H) Tree Maintenance and Pruning Practices
(1) All tree maintenance techniques shall be in conformance with industry identified standards and shall be performed by a Certified Arborist (Page 280).
(2) No person(s) or entity may use improper or malicious maintenance or pruning techniques which would likely lead to the death of the tree.
4.01.07. Tree Surveys and Tree Preservation Plans
(A) Preliminary Plat and Preliminary Site Plans Require a Tree Survey
A detailed Tree Survey shall be submitted with all Preliminary Plats and Preliminary Site Plans identifying natural vegetation, Protected Trees and anticipated Protected Tree losses.
(1) Tree Survey Application and Requirements
The Tree Survey application shall include the information listed on the Development Services’ Tree Survey Application Form and Checklist, which shall be established and maintained by the Director.
(2) Exception: Conditionally Approved Preliminary Plats
A detailed Tree Survey may be submitted after a Preliminary Plat submission; however, in this case, the Preliminary Plat shall have an aerial map overlaid and may only be conditionally approved. Subsequently, no construction plans may be approved until a Tree Survey has been submitted and approved.
(B) Tree Preservation Plan
A Tree Preservation Plan providing detailed information beyond the requirements of a tree survey shall be submitted with all Preliminary Plats for residential developments and all Preliminary Site Plans for nonresidential and multiple family developments and is only required for areas that are intended to be disturbed.
(1) Tree Preservation Plan Application and Requirements
The Preservation Plan application shall include the information listed on the Development Services’ Tree Preservation Plan Application Form and Checklist, which shall be established and maintained by the Director.
4.01.08. Verifications and Inspections
(A) Field Verification
(1) Prior to written approval of the Tree Preservation Plan, the applicant shall mark all trees to be preserved and notify (in writing) the Director of the marking.
(2) The Director shall inspect and verify the markings within eleven (11) calendar days of his/her receipt of applicants’ notification.
(3) If the Director has not contacted the owner within fourteen (14) calendar days from the date of notification, the protective plan submitted by the applicant is deemed approved.
(B) Site Preparation
(1) Prior to the preconstruction meeting or obtaining a grading permit, all tree markings and protective fencing shall be installed by the owner and shall be inspected by the Director.
(2) An approved silt fence may serve as protective fencing and shall remain in place until the City
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 121
accepts the project.
(3) A stop work order will be issued at any time if tree preservation requirements are not being met.
(C) Final Inspections
(1) The owner shall notify the Director for an inspection fourteen (14) calendar days prior to receiving a Certificate of Occupancy.
(2) All dead trees shall be replaced prior to receiving the Certificate of Occupancy.
4.01.09. Penalties for Violation
(A) Violation
Any person(s) or entity causing the transplanting or removing of a tree without first obtaining an approved Tree Removal Permit is in violation of this Ordinance.
(B) Occurrence
Each tree removed or transplanted without a permit shall constitute a separate offense.
(C) Compliance Required after Violations
Violation of this Ordinance shall not constitute an exemption to the replacement requirements of this Ordinance.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 122 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
Subsection 4.02. Landscape Requirements
4.02.01. Purpose
This Subsection 4.02 Landscape Requirements concerns providing landscape space, trees, vegetation and other materials for the purposes of the following.
(A) Site Design
Complementing the design and location of buildings, streets, and circulation systems and integrating and enhancing the overall site design.
(B) Buffering
Minimizing the impacts of light, noise, movement or activities from adjacent properties.
(C) Conservation
Protecting and conserving water resources and assisting in the management of storm water.
(D) Environmental
Improving air quality, moderating ambient temperatures and lowering energy consumption.
(E) Soil Protection
Protecting and conserving soils from erosion by wind or water or from excavation or grading and the promotion of healthy soil biology.
4.02.02. Scope
(A) Applicability
This Subsection 4.02 Landscape Requirements shall apply to the following.
(1) All new developments and all existing developments that are expanding or redeveloping thirty (30) percent or more land area or building area
(2) New Single Family (SF), Two Family (2F) and Townhome (TH) lots shall comply with 4.02.10. Landscaping Requirements for Single Family, Two Family, and Townhome Lots (Page 133).
(3) Homeowner Associations (HOAs) and Covenants, Codes and Restrictions (CCRs) for residential developments shall not overrule the requirements of this Subsection 4.02 by penalizing or restricting water conserving landscapes, or requiring landscape materials that do not comply with this Subsection 4.02.
(4) All open space and landscape areas required by other regulations in the Zoning Ordinance and the Subdivision Ordinance shall comply with the standards of this Subsection 4.02.
(B) General Standards
The preparation of the Landscape and Irrigation plans shall be in accordance with the following standards.
(1) Best management practices for tree pruning, ANSI A300, shall apply to this Subsection 4.02.
(2) Nursery standards shall be the American Standard for Nursery Stock, ANSI Z60.1-2004.
(3) Best management practices for stormwater management as approved by the Director of Engineering Services.
(4) Irrigation Ordinance (No. 08-12-103, Frisco Code of Ordinances).
(5) City Water Management Plan.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 123
(C) Landscape Plan
(1) A Landscape Plan is required for all applicable developments, as described above.
(2) The Director shall establish and maintain a list of the required documents and elements for a Landscape Plan.
(3) A Landscape Plan shall be prepared by a Landscape Architect and submitted for review.
(4) Irrigation drawings shall be prepared by a licensed Irrigator.
(D) Equivalent or Superior Landscape Requirements
(1) The Planning & Zoning Commission may approve modified landscape requirements that are equivalent to, or exceed, the requirements set forth in within this section in conjunction with the submittal Site Plan only if the following is met.
a. The following standards are met:
1. The proposed landscape requirements represent a superior result than that which could be achieved by strictly following the requirements of this section; and
2. The proposed landscape design complies with the stated purpose of this section; and
3. Landscape elements and yard area requirements are provided elsewhere on the site.
b. The proposed landscape design either:
1. Incorporates the retention of significant trees and naturally occurring undergrowth; or
2. Better accommodates or improves the existing physical conditions of the subject property.
(E) Landscape Inspections
(1) The approved landscape design shall be inspected and approved by the City’s Landscape Architect before a Certificate of Occupancy can be issued.
(2) The landscape construction may be delayed up to six (6) months under special circumstances when the amount of the landscape improvement costs is escrowed with the City or a performance bond is initiated between the City and the property owner.
(F) Maintenance and Enforcement
(1) The owner of the property shall maintain the landscape pursuant to the design intent and best management practices for landscape.
(2) The owner of a property that does not comply with these requirements shall be notified and given thirty (30) calendar days to comply.
(3) If, after thirty (30) calendar days, the landscape still does not comply with the approved Landscape Plan, the City may issue
citations for the violation pursuant to code enforcement provisions.
(G) Process Overview
The general landscaping process can be summarized into the three major steps, as shown in Figure 4.02.02.1: Landscaping Process General Overview.
Determine the Amount of Landscape Area Required
Determine the Combination of Landscape Zones
Follow the Applicable Site Design Requirements
Figure 4.02.02.1: Landscaping Process General Overview
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 124 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
4.02.03. Approved Plant Materials and Landscape Standards
(A) Approved Plant Materials
(1) The Director shall establish and maintain a list of approved plants for each landscape zone.
a. Plants shall be selected for the appropriate landscape zones as described 4.02.09. (B) Landscape Zones (Page 132).
b. Other species may be utilized with approval from the City’s Landscape Architect.
c. Artificial plants are prohibited.
(2) Tree and Shrub Planting Standards
a. Tree size options: All trees shall be one of the following options.
1. A minimum three (3) inch caliper tree.
2. A minimum two (2) inch caliper tree and verification that the tree has not been pruned in a “headed back” fashion, which is the pruning of the terminal bud.
b. Tree plantings shall not include more than forty-five (45) percent of the same tree species unless otherwise approved by the Director.
c. A four (4) foot minimum trunk distance from concrete pavement, utility lines, screening walls, or others structures unless approved or otherwise noted shall be maintained. A six (6) foot minimum trunk distance shall be maintained from back of street curbs.
d. Final locations of trees are subject to approval by the City’s Landscape Architect.
e. Each landscape zone shall be designed to achieve complete coverage of the landscape while not being over planted (i.e., plant spacing on the planting plan shall represent not less than seventy five (75) percent of the mature plant size).
f. A layer of fibrous mulch shall be provided in shrub beds and around trees. The root flare on all trees shall be kept exposed.
(3) Existing trees on-site shall count toward the total canopy coverage requirement, which is thirty-five (35) percent or as shown on the Trees Per Acre requirement in section 4.02.04. Landscape Area and Tree Requirements for Nonresidential, Mixed Use, and Multifamily Zoning Districts (Page 125) including non-protected trees in the Riparian Buffer (Page 304). Consideration to the overall health of individual existing trees shall be at the discretion of the City’s Landscape Architect.
(B) Soils
(1) Native topsoil shall be protected from erosion or stockpiled.
(2) Native site topsoil shall be laboratory tested by an accredited laboratory and amended per said laboratory’s recommendations to achieve a healthy soil biology.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 125
4.02.04. Landscape Area and Tree Requirements for Nonresidential, Mixed Use, and Multifamily Zoning Districts
All nonresidential, mixed use, and multifamily zoning districts shall comply with the following landscape standards.
REQUIRED AND OPTIONAL LANDSCAPING BY USE
Retail
Office/ Non-Retail
Multi-Family
Mixed-Use
OTC Street Frontage Landscape Areas (Figures on Page 126)
S1
Urban
O
O
O
R
R
S2
Slip Road1
O/R1
O/R1
O/R1
O/R1
O
S3
Double Row2
O/R2
O/R2
O/R2
S4
Single Row
R
R
R
Street Median
R
R
R
R
R Water Resource Landscape Zones for Interior Landscape Areas (Figures on Page 129)
Z1
Option One – Landscape Edge
R
R
R
R
Z2
Option Two – Pervious Surface
O
O
O
O Façade Landscape Areas (Figures on Page 130)
F1
Retail Façade
R
R
F2
Office/Non-Retail Façade
R Drive Landscape Areas (Figures on Page 131)
D1
Ceremonial Drive
O
O
O
O Screening/Buffer Areas (Figures on Page 137)
B1
Solid Screening Wall
R
R
R
B2
Screening Wall w/ Topographic Changes
R
R
R
B3
Partially Solid Wall
O
O
O
B4
Living Screen
O
O
O
B5
Natural Area w/ Enhanced Buffer
R
R
R
R
TREES PER ACRE
12
12
15
8
8
Notes: O = Optional; R = Required
1 Required in the Preston Road Overlay District.
2 Required in the Preston Road Overlay District where a slip road is not feasible.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 126 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
Required Landscape Elements
Figure 4.02.04.1: Landscape Areas
Streetscape
Ceremonial drive (optional)
Main drive aisle
Water Resource Zone
Screening Buffer
4.02.05. Street Frontage Landscape Areas
STREET TYPE S1
Urban Street Frontage
Figure 4.02.05.1: Urban Street Frontage
Thoroughfare
Type A, B, C, D, F, or G
Sidewalk
15’ minimum width to building;
Continuous frontage
Trees
30’ on center, in tree wells or grates;
Minimum 500 square feet structural soil per tree or equivalent.
Median
Where applicable
Build-to-line
Applicable for all projects with a Build-to-Line
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 127
STREET TYPE S2
Slip Road Street Frontage
Figure 4.02.05.2: Slip Road Street Frontage
Thoroughfare
Type A or B;
Required in Preston Road Overlay, optional in other zones ¹
Landscape edge
8’ width
Parking
24’ drive aisle;
2 rows of parking, with 20’ parking stalls;
One 9’ wide landscape space at every 4th parking space, as shown
Sidewalk
15’ minimum to building
Trees
3 rows aligned and centered in landscape spaces
Enhanced paving bands
Brick or concrete pavers
¹
If used in other zones, must be uniform in the development (prohibited as infill).
STREET TYPE S3
Double Row Street Frontage
Figure 4.02.05.3: Double Row Street Frontage
Thoroughfare
Type A or B
Required in Preston Road Overlay where slip road is not feasible. Optional in other zones
Landscape edge
30’ width;
50’ in Preston Road Overlay Rural Corridor
Trees
2 aligned rows, 4’ minimum from pavement;
30’ on center
Parking Edge
2’ vehicle overhang, exclusive of landscape edge, required for 18’ parking spaces (not required for 20’ spaces with wheel stops);
No vegetation over 6’ in height
Parking area
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 128 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
STREET TYPE S4
Single Row Street Frontage
Figure 4.02.05.4: Single Row Street Frontage
Thoroughfare
Type A or B
Landscape edge
25’ width
30’ along U.S. Hwy. 380 and S.H. 121
Trees
One row, centered in landscape edge;
30’ on center
Parking Edge
2’ vehicle overhang, exclusive of landscape edge, required for 18’ parking spaces (not required for 20’ spaces with wheel stops);
No vegetation over 6’ in height
Parking area
STREET MEDIAN
Median in a Public Street
Figure 4.02.05.5: Median in a Public Street
Thoroughfare
Type A & B
Landscape median
See Thoroughfare Design
Standards Ordinance
Trees
35’ on center;
Center in median
Median nose
50’ clearance per Thoroughfare
Standards
Development adjacent to Type ‘A’ and ‘B’ thoroughfares are required to provide, or pay a fee for, one 3” caliper large tree per 70 linear feet of frontage for each side of the street.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 129
4.02.06. Water Resource Landscape Zones for Interior Landscape Areas
WATER RESOURCE ZONE TYPE Z1
Option One – Landscape Edge
Figure 4.02.06.1: Water Resource Zone – Option One
Landscape buffer
12’ minimum width¹;
5 percent of the parking surface area, including drive aisles, for nonresidential;
7 percent of the parking surface area, including drive aisles, for multifamily;
Stormwater
BMP
Engineered bioswale
or bioretention
Trees
One tree per 500 square
feet of landscape area
Parking lot
Grade parking lot to drain towards landscape area
Design with wheel stops
or curb cuts to allow
drainage into landscape buffer
¹
May be wider based on stormwater runoff and exclusive of detention basis.
WATER RESOURCE ZONE TYPE Z2
Option Two – Pervious Surface
Figure 4.02.06.2: Water Resource Zone – Option Two
Pervious pavers
5 percent of the parking surface area, including drive aisles, for nonresidential;
7 percent of the parking surface area, including drive aisles, for multifamily
Structural soil
Per industry standards
(provide details);
Provide drainage and details in Civil drainage plans
Small island
Less than 500 square
feet
Trees
36’ on center;
One per 500 square
feet of pervious paver plus the landscape island area
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 130 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
4.02.07. Façade Landscape Areas
FAÇADE TYPE F1
Retail Shopping Center Façade
Figure 4.02.07.1: Retail Shopping Center Façade
Sidewalk
15’ minimum to building
Main drive aisle
24’ minimum width
Trees, façade
30’ on center¹ in grates or tree wells²
Parking island
9’ minimum width;
Terminus of parking
rows at main drive aisle
Trees, parking
Center in landscape
Parking rows
¹
Structural soil or equivalent required per industry standard (provide details).
²
Not required for section where an arcade is provided or hard awning (not fabric) extends over the sidewalk.
FAÇADE TYPE F2
Office / Non-Retail Center Façade
Figure 4.02.07.2: Office / Non-Retail Center Façade
Façade
South and West Façades with glazing
Landscape area
15’ minimum adjacent to structure
Trees, façade
30’ on center or as appropriate for species
Sidewalk
6’ minimum width
Main drive aisle
24’ minimum
Parking island
9’ minimum width;
Terminus of parking rows along the main drive aisle;
Equal to 2 parking spaces
Parking lot
Trees, parking
Center in landscape island
Offices in Mixed-Use zone shall provide Retail Shopping Center Façade (Figure 4.02.07.1).
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 131
4.02.08. Drive Landscape Areas
DRIVE AISLE TYPE D1
Ceremonial Drive (Optional)
Figure 4.02.08.1: Ceremonial Drive
Landscape area
10’ minimum;
May include Water Resource Zone
Entry drive aisle
24’ minimum;
On axis with building main entry
Parking rows
Landscape terminus on main drive aisle
Trees, ceremonial drive
30’ on center or as appropriate for species;
Center in 10’ wide landscape area
Trees, façade
30’ on center¹ in grates or tree wells²
¹
Structural soil or equivalent required per industry standard (provide details).
²
Not required for section where an arcade is provided or hard awning (not fabric) extends over the sidewalk.
3
With Director approval, trees may be clustered and trees required by other various landscaping sections may be clustered within a Ceremonial Drive.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 132 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
4.02.09. Landscape Type Requirements for Nonresidential, Mixed Use, and Multifamily Zoning Districts
(A) Intent
This section 4.02.09. establishes the landscape types (i.e., landscape zones) to be used to fulfill the landscape area requirements established in 4.02.04. Landscape Area and Tree Requirements for Nonresidential, Mixed Use, and Multifamily Zoning Districts (Page 125).
(B) Landscape Zones
A landscaping zone is a portion of the landscape area having plants with similar water requirements, site conditions or functions. The following are the three types of landscape zones.
(1) Natural Landscape Zone
A landscape zone composed of native and adapted plants that do not require irrigation after establishment.
(2) Water Resource Landscape Zone
A landscape zone that is designed to capture, filter, reuse or infiltrate rainwater with the purpose of protecting and conserving water resources and can be one of the following.
a. Equal to at least five (5) percent for nonresidential and at least seven (7) percent for multifamily of the impervious parking area, the Water Resource Zone shall be located adjacent to parking surfaces and shall be used to capture, slow, filter and absorb storm water before entering the storm water system. Acceptable Best Management Practices include bio-retention, filter strips, and bio-swales as specified by locally accepted standards.
b. Rainwater Harvesting: A system for collecting rainwater and or graywater in cisterns or water bodies and using it for irrigation and/or other purposes.
(3) High Water Usage Landscape Zone
A Landscape Zone composed of high-water usage or non-drought tolerant turf and other plants may be used within the landscape design. This is not a required zone.
(C) Water Use Requirements
(1) Exemptions
a. Cemeteries;
b. Ecological restoration projects and landscape designs that do not require a permanent irrigation system;
c. Landscapes that are irrigated solely with reclaimed water or storm water where a connection to the City water system is not proposed; and
d. City parks, and recreation areas, golf courses, street medians and school athletic fields and play areas.
(2) Implementation of Water Use Requirements
a. Landscape zones shall be used in the landscape design and water use calculations.
b. If the Landscape Water Allowance (LWA) (Page 291) is not exceeded, then various combinations of landscape zones may be used on any given property including a water resource zone equal to five (5) percent of the impervious parking surface.
(3) Landscape Water Allowance (LWA)
a. For design purposes, the LWA establishes the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscape area.
b. The Landscape Water Allowance (LWA) (Page 291) shall be calculated for each Landscape Plan (Page 123) with a “Calculator Form” maintained by the Director.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 133
(4) Estimated Landscape Water Use (ELWU)
The Estimated Landscape Water Use (ELWU) (Page 285) shall be calculated using the “Calculator Form.”
(5) Alternative Plant Coefficient (Pc) or Irrigation Efficiency (IE) Approval
An alternative Plant Coefficient (Pc) (Page 300) or Irrigation Efficiency (IE) (Page 290) may be approved by the Director in calculating the ELWU if:
a. The calculations are based on a methodology or test data that has generally been endorsed or approved by the landscape profession; or
b. Specific microclimate or soil conditions or landscape design elements warrant their adjustment.
(D) Irrigation Hydro-Zones
Each irrigation zone shall apply water to plants with similar water and light requirements (e.g., plants in a High Water Usage Zone shall be watered separately from plants in a Natural Landscape Zone). Areas within ten (10) feet from the curb may be irrigated only with one of the following:
(1) Drip irrigation, or
(2) Efficient low precipitation nozzles as may be approved by the Director.
4.02.10. Landscaping Requirements for Single Family, Two Family, and Townhome Lots
Single Family (SF), Two Family (2F), or Townhome (TH) developments shall comply with the following:
(A) Residential Tree Requirements: Landscape Plans and drawings are not required.
Residential Zoning District
Number of Medium or Large Trees Required Per Lot
RE
6
SF-16
5
SF-12.5
4
SF-10
4
SF-8.5
3
SF-7
2
OTR
2
PH
1
2F
2
TH
1
(B) Model home landscaping: Home builder shall submit the following drawings and information prepared by a Landscape Architect with an application for a Building Permit.
(1) Provide Landscape Water Use calculations, pursuant to 4.02.09. (C) Water Use Requirements (Page 132).
(2) Landscape and irrigation drawings that use of Natural Landscape, Water Resource and High Water Usage (optional) landscape zones.
(C) Basic Home Builder landscape packages for individual lots
Provide drought tolerant plants able to survive stage three drought restrictions pursuant to the City Drought Contingency Plan. Bermuda will be allowed as a drought tolerant turf; however, alternative native drought tolerant grasses, which will remain green while using fifty (50) percent less water, shall be offered as an alternative.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 134 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
(D) Required Landscaping for Rights-of-Way (see Thoroughfare Design Standards [TSD] Ordinance)
RESIDENTIAL STREET TYPE R1
Front Entry
Figure 4.02.10.1: Residential Street, Front Entry
Front Yard
R.O.W.
Type F per TDS Ordinance
Pavement
30’ width F/F
Trees
35’ on center;
3 ½ - inch caliper;
6’ minimum from the face of curb;
4’ minimum from sidewalk
Sidewalk easement
2’ wide
RESIDENTIAL STREET TYPE R2
Rear Entry
Figure 4.02.10.2: Residential Street, Rear Entry
Front Yard
R.O.W.
Type G per TDS Ordinance
Pavement
26’ width F/F
Trees
35’ on center;
3 ½ - inch caliper;
6.5’ minimum from the back of curb;
4’ minimum from sidewalk
Sidewalk easement
2’ wide
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 135
Subsection 4.03. Screening Standards
4.03.01. Purpose
Standards set forth in this subsection establish the screening options required for the various land uses and zoning districts.
4.03.02. Standards
(A) Applicability
Regulations are prescribed for the location and type of various screening devices to be used when required in the various zoning districts or in this section in accordance with the following standards.
(1) The property owner of a tract of land in a nonresidential zoning district shall be the responsible party for:
a. The wall or fence construction on the property line where a tract is adjacent to a district or use required to be screened; and
b. Paving the area between the wall and/or fence and the alley according to Engineering Services’ standards.
(2) The property owner of a tract of land within a multifamily zoning district shall be the responsible party for when adjacent to a single family zoning district.
(3) Screened from View and Screening Elements
All areas covered by this section shall be screened from all streets and adjacent property lines of residentially zoned parcels, or areas shown as single family or multifamily residential uses on the Future Land Use Map.
(B) Screening Wall Materials
A screening wall or fence required under the provisions of this section, under a Specific Use Permit, a Planned Development District, or other requirement shall be constructed of clay-fired brick or stone masonry units.
(1) All wall or fence openings within a required screening element shall be equipped with gates equal in height and screening characteristics to the wall or fence.
(2) Split-face concrete masonry units, or pre-cast panels used in lieu of walls constructed of clay fired brick or stone materials shall be constructed only with approval by the Director.
(C) Screening Wall Finishing on Both Sides
(1) All required masonry screening walls shall be equally finished on both sides of the wall.
(2) The style, color, and material of the wall must be consistent within the development.
(D) Screening Installation and Maintenance
(1) All required walls, fencing, and other screening materials must be installed and completed prior to final acceptance of the project.
(2) The property owner shall maintain all screening fences, walls, and landscaping.
(3) Set in place wall panel construction methods are prohibited in conjunction with multifamily developments proposed after April 5, 2011.
(4) Repairs to existing walls will be permitted with the addition of galvanized metal supports being added to the area being repaired.
(5) Thin walls are permitted in conjunction with multifamily development, and shall be constructed
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 136 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
over a concrete footing (grade beam) or a galvanized steel angle iron with four (4) inch by twelve (12) inch concrete mow strip beneath.
(E) Landscape Screening and Sight Visibility Triangle
Refer to the Thoroughfare Design Standards Ordinance for restrictions and limitations of improvements and landscaping in visibility easements.
(F) Screening Standards
In any residential district, or along the common boundary between any residential and nonresidential district where a wall, fence, or screening separation is erected, the following standards for height, location, and design shall be observed.
(1) Any fence or wall located to the rear of the minimum required front yard line shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height above the grade of the adjacent property.
a. As shown in Figure 4.03.02.1: Where a Fence Intersects a Screening Wall, where a fence intersects a screening wall and the height of the fence exceeds the height of the screening wall, the height of the fence shall transition to the height of the screening wall over a distance of twenty (20) feet.
Figure 4.03.02.1: Where a Fence Intersects a Screening Wall
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 137
4.03.03. Screening/Buffer Areas
See 4.02.04. Landscape Area and Tree Requirements for Nonresidential, Mixed Use, and Multifamily Zoning Districts (Page 125) for applicability.
SITE SCREENING TYPE B1
Solid Screening Wall
Figure 4.03.03.1: Screening Wall
Adjacent property*
Single Family
Multifamily
Landscape buffer
15’ minimum width;
May include Water Resource Zone from 4.02.06. (Page 129)
Trees
One row;
30’ on center
Wall
6’ minimum to 8’ maximum height;
14’ at loading docks
Solid masonry
Min. Wall Height
6’ minimum vertical distance, bldg. entrance to top of wall elevation (see B2)
Pavement
Parking or other impervious surface;
May drain to Water Resource Zone in buffer
SITE SCREENING TYPE B2
Screening Wall with Topographic Change
Figure 4.03.03.2: Screening Wall w/ Topo. Change
Adjacent property*
Single Family;
Multifamily
Alley R.O.W.
18’ minimum width
Terrace width
8’ minimum width;
Plant with shrubs, vines or groundcover
Landscape buffer
15’ minimum width
Paved surface
Trees
One row;
30’ on center
Wall
6’ minimum to 8’ maximum height;
Solid masonry
Min. Wall Height
6’ minimum vertical distance, building entrance finish grade to top of wall elevation
Retaining Wall
6’ maximum
*Based upon the Zoning Map or Future Land Use Map
*Based upon the Zoning Map or Future Land Use Map
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 138 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
SITE SCREENING TYPE B3
Screening Wall with View Fence
Figure 4.03.03.3: Screening Wall with View Fence
Adjacent property1
Single Family;
Multifamily
Buffer width
15’ minimum width;
10’ for OTC adjacent to OTR
Pavement
Parking or other impervious surface;
May drain to Water Resource Zone in buffer
Trees
One row, evergreen2 selected from Living Screen list
Wall
6’ minimum to 8’ maximum height;
30% masonry; 70% open ornamental fence material (see B2);
Masonry is not required within the OTC
Elevation detail:
Landscape area
View fence
Solid masonry / pilaster wall
Note: View fence/wall design shown is a sample only.
SITE SCREENING TYPE B4
Living Screen1
Figure 4.03.03.4: Living Screen
Adjacent property2
Single Family;
Multifamily
Landscape buffer
15’ minimum width, or as determined by landscaping
Pavement
Parking or other impervious surface;
May drain to Water Resource Zone in buffer
Trees
Two rows, evergreen3 (selected from Living Screen list );
6’ in height at planting and create a solid screen (see B2);
14’ when screening a loading dock
Private fence
Homeowner fence
1P&Z approval required for Living Screen.
2Based upon the Zoning Map or Future Land Use Map
3Spacing shall be determined based on species and approved by the City’s Landscape Architect.
1Based upon the Zoning Map or Future Land Use Map
2Spacing shall be determined based on species and approved by the City’s Landscape Architect.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 139
SITE SCREENING TYPE B5
Natural Area with Enhanced Buffer
Figure 4.03.03.5: Natural Area with Enhanced Buffer
Feature
Riparian Buffer or other designated natural feature, such as a pond or wetland
Buffer
30’ minimum between developed area and a natural feature, such as a pond or wetland;
No buffer is required for a Riparian Buffer
Development
Impervious surface and/or building;
Impervious surface graded to sheet flow to natural drainage;
Design with wheel stops or curb cuts to allow drainage into landscape area
Trail
8’ minimum width;
Greater widths may be required by Parks Dept.;
Provide connections from development to trail.
Trees
Large trees¹, 30’ on center, where natural vegetation is not sufficient.
35% canopy coverage is required in the buffer area; where existing trees are insufficient to provide 35% coverage, additional trees shall be added.
Groundcover
Appropriate native seed mix
¹
Select native and adapted upland shade and understory trees.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 140 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
4.03.04. Location of Required Screening
SCREENING REQUIREMENTS FOR PROPERTY PERIMETERS
Screening Type
Additional Standards and Notes
Screening Scenario
B1
B2
B3
B4
B5
Nonresidential, siding or backing to:
· Multifamily zoning district
· Listed residential districts (see notes)
· Property that is both zoned AG and shown on the Comprehensive Plan’s Future Land Use Map as residential land use
· Nonresidential use in a Single Family Zone
•
•
•
•
Listed residential districts:
· RE – Residential Estate District
· SF-16 – Single Family Residential-16 District
· SF-12.5 – Single Family Residential-12.5 District
· SF-10 – Single Family Residential-10 District
· SF-8.5 – Single Family Residential-8.5 District
· SF-7 – Single Family Residential-7 District
· OTR – Original Town Residential District
· PH – Patio Home District
· 2F – Two Family Residential (Duplex) District
· TH – Townhome District
· MF-15 – Multifamily-15 District
· MF-19 – Multifamily-19 District
· MH – Manufactured Home District
Option B4 is subject to approval from the Planning & Zoning Commission.
Other equivalent screening options may be reviewed and approved by the Director.
Thoroughfare screening
See Section 8.06 (Thoroughfare Screening) of the Subdivision Ordinance No. 09-07-38,
Parking in OTC adjacent to residential
•
Nonresidential and Multifamily adjacent to a Major Creek
•
Additional fencing may be required and/or approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission to provide a more protective barrier between the properties.
· Tubular steel, wrought iron, or similar material.
· Four (4) foot minimum height.
· Eight (8) foot maximum height.
Berms may be used subject to approval by the Director of Engineering Services.
Topographic changes
•
Living screen requirements on sites with topography changes are subject to the discretion of the Director.
Note: Dots (•) indicates applicability.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 141
4.03.05. Screening for Outside Storage and Display
SCREENING REQUIREMENTS FOR OUTDOOR STORAGE AND DISPLAY
Screening Type
Additional Standards and Notes
Use / Zoning District
B1
B2
B3
B4
B5
General storage and display, visible from streets and residential areas
•
Evergreen trees at fifteen (15) feet on center with continuous row of 5 gallon evergreen shrubs.
Wrecking, Junk, and Salvage Yards
•
Items displayed shall be one (1) foot below the screening wall.
TO & PRO Districts
•
•
Also requires a fourteen (14) foot tall wing wall.
(See Figure 4.03.06.1 (Page 143))
I Districts
•
•
•
•
Wall shall be eight (8) feet when screening from the street and fourteen (14) feet (wing wall) when screening the storage area from residential.
Note: Dots (•) indicates applicability.
(A) Outside Storage and Display Requirements
(1) Elements within Outside Storage and Display Areas
a. Outside storage and display areas shall only contain equipment, vehicles, commodities, materials, goods, or merchandise that is sold, rented, or distributed within the inside of a building of a primary use, unless it is demonstrated to the Director that such products or materials could not be located indoors.
b. Outside Storage and Display, Sales, or Operations
1. No outside storage and display, sales, or operations shall be permitted unless such activity is visually screened from all streets and adjacent property lines of residentially zoned parcels or areas shown as single family residential or multifamily use on the Future Land Use Map.
2. These regulations do not apply to temporary outside merchandise display, such as a sidewalk sale, where an outside area is used for merchandise display for less than 90 calendar days in one calendar year. If an area is used for more than 90 calendar days in one calendar year, then it shall comply with this section.
(2) Prohibited Areas
a. Outside storage and display areas shall not be located within any required front/side yards.
b. Outside storage and display areas shall not be located within any drainage or other type of easement.
c. Outside storage and display areas shall not be located within any required parking area, parking spaces, loading areas, fire lanes, vehicular moving aisles or customer pick up lanes.
(3) Visual Obstruction and Interference
Outside storage and display areas shall not obstruct visibility or interfere with pedestrian or vehicular circulation and shall be subject to the following requirements:
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 142 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
a. A minimum six (6) foot wide pedestrian path shall be maintained between outside storage and display areas and vehicular maneuvering aisles; and
b. A minimum six (6) foot wide pedestrian path shall be maintained between any entry or exit doors from the primary use building to the vehicular maneuvering aisles or parking areas.
(4) Size Limitation
a. Outside storage and display areas shall not occupy an area exceeding twenty five (25) percent of the gross floor area of the primary use building, or ten (10) percent of the lot area, whichever is most restrictive.
b. Exception to the Size Limitation of Outside Storage and Display Areas
If the outside storage and display area exceeds these requirements, it must be presented on the Site Plan and requires Planning & Zoning Commission approval.
(5) Exemptions
Outside storage and display areas shall not apply to new and used sales or lease of automobile, motorcycle, recreational vehicles, or watercraft and similar facilities requiring outside display.
(6) Temporary Uses
Seasonal and temporary storage areas shall provide for electrical plug-ins if storage containers require electrical service.
4.03.06. Screening for Loading Docks, Bays and Service Areas
SCREENING REQUIREMENTS FOR DOCKS AND SERVICE AREAS
Screening Type
Additional Notes
B1
B2
B3
B4
B5
Docks and bays when visible from a street or residential zone
•
•
•
•
Living screen trees to soften the wall with fourteen (14) foot tall wing wall
(See Figure 4.03.06.1 (Page 143))
PRO and TO Districts
•
•
•
•
May not face Preston Road and the Dallas North Tollway
May face other streets with landscape buffer (See Figure 4.03.06.1 (Page 143))
IT districts
•
•
•
•
Requires a fourteen (14) foot tall wing wall
(See Figure 4.03.06.1 (Page 143))
Docks and bays adjacent to a major creek
•
•
Fourteen (14) foot tall solid living screen
Note: Dots (•) indicates applicability.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 143
4.03.07. Screening for Refuse (Trash) and Recycling Storage Container Screening
(A) Refuse and Recycling Collection Areas
(1) Refuse and recycling collection areas shall be located to minimize their visibility from public streets.
(2) Refuse and recycling receptacles shall be screened with a six (6) to eight (8) foot masonry wall of a color to match the primary building.
a. Screening enclosures shall be visually and aesthetically compatible with the overall project.
(3) Refuse or recycling compactors shall be screened with an eight (8) foot masonry wall of a color that is consistent with the color of the primary building.
a. Screening enclosures shall be visually and aesthetically compatible with the overall project.
(4) Refuse and recycling collection enclosures shall contain permanent walls on three (3) sides with the service opening not directly facing any public right-of-way or any residentially zoned property. The fourth side may incorporate a metal gate to visually screen the dumpster or compactor. Refuse and recycling collection enclosure doors cannot open into or obstruct the fire lane, access easement, or utility easement.
(5) Single family and duplex dwellings shall be exempt from these refuse and recycling collection area screening requirements
(B) Placement of Refuse and Recycling Storage Collections Facilities in a Parking Lot
(1) Refuse or recycling storage facilities located in a parking lot are prohibited in a designated parking or loading space.
(2) Refuse or recycling storage facilities and screening shall be located a distance of twenty-five (25) feet away from the intersection of two (2) or more fire lanes and/or drive aisles. Distance shall be measured from the intersecting center lines of the lanes and/or aisles.
(3) Each refuse or recycling storage facility shall be located so as to facilitate pickup by refuse collection agencies and shall be screened according to this Subsection 4.03 Screening Standards.
Figure 4.03.06.1: Service Bay Requirement within an Applicable Zoning District
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 144 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
(4) Refuse or recycling storage facilities shall not be located between a building and street unless approved by the Director.
(C) Additional Requirements for Overlay Zoning Districts
(1) Applicability
The following additional standards shall apply to all development within the following districts.
a. PRO – Preston Road Overlay District
b. TO – Tollway Overlay District
(2) Refuse and Recycling Collection Areas
Refuse storage enclosures are required for all developments. Enclosures shall meet the following.
a. Be three-sided and consist of solid walls of six (6) to eight (8) feet in height, constructed of material type and color to match the building.
1. Compactors shall be enclosed on three (3) sides by a solid wall with a minimum height of eight (8) feet and the fourth side by an eight (8) foot gate.
b. Be designed to contain all refuse generated on-site between solid waste collections.
c. Not be located in front yard setbacks and generally not be visible from adjacent streets or residential uses.
d. Screening Walls for Refuse and Recycling Collection Areas
1. Screening walls for refuse and recycling collection areas shall be constructed of primary exterior construction materials listed for the sub-district.
2. Vegetation shall be used to soften the appearance of the walls. This may include either vines trained up the wall or minimum five (5) gallon shrubs planted thirty (30) inches on center.
(D) Additional Requirements for Multifamily Districts
(1) Screening
Each refuse facility shall be screened from view on three (3) sides from persons standing at ground level on the site, or immediately adjoining property by a masonry wall not less than six (6) feet, nor more than eight (8) feet, in height or by an enclosure within a building.
(2) Health Regulations
Refuse containers shall be provided and maintained in a manner to satisfy local public health and sanitary regulations.
(3) Location
a. Each refuse facility shall be located so as to provide safe and convenient pickup by refuse collection agencies using a fifteen (15) foot inside turning radius with a thirty (30) foot approach.
b. Trash dumpsters shall be located a minimum of fifty (50) feet from a residential apartment building and one hundred (100) feet from an adjacent Residential district boundary line. Dumpsters shall have a minimum six (6) foot wall enclosure with an evergreen screen around the perimeter.
c. Trash compactors shall be located a minimum of fifty (50) feet from residential apartment buildings and have an eight (8) foot wall enclosure with an evergreen living screen around the perimeter. Compactors are to be a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet from other Residential district boundary lines.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 145
(4) Recycling Facilities
a. Properties consisting of thirty (30) or more total dwelling units shall, in addition to refuse facilities, construct recycling facilities suitable to hold the capacity for the on-site recycling programs.
b. Recycling facilities will meet the same setback criteria as refuse facilities.
4.03.08. Screening for Utilities, Mechanical, and Service Facilities
(A) Applicability
The regulations provided in this section shall apply to all nonresidential development.
(B) Finish of Accessory Elements
Exposed conduit, ladders, utility boxes, and drain spouts shall be either:
(1) Painted to match the color of the building or an accent color, or
(2) Have a natural metal finish.
(C) Ground-Mounted and Roof-Mounted Mechanical Equipment Screening
(1) All mechanical equipment shall be screened from view at a point six (6) feet above ground level at the property line.
(2) If a parapet does not accomplish this screening, a screening wall equal to the height of the equipment shall be provided.
(3) Buildings adjacent to single family zoned property or property that is designated as single family on the Future Land Use Plan shall provide a screening wall equal to the height of the equipment on all sides that face the residential property.
(4) In all cases, screening shall be compatible with building materials.
(5) Mechanical penthouses shall complement overall building design.
(D) Ground-Mounted Service Equipment within Overlay Districts
Within the PRO – Preston Road Overlay District and TO – Tollway Overlay District, all ground-mounted service equipment such as air conditioners, transformers, and other service functions shall be located at the rear of all buildings and integrated into the building envelope or consolidated into enclosed service areas and screened with the primary building materials used on the building.
4.03.09. Entryway Wall Standards for Subdivisions
(A) Applicability
(1) The following standards apply to exterior side yards of corner lots meeting the following criteria:
a. The corner lot is within a single family detached, two family, or townhome subdivision; and
b. The exterior side yard of the corner lot is adjacent to or at the terminus of an entryway street and within two hundred fifty (250) feet from a Type “A”, “B”, “C”, or “D” thoroughfare measured from a point at the intersection of the center line of the entryway street and the closest right-of-way line, see Figure 4.03.09.1: Entryway Wall Requirement Area.
c. Subdivision lot layout, with regards to exterior side yard location, conforms to Figure 4.03.09.1: Entryway Wall Requirement Area.
d. The wall height and location shall be shown on Preliminary Plats and Landscape Plans as dictated within the Development Application Handbook.
(2) Entryway fencing standards apply only to the portion of the exterior side yard fence that is parallel to the entry street or parallel to the intersecting street as shown in Figure 4.03.09.1.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 146 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
(B) Materials
(1) Walls shall either be constructed of:
a. Wood materials screened by living plant materials, which shall require a dedicated ten (10) foot wide planting strip,
b. The same material and in the same manner as the screening walls surrounding the subdivision, or
c. Open Ornamental Fence (Page 298) materials and may include masonry materials. If masonry materials are used, then masonry materials shall be similar to the existing screening wall.
(2) Height of entryway fencing shall comply with this Subsection 4.03 Screening Standards.
(C) Developer and HOA Responsibilities
(1) The developer of a subdivision shall construct all required walls shown in Figure 4.03.09.1.
(2) All new subdivision developments platted after the adoption date of this Zoning Ordinance that implement the design in Figure 4.03.09.1: Entryway Wall Requirement Area (Page 146) shall be required to have an HOA to own and maintain such features.
(3) If an HOA fails to maintain any required wall, the Director of Public Works and/or the Director of Development Services, at their discretion, shall have the authority to cause the repair and/or replacement of such wall at the expense of the HOA.
(D) Exceptions: Existing Walls or Fences within the Required Wall Area
The following shall only apply to existing walls and fences within the required wall area as shown in Figure 4.03.09.1: Entryway Wall Requirement Area. (Page 146)
(1) All existing walls or fences shall be maintained.
(2) If an existing wall or fence is replaced, then the replacement wall or fence shall be a required wall as described above or meet the following fence standards.
a. Replacement fences shall meet the height standards within this section.
b. Replacement fences shall be constructed from Red Cedar, vinyl/PVC, or Open Ornamental Fence (Page 298) materials.
c. Replacement fences shall be built with the finished side (i.e., smooth side) facing the street.
d. Red Cedar replacement fences shall use metal fence posts.
Figure 4.03.09.1: Entryway Wall Requirement Area
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 147
Subsection 4.04. Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
4.04.01. Purpose
To secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; to lessen congestion on public streets; to facilitate the adequate provisions of transportation; to conserve the value of buildings; and to encourage the most appropriate use of land. Minimum off-street parking and loading shall be provided as set forth in the following schedules and provisions.
4.04.02. Special Off-Street Parking Provisions: Residential Districts
(A) Parking Placement
Required off-street parking shall be provided on the same lot as the use it is to serve, as referenced in 4.04.09. Location of Parking Spaces (Page 157).
(B) Paving Requirements
Required parking must be paved concrete, or it may be pervious concrete or other materials with approval of the Director of Engineering Services.
(C) Agricultural Zoning District
Agricultural use located in the AG – Agricultural District, the required parking shall be on, at a minimum, washed gravel to reduce dust emission or similar all-weather surface.
(D) Heavy Load Vehicle Storage
No required parking space, garage, carport, or other automobile storage space shall be used for the storage of any heavy load vehicle.
(E) Minimum Parking Provisions
(1) In the following zoning districts, there shall be a minimum of two (2) enclosed garage parking spaces.
APPLICABLE ZONING DISTRICTS TABLE
Section
District Abbreviation – District Name
Page Number
2.03.02.
RE – Residential Estate District
23
2.03.03.
SF-16 – Single Family Residential-16 District
24
2.03.04.
SF-12.5 – Single Family Residential-12.5 District
25
2.03.05.
SF-10 – Single Family Residential-10 District
26
2.03.06.
SF-8.5 – Single Family Residential-8.5 District
27
2.03.07.
SF-7 – Single Family Residential-7 District
28
2.03.08.
OTR – Original Town Residential District
29
2.03.09.
PH – Patio Home District
31
2.03.10.
2F – Two Family Residential (Duplex) District
33
2.03.11.
TH – Townhome District
34
(2) In addition, there shall be two (2) paved parking spaces provided behind the front property line only for the purpose of allowing on-site stacking or maneuvering to the enclosed spaces.
(3) Front entry design requirements listed in 4.07.18. Residential Front Entry Garage Standards (Page 189) apply to the districts listed above.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 148 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
(F) Enclosed Parking and Stacking Spaces
(1) In the zoning districts listed in 4.04.02. (E) above, required enclosed parking and stacking spaces shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet wide and twenty (20) feet long.
(2) Required enclosed parking and stacking spaces shall remain clear of any encroachments.
(G) OTR Garage Setbacks
In the OTR – Original Town Residential District, the front of the garage shall be setback a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the projection of the front porch or building line.
(H) Circular driveways
(1) Circular driveways shall be designed to accommodate any required parking behind the front building line.
(2) Such driveways shall comply with driveway standards as outlined in the City’s Engineering Design Standards and Construction Details and Thoroughfare Design Standards Ordinance.
4.04.03. Special Off-Street Parking Provisions: Nonresidential and MF Districts
(A) Parking Space Delineation
(1) Parking spaces shall be permanently and clearly identified by stripes, buttons, tiles, curbs, barriers, or other approved methods.
(2) Non-permanent type marking, such as paint, shall be regularly maintained to ensure continuous clear identification of the space.
(B) Parking Space Dimensions
(1) Each standard off-street parking space shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet in width and twenty (20) feet in depth, exclusive of driveways and maneuvering aisles, and shall be of usable shape and condition (See Figure 9.01.01.12: Parking Space Standards (Page 324)).
(2) Where it is possible for a vehicle to overhang the front of a parking space above a paved, stoned, mulched, or grassed area other than a required landscape area, open space area, sidewalk, street right-of-way or adjacent property, the depth of the paved standard space may be reduced to eighteen (18) feet (See Figure 9.01.01.12: Parking Space Standards (Page 324)). The landscaped buffer shall be increased by two (2) feet where the parking is eighteen (18) feet in length.
(3) No parking space shall allow a vehicle to overhang a required landscape area, open space area, sidewalk, street right-of-way or adjacent property (See Figure 4.04.03.1: Vehicle Overhang Prohibited).
(4) Head-in parking spaces adjacent to buildings shall have a minimum four (4) foot wide clearance between the front of the car and the building.
Figure 4.04.03.1: Vehicle Overhang Prohibited
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 149
a. The four (4) foot wide clearance shall be maintained by curbs or wheel stops, the face of which shall be located six (6) feet from the building, which allows a vehicle overhang of two (2) feet. Wheel stops shall only be used in parking spaces that are twenty (20) feet long.
(5) Parallel off-street parking spaces must be a minimum of eight (8) feet in width and twenty-two (22) feet in depth (See Figure 9.01.01.10: Parking Layouts (Page 322).
(6) Parking spaces within structured parking garages shall be a minimum of eight and one-half (8½) feet in width and eighteen (18) feet in depth.
(C) Encroachment Upon the Public Right-of-Way or Required Landscaping Areas
(1) Off-street parking shall be prohibited from encroaching into the public right-of-way in any case.
(2) All vehicle maneuvering shall take place on-site.
a. No public right-of-way shall be used for backing or maneuvering into a parking space, except in the OTC – Original Town Commercial District as approved by the Director (See Figure 9.01.01.2: Off-Street Maneuvering for Loading and Parking Areas (Page 318)).
(D) Dead End Parking
Dead end parking is prohibited in nonresidential developments, except in the OTC – Original Town Commercial District as approved by the Director.
(E) Handicap Parking
Handicap parking space(s) shall be provided according to State of Texas Program for the Elimination of Architectural Barriers and shall conform to the Americans Disability Act (ADA) of 1991, as may be amended, accessibility guidelines or the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards. Current requirements are as follows:
Total Parking Spaces
Required Minimum Number of Accessible Spaces
1 to 25
1
26 to 50
2
51 to 75
3
76 to 100
4
101 to 150
5
151 to 200
6
201 to 300
7
301 to 400
8
401 to 500
9
501 to 1,000
2 percent of total
1,001 and over
20, plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000
4.04.04. Off-Street Loading Space: All Districts
All nonresidential uses having 50,000 square feet or more of gross floor area shall provide and maintain an off-street area for the loading and unloading of merchandise and goods.
(A) Drives and Approaches
(1) All drives and approaches shall provide adequate space and clearances to allow for the maneuvering of trucks off-street.
(2) Each site shall provide a designated maneuvering area for trucks.
(3) No maneuvering shall take place in the right-of-way.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 150 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
4.04.05. Parking Access from a Public Street: All Districts
(A) Vehicular Access
Vehicular access to nonresidential uses shall not be permitted from alleys serving residential uses except in the OTC – Original Town Commercial District as approved by the Director.
(B) Garages and Carports in Residential Districts
See Subsection 4.06 Accessory Structure Standards (Page 166) and Subsection 4.07 Supplementary Regulations (Page 172) for setback requirements for garages and carports in residential districts adjacent to a public or private street.
4.04.06. Rules for Computing Number of Parking Spaces
In computing the number of parking spaces required for each use, the following rules shall govern.
(A) Floor Area
"Floor Area" shall mean the gross floor area of the specific use.
(B) Fractional Parking Space Calculation
Where fractional parking spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number.
(C) Unlisted Use Requirement Calculation
The parking space requirements for a use not specifically mentioned herein shall be the same as required for a use of similar nature or as approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission in conjunction with a Site Plan.
(1) The applicant must provide data to support the request.
(2) Optional resources for the parking space requirement consideration may include the Urban Land Institute (ULI) and Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) technical manuals or other similar planning documents.
(D) Building / Use Changes or Enlargements
Whenever a building or use constructed or established after the effective date of this Ordinance is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise, to create a need for an increase of ten (10) percent or more in the number of existing parking spaces, such spaces shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change.
(1) Whenever a building or use existing prior to April 5, 2011 is enlarged to the extent of thirty (30) percent or more in floor area or in the area used, said building or use shall then and thereafter comply with the parking requirements set forth herein.
(E) Shared Parking Space Calculations
In order to establish a baseline number of parking spaces that may be reduced in a shared parking agreement, the baseline number of parking spaces shall equal the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately.
(1) Mixed Use Shared Parking Agreement
Up to fifty (50) percent of the parking spaces required for a theater or other place of evening entertainment (after 6:00 P.M.), or for a church, may be provided and used jointly by banks, offices, and similar uses not normally open, used, or operated during evening hours if specifically approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission as shown on a Site Plan or Final Plat.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 151
a. When a college or university offering evening classes only (after 5:30 P.M.) and an office development are located on the same lot, they may share one hundred (100) percent of the parking provided on the lot (with approval of a Preliminary Site Plan, Site Plan, or Substantially Conforming Site Plan designating as such).
(2) Uses Prohibited from Mixed Use Shared Parking Agreements
Due to the nature of the development, uses that conform to 4.04.08. (A)(42)c Retail (Shopping Center) (Page 154) are prohibited from using shared parking, unless approved by the Director.
(3) Pedestrian Access
Proper pedestrian access is provided such that pedestrians can access both uses within an acceptable distance and that such access is provided safely and conveniently to both uses.
(4) Rescinded Shared Parking Agreement Approval
Approval by the Planning & Zoning Commission may be rescinded by the Planning & Zoning Commission and additional parking shall be obtained by the owners in the event that the Planning & Zoning Commission determines that such joint use is resulting in a public nuisance by providing an inadequate number of parking spaces or otherwise adversely affecting the public health, safety, or welfare. For appeals, see Subsection 6.19 Appeals and the Appeal Process (Page 268).
4.04.07. Circulation and Parking Requirements for all Nonresidential Developments
(A) Applicability
The regulations provided in this section shall apply to all nonresidential development.
(B) Parking Aisles
Parking aisles shall be designed perpendicular to the front of the primary building in the development.
(C) Wheel Stops and/or Bollards
If curbs are not provided, then parking spaces that face and are adjacent to a building shall utilize wheel stops and/or bollards.
(D) Drive Aisles
Continuous drive aisles in front of buildings cannot be longer than three hundred (300) feet without a thirty (30) foot offset, a roundabout, raised crosswalks, or other acceptable traffic-calming feature approved by the Director, Director of Engineering Services, and Fire Chief.
4.04.08. Parking Requirement Based on Use
(A) Off-Street Parking Requirements
In all Districts, at the time any building or structure is erected or structurally altered, off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements.
(1) Assisted Care or Living Facility
One (1) space per five (5) beds and one (1) parking space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of lot area for outdoor uses.
(2) Athletic Fields
Fifty (50) spaces per field for fields without fixed seating.
(3) Bank, Savings and Loan, or Credit Union
One (1) space per three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 152 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
(4) Bed and Breakfast Facility
One (1) space per guest room in addition to the requirements for a normal residential use.
(5) Boarding or Rooming House
One (1) parking space for each sleeping room.
(6) Bowling Alley
Five (5) parking spaces for each alley or lane.
(7) Car Wash, Full Service
Two (2) parking spaces plus required stacking for each car wash bay.
(8) Car Wash, Self Service
Two (2) parking spaces plus required stacking for each car wash bay.
(9) Child-care, Kindergartens, Day Schools, and Similar Child Training Establishments
One (1) space per eight (8) pupils plus one (1) space per employee.
(10) Church, Rectory, or Other Place of Worship
One (1) space per one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area of the main sanctuary.
(11) College or University
One (1) space per each day student.
(12) Community Center, Library, Museum, or Art Gallery
Ten (10) parking spaces plus one (1) additional space for each three hundred (300) square feet of floor area in excess of two thousand (2,000) square feet. If an auditorium is included as a part of the building, its floor area shall be deducted from the total and additional parking provided on the basis of one (1) space for each four (4) seats that it contains.
(13) Commercial Amusement (Indoor)
If a stand-alone use, then one (1) space per one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area. If within a shopping center, then one (1) space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area.
(14) Commercial Amusement (Outdoor)
Two (2) spaces per three (3) seats on amusement rides, or ten (10) spaces per ride, sports court, batting cage facility, or attraction with no specific or defined seating.
(15) Convenience Store with Gas Pumps
One (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area. Parking in front of pump stations shall be counted towards meeting the required parking. A minimum of six (6) parking spaces shall be provided adjacent to the main building.
(16) Dance Hall, Assembly or Exhibition Hall Without Fixed Seats
One (1) parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor area thereof.
(17) Dwellings, Single Family and Two Family
See 4.04.02. (E) Minimum Parking Provisions (Page 147) for parking standard.
(18) Dwellings, Multifamily
Two (2) spaces for one (1) and two (2) bedroom units, plus one (1) additional space for each additional bedroom.
(19) Flea Market
One (1) space for each five hundred (500) square feet of site area. Dirt or gravel parking lots are not permitted.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 153
(20) Fraternity, Sorority, or Dormitory
One (1) parking space for each two (2) beds on campus, and one and one-half (1½) spaces for each two beds in off campus projects.
(21) Gasoline Station (kiosk)
Four (4) parking spaces.
(22) Golf Course
Nine (9) parking spaces per hole, plus one (1) parking space for each 150 square feet of floor area of golf or country club.
(23) Golf Course (miniature and driving range)
One and one-half (1½) parking spaces per hole (or tee), plus one (1) space for each 100 square feet of game room area.
(24) Health Studio or Club
One (1) parking space per one hundred (100) square feet.
(25) Hospital
One (1) space per employee on the largest shift, plus one and one-half (1½) spaces per each bed or examination room, whichever is applicable.
(26) Hotel
One (1) parking space for each sleeping room or suite plus one (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of commercial floor area contained therein.
(27) Lodge or Fraternal Organization
One (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet.
(28)Manufacturing or Industrial Establishment, Research or Testing Laboratory, Creamery, Bottling Plant, Warehouse, Printing or Plumbing Shop, or Similar Establishment
One (1) parking space for each employee on the maximum working shift plus parking spaces to accommodate all trucks and other vehicles used in connection therewith, but not less than one (1) parking space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area.
(29)Mini-Warehouse
Six (6) parking spaces per complex located outside of the security gates and accessible to the public.
a. Interior parking spaces for loading and unloading may be included as parallel spaces between the fire lane and storage buildings.
(30)Manufactured Home Park
Two (2) parking spaces for each manufactured home plus additional parking spaces as required herein for accessory uses.
(31)Mortuary or Funeral Home
One (1) parking space for each fifty (50) square feet of floor space in slumber rooms, parlors or individual funeral service rooms.
(32)Motel
One (1) parking space for each sleeping room or suite plus one (1) additional parking space for each two hundred (200) square feet of commercial floor area contained therein.
(33)Motor Vehicle Repair and Service
Three (3) parking spaces per service bay plus one (1) additional parking space per maximum number of employees on a shift.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 154 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
(34)Motor-Vehicle Salesroom and Used Car Lots
One (1) parking space for each five hundred (500) square feet of sales floor for indoor uses, or one (1) parking space for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of lot area for outdoor uses.
(35) Nursery (Major and Minor)
One (1) parking space for each five thousand (5,000) square feet of outdoor storage area. Any associated sales or office area shall be calculated at one (1) parking space per two hundred (200) square feet.
(36) Office (Professional)
One (1) space per three hundred fifty (350) square feet of gross floor area except as otherwise specified herein.
(37) Office (Medical and/or Dental)
One (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area. Facilities over 20,000 square feet shall use the parking standards set forth for hospitals.
(38) Private Club or Restaurant with a Private Club
One (1) parking space for each seventy-five (75) square feet of gross floor area.
(39) Recycling Center/Plant
One space per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area of the processing center.
(40) Residential Amenity Center
Minimum ten (10) spaces.
(41) Restaurant or Similar Dining Establishment
a. Stand-alone Restaurants
One (1) parking space for each one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area.
b. Inline Restaurants
Inline restaurants, restaurants located within a common structure, attached to neighboring businesses, and are not stand-alone structures, shall provide one (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area.
1. This standard does not apply to restaurants conforming to 4.04.08. (A)(42)c Retail (Shopping Center) (Page 154).
c. Outdoor Seating Areas
Outdoor seating areas (may be covered, but not enclosed) under 500 square feet do not have an additional parking requirement.
(42) Retail
a. General Retail
One (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area.
b. Retail (big box, wholesale, furniture store, etc.)
One (1) space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area.
c. Retail (Shopping Center)
One (1) space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area for shopping centers between 100,000 and 500,000 square feet. Regardless of use breakdown, parking overflow amongst uses/lots is permitted.
d. Retail (over 500,000 square feet)
One (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 155
(43) Sanitarium, Convalescent Home, Home for the Aged or Similar Institution
One (1) parking space for each five (5) beds.
(44) School, Elementary, Secondary, or Middle (Public or Private)
One (1) parking space per seventeen (17) students.
a. The total number of students shall be determined by taking the square footage of standard classrooms divided by twenty (20), plus the square footage of special classrooms, such as art, laboratories, drama, band and vocational rooms, divided by fifty (50).
(45) School, High School (Public or Private)
One (1) parking space per three and three-tenths (3.3) students. (The total number of students shall be determined by taking the square footage of standard classrooms divided by twenty (20), plus the square footage of special classrooms, such as art, laboratories, drama, band and vocational rooms, divided by fifty (50)).
(46) Theater, Sports Arena, Stadium, Gymnasium or Auditorium (except school)
One (1) parking space for each three (3) seats or bench seating spaces.
(47) Truck Stops
One (1) truck parking space measuring seventy-five (75) feet by twelve (12) feet for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet of site area plus one (1) vehicle parking space per two hundred (200) square feet of building area.
(48)Warehouse, Wholesale, Manufacturing and Other Industrial Type Uses
One (1) space for one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area.
(49) Best/Current Practices Parking Ratio
For uses shown in the Use Chart that have atypical standards or single uses which have varying parking needs depending on the function of that specific single use, an applicant may submit a parking ratio based on best/current planning and transportation practices.
a. Best/Current Practices Parking Ratio Application
1. An applicant shall fully cite the sources used to derive the applicant-submitted parking ratio, possible resources include parking standards materials from the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) or the American Planning Association (APA).
2. The Director shall review the applicant submitted parking ratio to confirm best/current planning practices for a use.
3. The Director shall approve, modify, or deny the applicant submitted parking ratio.
b. Parking Ratio Determination in Case where no Application is Submitted
1. If the applicant does not submit a parking ratio, then the Director shall determine the parking ratio based on the best/current planning and transportation practices.
(B) Stacking Requirements
(1) Stacking Space Definition
Stacking spaces provide the ability for vehicles to queue on site prior to receiving a service.
(2) Stacking Space Size and Location
A stacking space shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet in width and twenty (20) feet in length and shall not be located within or interfere with any other circulation driveway, parking space, fire lane, or maneuvering area.
(3) Additional Stacking Space Location Criteria
Stacking spaces shall be provided behind the vehicle bay door, middle of the service window, or middle of the service island, whichever is applicable.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 156 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
(4) Number of Required Stacking Spaces (All Districts)
In all Districts, at the time any building or structure is erected or altered, stacking spaces shall be provided in the number and manner set forth in the following list of property uses.
a. Automated Teller Machine (ATM)
Three (3) stacking spaces.
b. Automobile Oil Change and Similar Establishments
Three (3) stacking spaces per bay.
c. Car Wash, Full Service
Six (6) stacking spaces per bay.
d. Car Wash, Self Service (Automated)
Three (3) stacking spaces per bay.
e. Car Wash, Self Service (Open Bay)
Two (2) stacking spaces per bay.
f. Car Wash, Self Service (Drying Areas and Vacuum Islands)
Two (2) stacking spaces per drying area and/or vacuum island.
g. Child-care, Kindergartens, day schools, and similar child training and care establishments
One (1) stacking space per twenty (20) students provided on a through “circular” drive.
h. Dry Cleaning, Pharmacy, or Other Retail Establishments with a Drive-Through
Three (3) stacking spaces for first service window.
i. Financial Institution
Five (5) stacking spaces per window or service lane.
j. Restaurant with Drive-Through
Five (5) stacking spaces for first window, order board, or other stopping point.
k. Schools, Public or Private
The number of stacking spaces shall be determined during Site Plan review and approved by the Director of Engineering Services.
(5) Single Stacking Space Required after the Final Window, Order Board, or Stopping Point
A single stacking space shall be provided after the final window, order board, or stopping point to allow vehicles to pull clear of the transaction area prior to entering an intersecting on-site driveway or maneuvering aisle.
(6) Setback Requirement
Buildings and other structures shall be setback a minimum of ten (10) feet from the back of the curb of the intersecting driveway or maneuvering aisle to provide adequate visibility and to allow vehicles to safely exit drive-through lanes and escape lanes prior to merging into intersecting driveways or maneuvering aisles.
(7) Escape Lane Requirement for Drive-Through Facilities
a. An escape lane shall be provided for any use containing a drive-through facility.
b. An escape lane shall be nine (9) feet in width and shall provide access around the drive-through facility.
c. An escape lane may be part of a circulation aisle.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 157
4.04.09. Location of Parking Spaces
All parking spaces required herein shall be located on the same lot with the building or use served, except as follows.
(A) Parking Easement Requirement for Off-Site Parking
In any case where the required parking spaces are not located on the same lot with the building or use served, or where such spaces are collectively or jointly provided and used, such spaces shall be located in a parking easement as shown on a Final Plat and Site Plan.
(B) OTC Parking Reduction and Awarding of Downtown Public Parking Lot Spaces
(1) Required parking in the OTC – Original Town Commercial District shall be reduced by fifty (50) percent of the current parking requirements as they exist or may be amended.
(2) If it is determined that due to existing site constraints, the requirements of this Ordinance cannot be met in the OTC – Original Town Commercial District, the Director may, at his/her sole discretion, award public off-street parking spaces at City designated locations if all of the following conditions exist.
a. Any property owner/lessee, or his/her authorized agent, requesting any building permit and/or Certificate of Occupancy, which affects a parcel in the OTC – Original Town Commercial District and which results in a more intense use or greater square footage, must provide the additional parking required by this Ordinance if determined by the Director.
b. The proposed use represents an increase in parking intensity.
c. The proposed use will be located in an existing structure, and non-building areas of the property cannot be reconfigured to provide all of the required off-street parking.
d. The owner and/or lessee of the proposed use has exhausted all other means to provide the necessary parking including, without limitation, utilizing any vacant parcel, owned by the owner and/or lessee, which could be developed as parking.
e. There must be a surplus of existing Downtown Public Parking Lot Spaces.
1. A roster of Downtown Public Parking Lot Spaces will be kept and maintained by the Director.
(3) The Director may approve on-street parking to be credited to a use within the OTC – Original Town Commercial District.
(C) Retaining Downtown Public Parking Lot Spaces
(1) Uses in the OTC – Original Town Commercial District that have been awarded parking spaces out of any Downtown Public Parking Lots, will retain the ability to apply these spaces to their off-street parking requirements for up to six (6) months after the use, for which the additional spaces were awarded under this section, has vacated the premises.
(2) If after six (6) months the site does not have a new use for which a Certificate of Occupancy has been issued, the spaces will revert to the City as surplus.
(3) In the event a property, previously awarded Downtown Public Parking Lot Spaces, changes to a less intensive use the unneeded spaces shall be forfeited.
(D) Intent of Awarding Downtown Public Parking Lot Spaces
(1) Awarding Downtown Public Parking Lot Spaces is allowed solely for the purpose of assisting an applicant in satisfying the off-street parking requirements established by this Ordinance.
(2) An award of Downtown Public Parking Lot Spaces is not a guarantee that the awarded spaces will be open for parking at any and/or all times.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 158 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
(3) Availability of any Downtown Public Parking Lot Spaces is on a first come, first serve basis, and the Downtown Public Parking Lot spaces are open to the public.
(4) Awarded parking spaces shall not be labeled and/or marked in any way by the user, lessee and/or landowner of record.
(E) Parking Prohibited in Front Yards
No parking shall be allowed in the front yard except on Main Street between the Dallas North Tollway and BNSF Railroad where slip roads will be allowed.
4.04.10. Uses of Required Parking Spaces, Nonresidential Districts
Required off-street parking and loading spaces shall be used only for these respective purposes and shall not be used for storage or permanent display of boats, trailers, campers, motor vehicles or other goods, personal property, materials, or products for sale.
4.04.11. Storm Water Management Requirements for Parking Lots
For uses with more than 100 parking spaces, all parking spaces over 100 which are in excess of the minimum number of required parking spaces shall provide an additional landscape area equal to five (5) percent of the excess parking surface and provide one additional tree per 500 square feet of landscape area as shown within 4.02.06. Water Resource Landscape Zones for Interior Landscape Areas (Page 129).
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 159
Subsection 4.05. Lighting Standards
4.05.01. Purpose
The purpose of this subsection is to:
(A) Reduce the problems created by improperly designed and installed outdoor lighting;
(B) Reduce problems of glare on operators of motor vehicles, pedestrians and land uses;
(C) Minimize light trespass;
(D) Reduce the energy and financial costs of outdoor lighting by establishing regulations, which limit the area that certain kinds of outdoor lighting fixtures can illuminate; and
(E) Preserve the night sky as a natural resource.
4.05.02. General Requirements
The following standards shall apply to all exterior lighting except public street lighting and other lighting (see the City’s engineering standards for lighting requirements in a public right-of-way) that is specifically exempted by this subsection.
(A) Buffer Areas and Required Setback Areas
Light sources or luminaires are prohibited in buffer areas and within required setback yard areas except on pedestrian walkways and hike and bike trails.
(B) Outdoor Advertising Lighting
(1) Light for outdoor advertising shall be designed to function as full cutoff type of luminaires.
(2) The temporary use of lasers and spotlights that project light into the sky may be allowed subject to the restrictions of temporary outdoor lighting. The applicant is responsible for acquiring a signed letter from the FAA stating that the proposed lighting is acceptable.
(3) See Figure 4.05.02.1: Shielded / Cutoff Light Source Required (Page 160) for examples.
(C) Shielded Light Source Required
(1) All luminaires located on nonresidential use properties shall be designed so that the light source (bulb or lamp) is completely shielded from direct view of at a point three (3) feet above grade on the lot line abutting a Protected Residential Property (Page 301).
(2) In all other instances, the light source must be completely shielded from direct view of at a point six (6) feet above grade on the lot line.
(3) See Figure 4.05.02.1: Shielded / Cutoff Light Source Required (Page 160) for examples.
(D) Light Trespass Limitation
All luminaires located on private property shall be designed or positioned so that the maximum illumination at the property line next to a Protected Residential Property shall not exceed one-quarter (¼) foot-candle and shall not exceed one-half (½) foot-candle adjacent to a street right-of-way.
(E) Canopy Lighting
Lighting recessed for canopies covering fueling stations at automobile service stations and drive-through facilities shall not illuminate abutting properties and the luminaires shall be designed so that the light source and lenses (bulb or lamp) are completely shielded from direct view at a point five (5) feet above the grade on the lot line.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 160 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
Figure 4.05.02.1: Shielded / Cutoff Light Source Required
(F) Wall or Roof Lighting
(1) Wall or roof lighting may be used to illuminate the pedestrian walkways, entrance areas and yard areas within thirty (30) feet of the building.
(2) No wall or roof lighting shall be used to illuminate areas for motor vehicle parking or access unless the Chief Building Official finds the following:
a. That the proposed lighting is not in conflict with the stated purpose;
b. That the proposed lighting will not unreasonably harm or restrict public health, safety and welfare or create a nuisance; and
c. The proposed lighting will not result in an impairment of vision creating a hazard for vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(G) Open Area Used for Motor Vehicle Parking, Storage or Access
(1) Any open area used for motor vehicle parking, storage or access may be illuminated with freestanding luminaires.
(2) Freestanding luminaires are permitted to be a maximum of thirty (30) feet in height.
(3) When a luminary is located within one hundred (100) feet of a Protected Residential Property (Page 301), the maximum permitted luminaires height shall be twenty (20) feet.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 161
(4) All luminaires must have a total cutoff angle equal to or less than ninety (90) degrees.
(5) The use of exterior lighting with a cutoff angle greater than ninety (90) degrees shall be permitted only when the Chief Building Official finds the following:
a. That the proposed lighting is not in conflict with the stated purpose;
b. That the proposed lighting will not unreasonably harm or restrict public health, safety and welfare or create a nuisance; and
c. The proposed lighting will not result in an impairment of vision creating a hazard for vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
(H) Signs
Externally illuminated signs, advertising displays, building identification, and monument signs shall use top mounted light fixtures which shine light downward and which are fully shielded or upward with pin-pointed light which are fully shielded.
(I) Flags, Statues, and Other Similar Objects
Outdoor light fixtures used to illuminate flags, statues, or any other objects mounted on a pole, pedestal, or platform shall use a very narrow cone of light for the purpose of confining the light to the object of interest and minimize spill-light and glare.
(J) Buildings
Building façades and architectural features of buildings may be floodlighted when the following conditions are met:
(1) Floodlight fixtures are equipped with shields and are located so as to limit the fixture’s direct light distribution to the façade or feature being illuminated;
(2) The configuration of the floodlight installation shall block all view to the floodlight fixture’s lamps from adjacent properties; and
(3) The maximum luminance of any floodlighted surface does not exceed the foot-candles specified in the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America Lighting Handbook for floodlighting surfaces.
Figure 4.05.02.2: Open Area Used for Motor Vehicle Parking, Storage or Access
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 162 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
4.05.03. Temporary Outdoor Lighting
(A) Conforming Temporary Lighting
Any temporary outdoor lighting that conforms to the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance shall be allowed.
(B) Permitting Nonconforming Temporary Lighting
(1) Nonconforming temporary outdoor lighting may be permitted by the Chief Building Official after considering:
a. The nature of the exemption;
b. The public and/or private benefits that would result from the temporary lighting;
c. Placement and height of outdoor light fixtures;
d. Type of outdoor light fixture(s) to be used, including total lumen output and character of the shielding, if any;
e. Any annoyance or safety problems that may result from the use of the temporary lighting;
f. The duration of the temporary nonconforming lighting and time that lights will be operating; and
g. Such other data and information as may be required by the Chief Building Official and/or City Council to clarify the request.
(2) Chief Building Official may revoke permitted temporary lighting on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or where it is determined that the lighting adversely effects the health or safety of the public.
(C) Detailed Description Required for Nonconforming Temporary Lighting
The applicant shall submit a detailed description of the proposed nonconforming temporary lighting to the Director.
(D) For appeals, see Subsection 6.19 Appeals and the Appeal Process (Page 268).
4.05.04. Illumination Levels
(A) Engineering Society of North America Lighting Handbook
The illumination levels contained in the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America Lighting Handbook, as amended from time to time, shall be used as a guide for providing adequate and safe illumination levels.
(B) Private and/or Public Development Project
The Director may require conformance with the illumination levels contained in the Lighting Handbook, Illuminating Engineering Society of North America as part of the review and approval of a private and/or public development project.
4.05.05. Method of Measurement
(A) Light Measuring Meter
(1) The light measuring meter shall have a color and cosine-corrected sensor with multiple scales and shall read within an accuracy of plus or minus five (5) percent.
(2) It shall be tested, calibrated, and certified by an independent commercial photometric laboratory or the manufacturer within one (1) year of its use.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 163
(B) Measurements / Readings
(1) Illumination levels shall be measured in foot-candles with a meter sensor in a horizontal position at an approximate height of three (3) feet above grade.
(2) Maximum illumination readings are to be taken directly beneath the luminaires.
4.05.06. Exterior Lighting Plan
(A) Submission
(1) Applicability
A lighting plan shall be required anytime exterior lighting is proposed, or modified, that is associated with a use of greater intensity than a one (1) or two (2) family dwelling.
(2) Submission Official
The lighting plan shall be submitted to the Director.
(3) Submission Criteria
The submission shall contain but shall not necessarily be limited to the following:
a. Plans indicating the location of the exterior lighting on the premises, and the type of illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors, and other devices;
b. Description of the illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors, and other devices and the description may include, but is not limited to, catalog cuts by manufacturers and drawings (including sections where required) and height of the luminaires; and
c. Photometric plan and data sheets, such as that furnished by manufacturers, or similar to that furnished by manufacturers, showing the angle of cut off or light emissions.
(4) Lighting Plan Preparation
A certified engineer, architect, landscape architect or lighting engineer or designer shall prepare the lighting plan.
(5) Certification Statement
The lighting plan shall also contain a certification by the property owner or agent and the preparer of the lighting plan that the exterior lighting depicted on the lighting plan complies with the requirements of this Ordinance after installation.
(6) Once the plan is approved by the Director, the exterior lighting of the property shall conform to the approved lighting plan.
(7) A lighting plan required by this 4.05.06. Exterior Lighting Plan shall expire at the same time that the approved Site Plan for which it was submitted expires.
(B) Additional Submission
(1) The above required plans, descriptions and data shall be sufficiently complete to enable the reviewer to readily determine whether compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance will be secured.
a. If such plans, descriptions and data cannot enable this ready determination, by reason of the nature or configuration or the devices, fixtures, or lamps proposed, the applicant shall additionally submit as evidence of compliance to enable such determination such certified reports of tests as will do so provided that these tests shall have been performed and certified by a recognized testing laboratory.
(2) Before issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or within thirty (30) calendar days of receiving a Certificate of Occupancy, the applicant or his/her designee shall submit to the Director a photometric plan, stamped by a certified testing laboratory or engineering firm that the installed lighting is in compliance with this Ordinance.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 164 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
(C) Lamp or Fixture Substitution
Should any outdoor light fixture or the type of light source therein be changed after the issuance of the building permit and/or Certificate of Occupancy, a change request with adequate information, as required in 4.05.06. (A) above herein, to ensure compliance with this Ordinance must be submitted to the Chief Building Official for review and approval prior to the substitution.
4.05.07. Prohibited
(A) Lighting Fixtures
(1) “Cobra head” type lighting fixtures having dished or “drop” lenses or refractors which house other than incandescent light sources shall be prohibited.
(2) See Figure 4.05.02.1: Shielded / Cutoff Light Source Required (Page 160) for examples.
(B) Flickering or Flashing Lights
Flickering or flashing lights shall be prohibited.
4.05.08. Exemptions
The following are exempt from the standards contained in this Ordinance.
(A) Decorative Seasonal Lighting
Decorative seasonal lights used for temporary purposes.
(B) Residential Dwellings
(1) Lighting for residential dwellings, provided that:
a. The lamps have a power rating of less than or equal to seventy-five (75) watts,
b. A cutoff component is incorporated in the design of the luminaires, and
c. The lighting level at the property line shall not exceed the maximum level specified within this Ordinance.
(2) The maximum lighting level at the property line may be exceeded in cases where the lamp is turned on and off by a motion sensor and the lamp is not on for a continuous period exceeding ten (10) minutes.
(C) Luminous Tube Lighting
Luminous tube lighting is exempt from this Ordinance.
(D) Specific Signs
Signs of the type constructed of translucent materials and wholly illuminated from within are exempt from the shielding requirement.
(E) Temporary Emergency Lighting
Temporary emergency lighting used by police, fire fighters, or other emergency services, as well as all vehicular luminaires.
(F) Hazard Warnings
Hazard warning luminaires, which are required by federal and state regulatory agencies.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 165
(G) Residential Party Lights
(1) Residential party lights for social gatherings. Such temporary outdoor lighting includes, but is not limited to, strings of lights and lanterns.
(2) The party lights shall be removed within a reasonable time after any given reason.
(3) The Chief Building Official will determine what the “reasonable time” should be.
(H) Specific Recreation
(1) Because of their unique requirement for nighttime visibility and their limited hours of operations, ball diamonds, playing fields and tennis courts are exempted from the general standards of this section.
(2) Lighting for these outdoor recreational uses shall be shielded to minimize light and glare from spilling over onto a Protected Residential Property.
(3) The maximum permitted illumination at the residential property line shall not exceed two (2) foot-candles.
(I) Public Street or Sidewalk Projects
City Council may vary from these requirements as part of the approval of public street or sidewalk projects.
4.05.09. Nonconforming Luminaires
(A) Pre-Existing Luminaires
(1) Exterior lighting luminaires in existence on the effective date of this Ordinance April 5, 2011 shall be exempt from these standards and shall be considered legally nonconforming.
(2) Legal nonconforming fixtures may be repaired, maintained and replaced.
(3) Non-conforming lighting luminaires shall be replaced to comply with this Ordinance when the property is redeveloped.
(B) Public Nuisance Luminaires
(1) Exterior lighting luminaires existing on the effective date of this Ordinance which are located on private nonresidential property and are found to direct light or glare to a Protected Residential Property shall be declared a public nuisance if the level of illumination on the Protected Residential Property, which is caused by the luminaires, is greater than one-quarter (¼) foot-candle.
(2) Such fixtures shall be altered to reduce the level of illumination in the protected residential property to a one-quarter (¼) foot-candle within two (2) months of receiving a written notice of the violation from the City.
(3) Two (2) foot candles are allowed for ball diamonds, playing fields and tennis courts.
4.05.10. Enforcement
The Chief Building Official, or his/her designee, is hereby empowered and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance relating to outdoor light control.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 166 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
Subsection 4.06. Accessory Structure Standards
4.06.01. Accessory Structure Use in Residential Districts
In the following applicable residential zoning districts, an accessory structure shall not be used for commercial purposes.
Applicable Zoning Districts Table
Section
District Abbreviation – District Name
Page Number
2.03.01.
AG – Agricultural District
22
2.03.02.
RE – Residential Estate District
23
2.03.03.
SF-16 – Single Family Residential-16 District
24
2.03.04.
SF-12.5 – Single Family Residential-12.5 District
25
2.03.05.
SF-10 – Single Family Residential-10 District
26
2.03.06.
SF-8.5 – Single Family Residential-8.5 District
27
2.03.07.
SF-7 – Single Family Residential-7 District
28
2.03.08.
OTR – Original Town Residential District
29
2.03.09.
PH – Patio Home District
31
2.03.10.
2F – Two Family Residential (Duplex) District
33
2.03.11.
TH – Townhome District
34
2.03.12.
MF-15 – Multifamily-15 District
36
2.03.13.
MF-19 – Multifamily-19 District
37
2.03.14.
MH – Manufactured Home District
38
4.06.02. Accessory Structure Use in Nonresidential Zoning Districts
In the following applicable nonresidential districts, an accessory structure is a subordinate structure, the use of which is incidental to and used only in conjunction with the main structure.
Applicable Zoning Districts Table
Section
District Abbreviation – District Name
Page Number
2.04.01.
O-1 – Office-1 District
39
2.04.02.
O-2 – Office-2 District
40
2.04.03.
R – Retail District
42
2.04.04.
OTC – Original Town Commercial District
43
2.04.05.
H – Highway District
49
2.04.06.
C-1 – Commercial-1 District
50
2.04.07.
C-2 – Commercial-2 District
51
2.04.08.
IT – Information and Technology District
52
2.04.09.
I – Industrial District
53
4.06.03. Garage Apartment or Guest House
A Garage Apartment (Page 287) or Guest House (Page 288) shall be allowed as an incidental use on the same lot or tract as the main dwelling unit and used by the same person or persons of the immediate family when the main structure is owner occupied, and meet the following standards.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 167
(A) Location
(1) A Garage Apartment (Page 287) shall be constructed attached to a garage, either above or adjacent to the garage.
(2) A Guest House (Page 288) shall be constructed to the rear of the main dwelling, separate from that upon which the main dwelling is constructed.
(B) Building Permit Requirement
A Garage Apartment or Guest House may be constructed only with the issuance of a Building Permit.
(C) Independent Sale and Sublet Prohibited
A Garage Apartment or Guest House may not be sold separately from sale of the entire property, including the main dwelling unit, and shall not be sublet.
(D) Setbacks
Setback requirements shall be the same as for the main structure.
4.06.04. Area Regulations for Accessory Structure in Residential Districts
(A) Definition
See Accessory Structure (Page 274).
(B) An Accessory Structure is prohibited in any easement.
(C) MH District
In the MH District, no carport, garage, storage structure, office, caretaker’s dwelling, laundry house, or other permitted structure may be located nearer than ten (10) feet to any side or rear property line. Such structures shall also be subject to front yard setback requirements of the primary structure.
(D) Multifamily Zoning Districts
Accessory Structure yard requirements shall be the same as the main structure unless otherwise specified in the zoning district or approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission on a Preliminary Site Plan for the multifamily development.
(1) See Figure 9.01.01.13: Accessory Building Setbacks (Page 324)
(E) All Residential Districts Except Multifamily Zoning Districts
(1) Specific Standards
a. Accessory Structure yard requirements shall be the same as the main structure unless otherwise specified in 4.06.04. (F) Accessory Structure Regulations in All Residential Districts Except MF & MH Zoning Districts (Page 169).
b. See Figure 4.06.04.1: Accessory Structure Regulations in All Residential Districts Except MF & MH Zoning Districts (Page 169) for requirements.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 168 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK FOR DOUBLE-SIDED PRINTING
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 169
(F) Accessory Structure Regulations in All Residential Districts Except MF & MH Zoning Districts
SPECIFIC STANDARDS BY LOT TYPE
SETBACKS
ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
FRONT
SIDE
REAR
Lots Backing to Alley
A 3’ rear yard setback is allowed if the structure is no greater than 8’ in height. A solid fence or wall of the same height shall be built on the rear lot line to screen the structure from property located to the rear.
Lots Backing to Open Space (minimum 50’ in depth)
No Alley or Open Space (minimum 50’ in depth)
SPECIFIC STANDARDS BY USE OF STRUCTURE
SETBACKS
ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
FRONT
SIDE
REAR
Guest House or Garage Apartment
Patio Covers/Arbors Attached to the Primary Structure
Shall be open on all sides, have a permeable (non weather-resistant) roof, and a maximum height of one story.
Outdoor Kitchen/Fireplace
On corner lots, may encroach into the side yard up to 7’ from the side property line. The maximum height for outdoor kitchens in the side yard shall be 42”.
100% masonry structures (no greater than 8’ in height) may encroach into the rear yard up to 10’ from the property line.
Fire Pit
15’ minimum distance from the primary structure
10’ minimum distance from any combustible item.
SPECIFIC STANDARDS BY USE OF STRUCTURE
SETBACKS
ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
FRONT
SIDE
REAR
Alley Loaded, Attached
20’ minimum setback from side yard if accessed off side alley.
Alley Loaded, Detached
20’ minimum setback from side yard if accessed off side alley.
Side Loaded
J-Swing
Front yard setback for J-Swing garage may be reduced by up to 10’ per 4.07.02. (I) (Page 175).
Front Loaded, Detached (Pass-Thru)
Driveway width shall be a maximum of 12’ between the street and the front façade of the primary structure.
6’ minimum setback from the rear property line shall be provided if a single story structures 10’ or more from the primary structure. Otherwise, it shall meet the primary structure setback requirement.
Front Loaded, Attached
LEGEND
REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL ACCESSORY STRUCTURES
Property Lines
Accessory Structure Note
No structure shall be placed within an easement.
Setback Lines
Garage/Carport Type
No structure shall be placed in the side yard setback between the front and rear yard setback lines.
Easement Lines
Garage/Carport Note
No structure shall project into the front yard beyond the face primary structure (not to include the porch area).
Note Applies to All Accessory Structures
Accessory structures or buildings within the rear portion of the lot constructed closer than 10’ to the main structure shall have the rear yard setback of the primary structure.
PRIMARY STRUCTURE SETBACKS
SETBACK NOTES
GARAGE/CARPORT NOTES
Front Yard
3’ min.
28’ min.
Side Yard
10’ min.
12’ max.
Rear Yard
15’ min. when Adjacent to a Side Street
20’ min.
Corner Lot, Side Yard
Same as Primary Structure Setback
6’ or Same as Primary Structure Setback
Corner Lot, Front Yard (Key Lot)
Figure 4.06.04.1: Accessory Structure Regulations in All Residential Districts Except MF & MH Zoning Districts
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 170 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK FOR DOUBLE-SIDED PRINTING
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 171
4.06.05. Accessory Structure Exterior Façades and Construction
(A) Exterior Façades
The exterior facades of all accessory structures, including detached garages, in all zoning districts shall be constructed of the same exterior construction material of the main building or structure, and, at a minimum, the requirements which meeting or exceed 4.07.09. Exterior Construction of Main Buildings (Page 179).
(B) Exceptions to Exterior Facades
(1) Fiber cement siding may be used to fulfill masonry requirements for an accessory structure or structure of two hundred (200) square feet or less in a single family or two family district.
(2) Exception shall be allowed to the 4.07.09. Exterior Construction of Main Buildings (Page 179) for accessory strictures in the AG – Agricultural District.
(3) Metal or wood may be used as an exterior construction material for an accessory structure or structure of one hundred twenty (120) square feet or less in a single family or two family district.
(4) Fiber cement siding may be used to fulfill masonry requirements for structures accessory to an existing structure constructed entirely of wood or vinyl siding.
(5) In nonresidential districts, accessory structures with pervious roofs (e.g., pergola) may be constructed of Cedar, Douglas Fir, or other material impervious to rotting, provided masonry, matching the material of the primary building or structure, wraps around the base of each column for a minimum three (3) feet above grade.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 172 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
Subsection 4.07. Supplementary Regulations
4.07.01. Residential Lot Regulations
(A) Minimum Residential Lot Area and Exceptions
The minimum lot area for the various zoning districts shall be in accordance with the individual districts except that a lot having less area than herein required which was an official "lot of record" prior to the adoption of this Ordinance, April 5, 2011, may be used for a single family dwelling and no lot existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance shall be reduced in area below the minimum requirements set forth in the respective district.
(B) Location of Dwellings and Buildings
(1) One Main Building for Single Family and Two Family Use
Only one main building for single family and two family use, with permitted accessory buildings, may be located upon a lot or unplatted tract.
(2) Access
Every means of access shall have a minimum lot width of twenty-five (25) feet at the property line.
(3) Two or More Main Buildings
Whenever two or more main buildings, or portions thereof, are placed upon a single lot or tract and such buildings do not face upon a public street, the same may be permitted when the Site Plan for such development is approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission so as to comply with the City Subdivision Regulations' requirements for platting.
(4) Duplicate Calculations Prohibited
No parking area, storage area, or required open space for one building shall be computed as being the open space, yard, or area requirements for any other dwelling or other use.
4.07.02. Front Yard Setback
(A) Corner Lots
On corner lots, the front yard setback shall be observed along the frontage of both intersecting streets, unless shown specifically otherwise on a Final Plat, according to 4.07.01. (A) Minimum Residential Lot Area and Exceptions (Page 172).
(B) Block with Split Zoning
Where the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is divided by two or more zoning districts, the front yard setback shall comply with the requirements of the most restrictive district for the entire frontage
(1) See Figure 4.07.02.1: Front Yard Where Zoning Changes in a Block.
Figure 4.07.02.1: Front Yard Where Zoning Changes in a Block
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 173
(C) Approved Plats with Established Building Line
The required front yard setback shall comply with the building line so established by such Ordinance or plat, where a building line has been established by a plat or by ordinance prior to April 5, 2011, and such line required is a greater or lesser front yard setback than prescribed by this Ordinance for the district in which the building line is located.
(D) Front Yard Measurements and Considerations
(1) The front yard shall be measured from the property line to the front face of the building, covered porch, covered terrace or attached accessory building.
(2) Eaves and roof extensions or a porch without posts or columns may project into the required front yard setback for a distance not to exceed three (3) feet.
a. See Figure 4.07.02.2: Method for Measuring Front Yards.
(E) Minimum Front Yard Setback Reduction and Average Setback
(1) The minimum front yard setback requirements may be reduced by a maximum of five (5) feet for all single family and duplex uses within all SF, 2F, and OTC zoning districts provided that at least fifty (50) percent of the structures on a given block are set back an additional five (5) feet from the original setback.
(2) The average setback along the block shall equal the original setback requirement.
(3) The purpose of this average setback is to encourage a variety of front yard setbacks along a street.
(4) In no case shall the front yard setback be less than twenty (20) feet.
(5) The desired front setbacks for each lot shall be designated on the Final Plat.
a. See Figure 4.07.02.3: Calculations of Average Front Yard Setbacks (Page 173)
Figure 4.07.02.2: Method for Measuring Front Yards
Figure 4.07.02.3: Calculations of Average Front Yard Setbacks
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 174 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
(F) Lots with Predominate Frontage on the Curved Radius of a Cul-de-sac Street
Minimum front yard setbacks for lots with predominate frontage on the curved radius of a dedicated cul-de-sac street shall be twenty (20) feet.
(1) See Figure 4.07.02.4: Calculations of Front Yard Setbacks on a Cul-de-sac Street.
(G) Future Right-of-Way Line
Where a future right-of-way line has been established for future widening or opening of a street or thoroughfare, upon which a lot abuts, then the front or side yard shall be measured from the future right-of-way line.
(H) Front Yard Setback Reduction for Nonresidential Zoning District
(1) Applicability
The following front yard reductions shall apply to all nonresidential zoning districts except the I – Industrial District.
(2) Reduction Standards
The minimum front yard setback requirements may be reduced to ten (10) if the following requirements are met.
a. A minimum fifteen (15) foot sidewalk is provided.
b. Using Subsection 9.07 Form-Based Code Manual (Page 332), street trees planted thirty (30) to thirty-five (35) feet on center are provided.
c. No parking or drive aisles are between the building and the property line
d. Buildings or required open space areas abut the fifteen (15) foot sidewalk for a minimum distance of two hundred (200) feet or fifty (50) percent of the length of the front yard, whichever is greater.
e. The above requirements shall be consistent with Subsection 9.07 Form-Based Code Manual (Page 332).
Figure 4.07.02.4: Calculations of Front Yard Setbacks on a Cul-de-sac Street
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 175
(I) Front Yard Setback Reduction for Single and Two Family Zoning Districts
The minimum front yard in single family and two family zoning districts may be reduced by ten (10) feet in the following circumstances. The front yard setback reduction shall apply only to the structures listed and shall not apply to the remainder of the housing unit. In no case shall the reduction cause the minimum front yard to be less than fifteen (15) feet. (See Figure 4.07.02.5: Front Yard Setback Reduction for Single and Two Family Zoning Districts (Page 175) for a graphic depiction of applicable standards.)
(1) Circumstance One
For a swing-in garage provided the wall of the garage that faces the street contains a glass pane window with a minimum size of three (3) feet by five (5) feet and the height of the garage does not exceed one (1) story;
(2) Circumstance Two
For a non-enclosed porch, stoop, or balcony, or an architectural feature, such as bay window without floor area or chimney (for porch information and examples, see 4.07.16. Front Porch Standards (Page 186 )); or
(3) Circumstance Three
For a non-enclosed porch and the main structure provided:
a. The porch has a minimum dimension of seven (7) feet in depth measured from stud to the front edge of the porch floor and a minimum width of:
1. Ten (10) feet for SF-8.5 – Single Family Residential-8.5 District lots and smaller; and
2. Twenty (20) feet for lots larger than SF-8.5 – Single Family Residential-8.5 District.
(J) Front Yard Setback Reduction for Specific Thoroughfares
The minimum front yard in single family and two family zoning districts with required street trees shall be reduced by five (5) feet for Type F and Type G thoroughfares.
4.07.03. Side Yard Setbacks
(A) Corner Lot Side Yard Setbacks
(1) On a corner lot used for one or two family dwellings, both street exposures shall be treated as front yards on all lots except where one street exposure is designated as a side yard on a lot of record and separated from the adjacent lot by an alley and separated from the adjacent lot by an alley.
Figure 4.07.02.5: Front Yard Setback Reduction for Single and Two Family Zoning Districts
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 176 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
a. In such case, a building line shall be designated on the plat containing a side yard of fifteen (15) feet or more.
(2) On lots that were official lots of record prior to April 5, 2011, the minimum side yard adjacent to a side street shall comply with the minimum required side yard for the respective district. See the following figures for details:
a. Figure 4.07.03.1: Key Lot.
b. Figure 4.07.03.2: Corner Lot.
(B) Open and Unobstructed Side Yards
(1) Every part of a required side yard shall be open and unobstructed from the ground upward except for accessory buildings as permitted herein and the ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses, cornices, and other architectural features not to exceed twelve (12) inches into the required side yard, and roof eaves projecting not to exceed thirty-six (36) inches into the required side yard.
(2) Air conditioning compressors, pool machinery and equipment, and similar appurtenances are permitted in the side yard, but shall be located a minimum three (3) feet from the property line.
Figure 4.07.03.1: Key Lot
Figure 4.07.03.2: Corner Lot
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 177
(C) Garage Door Side Yard Setback
The face (meaning garage door) of a garage that faces a side yard (a swing-in garage) must be setback twenty-eight (28) feet from the side property line.
a. See Figure 4.06.04.1: Accessory Structure Regulations in All Residential Districts Except MF & MH Zoning Districts (Page 169).
4.07.04. Wind Energy Conversion Systems, Small
(A) Height
The maximum tower height shall conform to the applicable zoning district.
(B) Property Line Setbacks
The setback from a property line shall be equal to or greater than the tower height.
4.07.05. Special Height Regulations
(A) Use Height Exceptions
Water stand pipes and tanks, church steeples, domes, and spires, public and private school buildings, and public/semi-public (see Public/Semi-Public Uses (Page 302)) institutional buildings (see Institutional Use (Page 290)) may be erected to exceed two (2) stories in height, provided that one (1) additional foot shall be added to the width and depth of front, side, and rear yards for each foot that such structures exceed two (2) stories.
Figure 4.07.05.1: Antenna & Tower Height Comparisons within Frisco
(B) Ornamental Features Exception
(1) Ornamental features in all nonresidential zoning districts may exceed the maximum building height provided that the ornamental feature does not contain floor area and provided the required setbacks for the ornamental feature are increased by two (2) feet for every one (1) foot that the ornamental feature exceeds the maximum height.
(2) Ornamental features shall be defined as towers, spires, steeples, and cupolas.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 178 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
(C) Antennas and Other Transmitting and Receiving Devices
(1) Amateur radio antennas and other transmitting and receiving devices of microwave or electromagnetic waves for broadcasting use, shall not interfere with radio or television reception of adjoining property owners, and shall comply with all regulations of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC).
(2) In no case shall the height of such antennas exceed forty-five (45) feet and proper guy wire securement shall be followed.
(3) In no manner shall the use of such equipment physically cross onto adjacent lots.
4.07.06. Miscellaneous Requirements
(A) Measurements
All measurements of setback requirements shall be made according to the following figures.
(1) Figure 9.01.01.3: Front Yard, Building Line, and Lot Width Measurement (Page 319)
(2) Figure 9.01.01.5: Determining Lot Depth on an Irregular Shaped Lot (Page 320)
(3) Figure 9.01.01.6: Yard Measurements (Page 320)
4.07.07. Radio, Television and Microwave Towers
No radio, television or microwave tower for a commercial use shall be located within a distance equal to or less than the height of such tower from any residential structure or from any area zoned residential, or shown as residential on the current Comprehensive Plan. Such distance shall be measured in a straight line from the closest point of the tower to the closest point of such area or residential structure or property line.
4.07.08. Modular (Industrialized) Home
(A) Permitted Zoning Districts
A modular home may be permitted within the following zoning districts.
Zoning Districts in which Modular Homes are Permitted
Section
District Abbreviation – District Name
Page Number
2.03.01.
AG – Agricultural District
22
2.03.02.
RE – Residential Estate District
23
2.03.03.
SF-16 – Single Family Residential-16 District
24
2.03.04.
SF-12.5 – Single Family Residential-12.5 District
25
2.03.05.
SF-10 – Single Family Residential-10 District
26
2.03.06.
SF-8.5 – Single Family Residential-8.5 District
27
2.03.07.
SF-7 – Single Family Residential-7 District
28
2.03.08.
OTR – Original Town Residential District
29
2.03.09.
PH – Patio Home District
31
2.03.10.
2F – Two Family Residential (Duplex) District
33
2.03.11.
TH – Townhome District
34
2.03.12.
MF-15 – Multifamily-15 District
36
2.03.13.
MF-19 – Multifamily-19 District
37
2.03.14.
MH – Manufactured Home District
38
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 179
(B) Modular (Industrialized) Home Requirements
The following requirements shall be met for modular homes.
(1) The modular home meets or exceeds all building code requirements that apply to other dwelling units concerning on-site construction.
(2) The modular home conforms to all applicable zoning standards for the respective zoning district.
(3) The modular home is affixed to an approved permanent foundation system.
(4) The Chief Building Official is so notified in writing for the purpose of establishing procedures for the inspection, issuing of building permits, and compliance with the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act (Article 1221f V.T.C.S.).
(5) The modular home is placed on an approved platted lot.
(6) Per the Texas Occupations Code §1202.253, Modular (Industrialized) homes shall:
a. Have a value equal to or greater than the median taxable value for each single-family dwelling located within 500 feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing is proposed to be located, as determined by the most recent certified tax appraisal roll for each county in which the properties are located;
b. Have exterior siding, roofing, roofing pitch, foundation fascia, and fenestration compatible with the single-family dwellings located within 500 feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing is proposed to be located;
c. Comply with municipal aesthetic standards, building setbacks, side and rear yard offsets, subdivision control, architectural landscaping, square footage, and other site requirements applicable to single-family dwellings; and
d. Be securely fixed to a permanent foundation.
(7) For purposes of above subsection (6), “value” means the taxable value of the industrialized housing and the lot after installation of the housing.
4.07.09. Exterior Construction of Main Buildings
(A) Exterior Material Requirements for Selected Residential Districts
(1) Applicable Zoning Districts
Residential Zoning Districts with Exterior Material Requirements
Section
District Abbreviation – District Name
Page Number
2.03.01.
AG – Agricultural District
22
2.03.02.
RE – Residential Estate District
23
2.03.03.
SF-16 – Single Family Residential-16 District
24
2.03.04.
SF-12.5 – Single Family Residential-12.5 District
25
2.03.05.
SF-10 – Single Family Residential-10 District
26
2.03.06.
SF-8.5 – Single Family Residential-8.5 District
27
2.03.07.
SF-7 – Single Family Residential-7 District
28
2.03.08.
OTR – Original Town Residential District
29
2.03.09.
PH – Patio Home District
31
2.03.10.
2F – Two Family Residential (Duplex) District
33
2.03.11.
TH – Townhome District
34
2.03.12.
MF-15 – Multifamily-15 District
36
2.03.13.
MF-19 – Multifamily-19 District
37
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 180 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
(2) Residential Materials Requirements
a. The exterior façades of a main building or structure shall be constructed of one hundred (100) percent masonry, unless otherwise specified in this Zoning Ordinance.
b. Fiber cement siding may constitute fifty (50) percent of stories other than the first story, where located over roofline.
1. Fiber cement siding may also be used for architectural features, including window box-outs, bay windows, roof dormers, garage door headers of rear entry garages, columns, chimneys not part of an exterior wall, or other architectural features approved by the Chief Building Official.
(B) Exterior Material Requirements for Selected Nonresidential Districts
(1) Applicable Zoning Districts
Nonresidential Zoning Districts with Exterior Material Requirements
Section
District Abbreviation – District Name
Page Number
2.04.01.
O-1 – Office-1 District
39
2.04.02.
O-2 – Office-2 District
40
2.04.03.
R – Retail District
42
2.04.05.
H – Highway District
49
2.04.06.
C-1 – Commercial-1 District
50
2.04.07.
C-2 – Commercial-2 District
51
2.04.08.
IT – Information and Technology District
52
2.04.09.
I – Industrial District
53
(2) Nonresidential Façade Requirements
All exterior façades for a main building or structure shall be constructed of one hundred (100) percent masonry as defined in Masonry Construction (Page 294). The use of secondary materials may be used as specified by 4.08.02. (B) (Page 190).
(C) Metal Buildings
For Metal Buildings within all Zoning Districts:
(1) Exterior construction of maintenance buildings for golf courses, public or parochial schools, churches, or the City may be metal upon issuance of a Specific Use Permit.
(2) Exterior construction of buildings used for agricultural purposes in conjunction with a school may be metal upon issuance of a Specific Use Permit.
(3) If an expansion or an addition to an existing metal building is not greater than ten (10) percent or 7,000 square feet, whichever is greater, the masonry requirements shall not apply to the expansion or addition to the existing metal building.
(D) Multifamily Zoning Districts
All main structures within the MF-15 – Multifamily-15 District and MF-19 – Multifamily-19 District districts must have a minimum of eighty (80) percent masonry on the first and second floors and fifty (50) percent on all other floors.
(E) OTR Façade Plan Requirement
(1) All main and/or accessory building construction in the OTR – Original Town Residential District must have an approved façade plan before issuance of a building permit.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 181
(2) All newly constructed dwellings in the OTR – Original Town Residential District must adhere to Subsection 9.06 Downtown Architectural Design Standards; OTC & OTR (Page 331).
a. Any change to a façade for main and accessory buildings in the OTR – Original Town Residential District shall be of the pre-existing material (existing prior to September 3, 2002), which may include wood, non-combustible fiber cement siding construction, or clay-fired brick, or other materials as long as it meets the requirements of the district and the Chief Building Official.
b. Any change to the façade of a main and/or accessory building must be in the same architectural style as the main structure.
(3) Façade plans shall follow the procedures listed in Subsection 6.16 Façade Plan Review (Page 263).
(F) OTC Façade Plan Requirement
(1) All main and/or accessory building construction in the OTC – Original Town Commercial District must have an approved façade plan before issuance of a building permit.
(2) New construction in the OTC – Original Town Commercial District must adhere to Subsection 9.06 Downtown Architectural Design Standards; OTC & OTR (Page 331).
a. Any change in façade for main buildings or structures in the OTC – Original Town Commercial District shall be clay-fired brick construction.
b. Original building materials are allowed on buildings (existing prior to September 3, 2002) for expansions only.
(3) Façade plans shall follow the procedures listed in Subsection 6.16 Façade Plan Review (Page 263).
(G) Equivalent or Superior Materials
(1) The City Council may approve materials which are equivalent to, or exceed, the standards set forth in the following.
a. 4.07.09. (A) Exterior Material Requirements for Selected Residential Districts (Page 179)
b. 4.07.09. (B) Exterior Material Requirements for Selected Nonresidential Districts (Page 180)
c. Subsection 9.06 Downtown Architectural Design Standards; OTC & OTR (Page 331)
(2) The City Council may also approve after a recommendation from the Planning & Zoning Commission, exceptions to the standards set forth in 4.07.09. (F) OTC Façade Plan Requirement (Page 181) if the proposed material is determined by the City Council to be compatible with the historical architectural character of the OTC – Original Town Commercial District.
4.07.10. Handicap Accessibility
The property owner is responsible for the project’s compliance with the Texas Department of License and Regulations, as they exist or may be amended.
4.07.11. Mini-Warehouse/Self-Storage Facilities
(A) Side Building Line Reduction
(1) The side building lines of a Mini-Warehouse/Self-Storage (Page 294) facility may be reduced by approval of the Planning & Zoning Commission at the time of the Preliminary Site Plan approval.
(2) If a reduction of side building lines is approve, then the configuration of the storage units shall be with the doors facing into the site with the rear walls of the units serving as the outer boundary.
(B) Exterior Construction
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 182 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
(1) Mini-Warehouse/Self-Storage facilities must comply with 4.07.09. Exterior Construction of Main Buildings (Page 179), and its amendments, relating to the construction material used for exterior buildings.
(2) Notwithstanding any other provisions to the contrary, a Mini-Warehouse/Self-Storage facility constructed adjacent to a residential area, whether separated by a dedicated street or not, shall exclusively use clay-fired brick as the exterior construction material.
(C) Recreational Vehicle (RV) and Boat Storage Screening
RV/Boat storage must be internal to the property or screened from view.
4.07.12. Adjacency of Certain Uses to Residential Zoning
(A) Structures in Conjunction with any Automotive Use
(1) All buildings, gasoline pump islands, vacuums, outdoor speakers, gasoline or fuel storage tanks, air and water dispensers, and other structures in conjunction with any automotive use shall be located a minimum of two hundred fifty (250) feet from any residential zoning district.
(2) No service bay shall face a residential zoning district.
(3) An automotive use shall be defined as the sales, leasing, renting, servicing, repair, or washing of automobiles, boats, motorcycles, trucks, or any other motor vehicle.
(B) Structures in Conjunction with any Drive-Through or Drive-In Restaurant
(1) All buildings, structures, and outdoor speakers used in conjunction with any drive-through or drive-in restaurant shall be located a minimum of two hundred (200) feet from any residential zoning district.
a. Outdoor speakers may be located closer than two hundred (200) feet from a residential zoning district provided that the building is located between the speaker box and adjacent residentially zoned property.
b. Landscaping standards may be found in Subsection 4.02 Landscape Requirements (Page 122).
(C) Thoroughfare Exemption
The requirements listed in 4.07.12. (A) (Page 182) and 4.07.12. (B) (Page 182) shall not apply to a drive-through restaurant, drive-in restaurant, and/or an automotive use within two hundred (200) feet of a residential zoning district that is separated from the residential area by an existing or future major thoroughfare identified on the City’s Thoroughfare Plan.
(D) External Balconies and Walkways
Nonresidential external balconies and walkways adjacent to the building shall be set back two hundred (200) feet from any residential zoning district.
4.07.13. Residential Development Adjacent to Railways
(A) Minimum Building Setback, Screening, and Landscaping Requirements
When a boundary of a residential subdivision is adjacent to a railroad right-of-way, one of the two following options shall be met.
(1) Option One – Screening Wall
a. A minimum building setback of fifty (50) feet shall be required from the railroad right-of-way.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 183
b. A one hundred (100) percent clay-fired brick or stone wall with a minimum height of six (6) feet shall be constructed on the railroad right-of-way line.
c. One three (3) inch caliper large tree shall be planted a minimum of thirty (30) linear feet on center adjacent to the residential side of the wall.
1. A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the trees shall be of the evergreen variety.
2. The landscaped area shall be mechanically irrigated.
3. The lot owner shall be responsible for the replacement of required plant materials.
(2) Option Two – Open Space
a. A minimum building setback of one hundred (100) feet shall be provided from the railroad right-of-way.
b. A maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of the setback area may be utilized as usable open space as required in 2.03.09. PH – Patio Home District (Page 31) and 2.03.11. TH – Townhome District (Page 34).
c. One three (3) inch caliper large tree shall be planted a minimum of thirty (30) linear feet on center adjacent to the residential side of the wall.
1. A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the trees shall be of the evergreen variety.
2. The landscaped area shall be mechanically irrigated.
3. The lot owner shall be responsible for the replacement of required plant materials.
(3) Installation Timing
The required screening wall and landscaping shall be installed within three (3) months from the date of City acceptance of public improvements.
(B) Platting Requirements
(1) The setback area shall be designated on the plat as follows: "This setback area is reserved for screening purposes. The placement of structures on this land or the removal of healthy screening plant materials is prohibited."
(2) Should the setback area be part of a single family lot, the setback area shall also be recorded on the plat as a building line.
(C) Exceptions
(1) This Section 4.07.13. Residential Development Adjacent to Railways shall not apply to any residential development with an approved Concept Plan, Preliminary Plat, and/or Final Plat prior to April 4, 2000.
4.07.14. Nonresidential and Multifamily Development Adjacent to a Major Creek
(A) Major Creeks Defined
Major Creeks within the City shall be defined within in Subdivision Ordinance as it exists or may be amended and may include the following:
(1) Cottonwood Creek;
(2) Panther Creek;
(3) Parvin Branch;
(4) Rowlett Creek;
(5) Stewart Creek; and
(6) White Rock Creek.
(B) Nonresidential and Multifamily Requirements
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 184 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
All nonresidential and multifamily lots developing adjacent to the fully-developed 100-year floodplain of a major creek shall comply with the requirements listed below. Multifamily-zoned property that develops as Single Family is not subject to these requirements, but shall comply with the Subdivision Ordinance, as it exists or may be amended.
(1) Retaining Walls
a. Retaining walls, where provided, shall be designed by a professional engineer and be constructed of clay-fired brick, stone, modular concrete block, poured concrete with masonry veneer, or split-faced concrete masonry units.
b. These requirements apply to walls constructed within the channel of the creek.
(2) Maintenance Access
Maintenance access, as required by the Director of Engineering Services shall be provided to the floodplain, hike and bike trail, and creek.
(3) Hike and Bike Trail Incorporation
a. The development shall incorporate a connection to the City’s hike and bike trail by way of a sidewalk, stairs, and/or ramps.
b. The connection shall comply with ADA accessibility requirements.
(4) Open Space Credit
a. Open space areas adjacent to the floodplain that have been improved with patios, courtyards, or additional landscaping listed in 4.07.14. (C)(2) and 4.07.14. (C)(2)f below may be counted to meet minimum open space requirements, if approved by the Director.
b. If the 4.11.04. Voluntary Buffer Requirements (Page 202) are met, then the area within the Riparian Buffer shall count towards open space.
(C) Nonresidential and Multifamily Amenities Required
(1) Applicability
a. Multifamily, except those multifamily zoned properties that are developed as Single Family, and office development adjacent to a major creek shall provide four (4) of the amenities listed below.
b. Retail and commercial development adjacent to a major creek shall provide three (3) of the amenities listed below.
c. Industrial development adjacent to a major creek shall provide two (2) of the amenities listed below.
d. Amenity selection is subject to approval by the Planning & Zoning Commission upon Preliminary Site Plan or Site Plan approval.
(2) Amenities
a. Landscape Edge Adjacent to the Floodplain
1. A thirty (30) foot landscape edge adjacent to the floodplain of the major creek with a double row of three (3) inch caliper trees planted on thirty (30) foot centers.
2. Existing trees in healthy growing condition and of a species from the list of 4.02.03. (A) Approved Plant Materials (Page 124) of this ordinance, as it exists or may be amended, may be counted toward this requirement.
b. Windows
1. A minimum of twenty-five (25) percent of the surface area of walls that face the major creek to be provided as windows.
c. Hike and Bike Trail Construction
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 185
1. Construction of a hike and bike trail in accordance with the City’s Hike and Bike Trail Master Plan.
2. Escrow for the construction of the hike and bike trail may be accepted upon approval by the Director of Parks and Recreation or his/her designee.
d. Visibility Corridor
1. A visibility corridor of at least one hundred (100) feet shall be required between and/or adjacent to buildings adjacent to the floodplain.
2. This visibility corridor can include parking, landscape medians or areas, amenities, and drive aisles.
e. Trailhead Park
1. A trailhead park shall have minimum dimensions of fifty (50) feet and be located adjacent to the hike and bike trail.
2. Park benches shall be provided.
3. Trailhead parks are subject to review and approval by the Director of Parks and Recreation or his/her designee.
f. Common Patio, Balcony, Courtyard, or Terrace
A common patio, balcony, courtyard, or terrace a minimum of 750 square feet located between the building and the major creek.
g. Building Orientation
Building orientation such that the entire side of the building adjacent to the floodplain is not the back of the building.
h. Creek Restoration
A plan shall be designed and implemented according to Army Corps of Engineers standards and approved by Army Corps of Engineers.
i. Other Amenities
Other amenities not listed may be approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission in conjunction with a Preliminary Site Plan if they determine that the proposed amenity meets the intent of these requirements.
4.07.15. Single Family Residential Density Bonus Adjacent to a Creek
As an incentive for preserving land adjacent to a creek, a density bonus shall be given to developments using a single loaded street (i.e., homes only on one side of street) adjacent to a creek. The bonus applies only to projects that provide one hundred (100) percent single loaded streets in lieu of the sixty (60) percent required by the Subdivision Ordinance.
(A) Patio Home and Townhome Uses Allowed
Patio homes and townhomes are permitted by right if the patio home or townhome fronts the single loaded street and is served by an alley.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 186 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
4.07.16. Front Porch Standards
(A) Front Porches are Optional
Front porches are not required but are encouraged on single family detached dwellings to create a sense of community, give scale and provide character to neighborhoods. Please refer to the following illustrations.
Figure 4.07.16.1: Examples of Porches
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 187
(B) Front Porch Standards
The porches shall be allowed to encroach into the required front setback by a maximum of ten (10) feet under the conditions noted below. In no case shall the reduction cause the minimum front yard to be less than fifteen (15) feet. For a non-enclosed porch attached to a main structure, the porch shall meet the following.
(1) Be fully covered.
(2) Be open on a minimum of two sides.
(3) Have decorative columns, with a tripartite composition (base, middle and top) appropriate to the architectural style of the structure.
(4) Have beam casings built of materials that reflect the structural nature of the beams, which means that the grain of texture of the casing material shall be horizontal.
(5) Have a minimum porch floor dimension of seven (7) feet in depth measured from exterior face of the house to the front edge or railing, whichever occurs first
(6) Have minimum porch floor dimension of ten (10) feet in width feet for lots in the SF-8.5 – Single Family Residential-8.5 District, SF-7 – Single Family Residential-7 District, and the PH – Patio Home District.
(7) Have a minimum porch floor dimension of twenty (20) feet in width for lots in the AG – Agricultural District, RE – Residential Estate District, SF-16 – Single Family Residential-16 District, SF-12.5 – Single Family Residential-12.5 District, and SF-10 – Single Family Residential-10 District. The long axis of the porch shall be parallel to the street to greatest extent possible.
(8) Have architectural details such as roof slopes, eave overhangs, column, railing proportions and shapes, materials, and relationships of porch to the structure itself should be designed to accurately reflect the architectural style of the structure. Please reference Abram’s Guide to American House Styles, published by Harry N. Abrams, Inc., 2004.
(C) Main Entrance
A front porch need not contain the main entrance to a building. In such cases, it shall be adjacent to a primary living space and be designed as an outdoor extension of such space.
(D) Single Story Height
No porch shall be more than a single story high.
(E) Front Porch Guidelines
(1) A porch may be accompanied with a non-enclosed balcony above.
(2) Porches may be located along the front and/or side of the dwelling.
(3) Porches may wrap along more than one façade of a structure.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 188 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
4.07.17. Interconnectivity of Residential and Nonresidential Developments
(A) Applicability Zoning Districts
The regulations of this section shall apply to the following zoning districts.
Nonresidential Zoning Districts
Section
District Abbreviation – District Name
Page Number
2.03.03.
SF-16 – Single Family Residential-16 District
24
2.03.04.
SF-12.5 – Single Family Residential-12.5 District
25
2.03.05.
SF-10 – Single Family Residential-10 District
26
2.03.06.
SF-8.5 – Single Family Residential-8.5 District
27
2.03.07.
SF-7 – Single Family Residential-7 District
28
2.03.08.
OTR – Original Town Residential District
29
2.03.09.
PH – Patio Home District
31
2.03.10.
2F – Two Family Residential (Duplex) District
33
2.03.11.
TH – Townhome District
34
2.04.01.
O-1 – Office-1 District
39
2.04.02.
O-2 – Office-2 District
40
2.04.03.
R – Retail District
42
2.04.04.
OTC – Original Town Commercial District
43
2.04.06.
C-1 – Commercial-1 District
50
2.04.07.
C-2 – Commercial-2 District
51
(B) Interconnectivity of Developments
In cases where residential and nonresidential development are adjacent to each other, one (1) street or drive connection shall be required for nonresidential properties less than ten (10) acres, and two (2) street or drive connections shall be required for nonresidential properties that are ten (10) or more acres in size. Residential developments shall provide street/drive stub-out connections. The Director may approve a reduction in the number of connections where physical or site development constraints exist. Connections shall be located as to avoid conflicts with the service areas of a nonresidential development.
Figure 4.07.17.1 Interconnected Development
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 189
4.07.18. Residential Front Entry Garage Standards
(A) Applicability
This section shall apply to all residential zoning districts except multifamily and manufactured home districts.
(B) Setback
A garage face shall either be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from the front of the house or front porch (as defined in Form-Based Code Manual), or be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the front property line, whichever is greater.
(C) Front Door Enhancement
Homes shall be designed in a manner that enhances the front door rather than the garage door and shall include one of the following.
(1) Front porch
(2) Columns/Gateways/Articulation at the sidewalk (see examples below)
(D) Enhanced Pavement
Driveways and entryway sidewalks shall incorporate a decorative paving technique from the following.
(1) Earth-tone colored concrete (stain mixed in, not applied after)
(2) Stamped/patterned concrete
(3) Brick/pave stone
(E) Garage Door Treatments
Garage doors shall contain three (3) of the following enhancements.
(1) Garage door recessed a minimum of twelve (12) inches from the garage face.
(2) Cedar/wood clad doors
(3) Double doors
(4) Decorative windows
(5) Decorative hardware
(6) Reveals/texture
Figure 4.07.18.1: Front Door Enhancement
Figure 4.07.18.2: Recessed Garage Door Example
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 190 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
Subsection 4.08. Nonresidential Development Standards
4.08.01. Applicability
This subsection shall apply to all nonresidential zoned districts except IT and I districts.
(A) Conflicts
(1) Where the regulations of this section conflict with other sections of this Ordinance, the regulations of this Subsection 4.08 shall apply.
(2) Where the regulations of this Subsection 4.08 conflict with regulations of an overlay district, the overlay district regulations shall apply.
4.08.02. Exterior Appearance of Buildings and Structures
(A) Primary Exterior Materials
(1) Primary exterior materials shall conform to the requirements found in 4.07.09. Exterior Construction of Main Buildings (Page 179).
(2) In addition to these requirements, the use of Exterior Insulated Finishing System (EIFS) is not permitted below nine (9) feet above finished grade, and the use of EIFS above nine (9) feet is limited to high impact EIFS, but in no instance shall EIFS constitute more than ten (10) percent of any façade wall.
(B) Secondary Exterior Materials
Secondary exterior materials consist of non-masonry materials, including aluminum, metal, or other materials as approved by the Director. These materials shall comprise less than ten (10) percent of each façade elevation.
(C) Architecturally Finished Buildings with One Row of Trees
All buildings shall be architecturally finished on all four (4) sides with same materials, detailing, and features if only one (1) row of trees is planted on the perimeter behind the building.
(D) Architecturally Finished Buildings with Two Row of Trees
All buildings shall be architecturally finished on all four (4) sides with same materials, detailing, and features, except the rear side (façade) if the following site-specific standards are met.
(1) A double row of trees on fifty (50) foot offset centers per row are provided in a thirty (30) foot landscape buffer along the perimeter of the property, where fifty (50) percent of the trees are canopy evergreen trees.
(2) The architectural finish of the rear side (façade) matches the remainder of the building in color only.
(3) This standard is only applicable for façades that are not visible from public streets and applies to anchor buildings and attached inline spaces only and shall not include “out” buildings or pad sites.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 191
4.08.03. Pad Site Requirements
(A) Pad Site Definition
A pad site is defined as a nonresidential building of 6,000 square feet or less.
(B) Pad Site Limitations
Pad sites at retail centers shall be limited to one for every five (5) acres, or portion thereof, of the overall development.
(C) Specific Standards per Zoning District
Within the TO – Tollway Overlay District additional pad sites will be permitted if one 210-foot long view corridor is provided per 1,000 feet, or portion thereof, of street frontage for each street adjacent to the property.
(1) A view corridor is defined as a separation between buildings along the street frontage.
(2) This view corridor is encouraged to be located at or near a median opening.
Figure 4.08.02.1: Architecturally Finished Buildings with Two Row of Trees
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 192 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
4.08.04. Retail Market Study Requirements
(A) Applicability
A Retail Market Study shall be submitted for all retail/commercial zoning requests, unless one of the following exceptions applies.
(1) A Retail Market Study is not required if the subject property is already zoned to allow retail development.
(2) A Retail Market Study is not required for any new development along S.H. 121, U.S. 380, FM 423, the Dallas North Tollway, and Preston Road between Eldorado Parkway and S.H. 121 for properties shown as nonresidential within the Comprehensive Plan.
(3) A Retail Market Study is not required for properties that are:
a. In compliance with the Comprehensive Plan (re: Future Land Use Plan),
b. Fifteen (15.0) or more net acres in size,
c. Of a 750-foot lot depth to allow for development with a major retail anchor store, and
d. Located at the intersection of two (2) major thoroughfares (i.e., not a mid-block development).
(B) Retail Market Study Parameters
The following parameters should be included in the preparation of the Retail Market Study:
(1) The Study shall define the market study area being analyzed and all retail properties in the study area with their building square footage areas;
(2) The total retail square footage that is part of the proposed development, including neighborhood retail, community retail, regional retail, and super-regional retail types, as outlined in the Comprehensive Plan (Page 4.26);
(3) Study area shall be the city limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ);
(4) The Study should use a Floor Area Ratio (FAR) of 0.25 for all undeveloped retail sites within the study area;
(5) The Study shall use agricultural zoning shown as Retail on Future Land Use Plan (FLUP) at 0.25 FAR at fifteen (15) acres;
(6) The Study shall identify the specific residential density (number of residential units) within the study area;
(7) The Study shall use agriculture zoning shown as Residential on Future Land Use Plan (FLUP) calculated at a density of 3.0 units/acre; and
(8) In determining the appropriate amount of retail, the Study shall use a ratio of thirty (30) gross leasable square feet of retail per person as a target ratio for the study area.
(C) Retail Market Study Results
(1) The results of the Retail Market Study will not guarantee approval or denial of a zoning request.
(2) The study results will be one part of the overall evaluation criteria.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 193
Subsection 4.09. Nonresidential Design Standards
4.09.01. Purpose
Frisco recognizes that building design is a major component of making a place unique. The purpose of these requirements is to avoid the creation of inappropriate or inharmonious façades which do not distinguish the City’s nonresidential areas from those in other cities. The standards are intended to foster the continuity of retail stores and display windows, provide weather protection and shade for pedestrians and maintain a healthy retail environment. It is also the intent to encourage proposals that will contribute to the established or planned architectural character of a specific area.
4.09.02. Applicability of Other Regulations
The façade design standards are not intended to supersede requirements established in the PRO – Preston Road Overlay District, the TO – Tollway Overlay District and existing Planned Development Districts. Where there is a conflict between the façade design standards and those listed in the above noted districts, the more restrictive of the two shall apply. Some PDs may have design standards unique to the project. This subsection shall apply to all nonresidential zoned districts except IT and I districts.
4.09.03. Design Standards
(A) Façade composition shall include the following elements
(1) Tripartite composition (base, middle and top).
(2) Pedestrian areas adjacent to the buildings shall incorporate features to promote a walkable environment such as seats, benches, shade trees, awnings and arcades. Where awnings are used, they should be metal or an equivalent durable material.
(3) Retail centers shall use materials similar to those in the block and surrounding development, including similar color. The first building to apply for a building permit establishes the building material palette for the retail center. The primary exterior building material established shall be used on at least ten (10) percent of the exterior façades of other buildings in the block and surrounding development. Where non-masonry materials are permitted, the use of Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems (EIFS) shall be limited to a maximum of ten (10) percent of the total façade and in no instances shall EIFS be permitted within nine feet of the grade of the first floor.
(4) Fenestration (window) patterns and percent of façade devoted to fenestration shall be consistent with the retail center. Fenestrations shall cover 50-75 percent of the storefront and 15-35 percent of the upper façade. Storefront fenestrations shall be vertically oriented.
(5) The fenestrations shall be placed a minimum of six (6) inches back from the exterior wall surface creating a reveal. Wall surfaces shall predominate; fenestration openings shall appear to be cut into the wall surface.
(6) An eighteen (18) inch minimum water course shall be provided under fenestrations.
(7) Mirrored or opaque façades shall be avoided.
(8) A well-defined cornice or fascia shall be located at the top of the storefront and at the roofline.
(9) Side and rear elevations of buildings visible to the public roadway shall incorporate architectural features consistent with the front façade.
(10) Buildings on pad sites shall share similar design characteristics of the main structure(s). The intent should not be the precise replication of the design of the main structure(s) but rather the use of similar colors, materials and textures including the repeating patterns, rhythms and proportions of the architecture of the other buildings.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 194 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
(11)When a new use or an addition will be adjacent to an existing development, the newly constructed portion of the building shall appear as part of the original design to the greatest extent possible. Where new construction must consist of a different height or bulk than that of the original structure, the change should not occur abruptly.
(12) The following design principle are suggested as resources.
a. The Golden Mean (1 to 1.618 ratio) and the Fibonacci Sequence (0,1,1,2,3,5,8,13,21, etc.).
1. http://www.vashti.net/mceinc/golden.htm
b. Pattern as a method of locating structural components, including windows and doors etc.; ref: “The Old Way of Seeing” by Jonathan Hale.
1. http://www.zloty-design.com/gd107/08OldWySeeing.pdf
c. Recessed entryways to provide a sense of arrival and shelter.
Figure 4.09.03.1: Example of Windows and Entrances Designed with Concepts from the Golden Mean and Fibonacci Sequence
Figure 4.09.03.2: Example of Windows and Entrances Designed with Concepts from the Golden Mean and Fibonacci Sequence
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 195
(B) Façade Design Standards for Big Box Retail Structures
(1) Façade plans will be evaluated for their architectural concept, proportions, composition, details, decorative features, artfulness and quality.
(2) Buildings shall incorporate a tripartite building composition (base, middle and top). The tripartite shall be proportioned to the other elements of the tripartite and the overall structure.
(3) Buildings shall provide a sheltered entry.
(4) Areas adjacent to the buildings shall incorporate features to promote a walkable environment such as seats, benches, shade trees, awnings and arcades. Where awnings are used, they shall be metal or an equivalent durable material.
(5) The City encourages creative freedom to enrich façade design; the architectural decision may include the following.
a. Placement of windows or
transparency subtracted or “punched”
Figure 4.09.03.3: Big Box Development with Quality Design Elements
Figure 4.09.03.4: Building with Sheltered Entry
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 196 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
b. Variations in roof form
c. Enhancement of long unadorned walls with:
1. Light and shade design elements,
2. Recesses and projections,
3. Vertical accents or focal points,
4. Murals,
5. Sculptures,
6. Masonry texture feature, or
7. Landscaping.
Figure 4.09.03.5: Quality Facade Designs Elements
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 197
Subsection 4.10. Residential Cluster Development Option
Cluster development is intended to provide open space, accessible to the public, for residential development by allowing reductions to the minimum lot size to either maintain or increase overall density. For a visual example of a residential cluster development, refer to Figure 4.10.13.1 (Page 201).
Cluster developments can concentrate dwelling units on a site’s prime developable areas and thus can provide more land for preserving drainage areas, slopes, soils, and natural vegetation to help manage stormwater runoff and soil erosion. Additionally, development costs can be decreased by reducing the amount of roadway and utility infrastructure needed to service the neighborhood.
Cluster development is an incentive based approach to encourage livable neighborhoods and is not a requirement. This approach promotes the creation or preservation of open space in exchange for increasing the amount design options through reduced or eliminated minimum lot sizes. Cluster development can either be designed to maintain the original development density or to increase development density.
4.10.01. Applicability
(A) New Single Family Residential Development
All new single family residential developments may utilize a cluster development option.
4.10.02. Minimum Required Area for a Cluster Development
(A) Minimum Area
The minimum area of a cluster development shall be five (5) acres.
4.10.03. Development Requirements
(A) Principal and Accessory Uses
All principal and accessory uses authorized with the applicable zoning district shall be allowed in the cluster development.
(B) Modified Minimum Lot Size, Lot Width, Lot Depth, or House Size
Modified minimum measurement shall apply to the following standards.
(1) Lot size: None.
(2) Lot width: Minimum of twenty-five (25) feet
(3) Lot depth: None
(4) Dwelling size: None
(C) Minimum Setback Required Adjacent to Street Right-of-Way
(1) A minimum front yard setback adjacent to a street right-of-way shall be twenty-five (25) feet.
(2) Porches may extend to within five (5) feet of the front property line.
(3) If alleys are provided, then the rear yard setback shall be reduced to a minimum of ten (10) feet.
(D) Minimum Building Separation
A minimum building separation between all buildings shall be:
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 198 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
(1) Ten (10) feet, if zero lot is used; and
(2) Fourteen (14) feet, if center loaded.
(E) Minimum Street Frontage per Lot
Each lot shall have a minimum twenty (20) feet of street frontage.
4.10.04. Preliminary Plat Requirements
(A) Preliminary Plat Requirement
A Preliminary Plat shall be required for all cluster developments.
(B) Additional Information Requirement
The following information shall be included with a Preliminary Plat.
(1) The maximum number and type of dwelling units proposed.
(2) The area of the site on which dwelling units will be constructed.
(3) The calculation of the permitted number of dwelling units (see 4.10.08. Calculating the Permitted Number of Dwelling Units (Page 199)).
(4) The area of the site on which other principal or accessory uses will be constructed.
(5) The areas of the site designated for open space and their size.
(6) The number of acres proposed to be conveyed as open space.
4.10.05. Amount of Open Space Required for Cluster Development
(A) Minimum Amount of Open Space Requirement
A cluster development shall have ten (10) percent of the site conveyed as open space. The Riparian Buffer may be include in the amount of open space provided that homes do not back onto the open space.
4.10.06. Base Zoning District’s Net Dwelling Unit per Acre (DUA)
The following maximum dwelling units per Net Acreage, Subdivision for Cluster Developments shall apply per each base zoning district.
Base Zoning District
Maximum Dwelling Unit Per Net Acre
RE – Residential Estate District
0.66
SF-16 – Single Family Residential-16 District
1.79
SF-12.5 – Single Family Residential-12.5 District
2.29
SF-10 – Single Family Residential-10 District
2.87
SF-8.5 – Single Family Residential-8.5 District
3.38
SF-7 – Single Family Residential-7 District
4.11
PH – Patio Home District
4.89
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 199
4.10.07. Amount of Permitted Dwelling Units for Cluster Development
(A) Number of Clustered Dwelling Units Equal the Number of Permitted Dwelling Units Under the Base Zoning District
Except as provided in 4.10.09. Density Bonus for Housing Integration, the maximum number of dwelling units proposed for a residential cluster development shall not exceed the number of dwelling units permitted per 4.10.06. Base Zoning District’s Net Dwelling Unit per Acre (DUA) for the residential zoning district in which the parcel is located.
4.10.08. Calculating the Permitted Number of Dwelling Units
(A) Measure the Net Area of the Development Site.
The Net Acreage, Subdivision of the entire site shall be measured to the tenth of an acre with all land dedicated to all streets within the site being subtracted.
(B) Apply Base Zoning Districts Net Dwelling Unit per Acre (DUA).
The Net Acreage, Subdivision land area shall be multiplied by the number of dwelling units per acre permitted within 4.10.06. Base Zoning District’s Net Dwelling Unit per Acre (DUA). The resulting number of dwelling units shall be rounded to the nearest whole number.
4.10.09. Density Bonus for Housing Integration
(A) Density Bonus may be Approved by the Director
The Director may approve a density bonus up to twenty (20) percent of permitted number of dwelling units under the following conditions.
(1) The amount of open space is at least ten (10) percent of the Net Acreage, Subdivision area.
(2) Housing types other than single family detached units are incorporated.
(3) Open space is conveyed to the pursuant to 4.10.12. Conveyance of Open Space.
(4) Open space is accessible to the public.
4.10.10. Director Review Criteria
(A) Fulfilled the Requirement of this Section
The requirements of this Subsection 4.10. are fulfilled.
(B) Ten (10) Percent Open Space Requirement is Met
Buildings and structures are adequately grouped so at least ten (10) percent of the total area of the site is set aside as open space. To the greatest degree practicable, common open space shall be designated as a single block and not divided into unconnected small parcels located in various parts of the development, unless otherwise approved by the Director.
(C) Pedestrian Access
Pedestrians can access common open space.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 200 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
(D) Minimization of Land Alteration
Individual lots, buildings, structures, streets, and parking areas are situated to minimize the alteration of natural features, natural vegetation, and topography.
(E) Scenic Views
Existing scenic views or vistas are permitted to remain unobstructed, especially from public streets.
(F) Historic Preservation
The Site Plan accommodates and preserves any features of historic, cultural, or archaeological value.
(G) Preserving Environmentally Sensitive Areas
Floodplains, wetlands, and areas with slopes in excess of ten (10) percent are protected from development.
(H) Consistent with Intent of this Ordinance and the Comprehensive Plan
The cluster development advances the purposes of this Ordinance and the Comprehensive Plan.
(I) Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED)
The cluster development incorporated CPTED principles.
4.10.11. Approval of a Residential Cluster Development
The Planning & Zoning Commission shall approve or deny residential cluster developments in the same manner as a plat.
(A) For appeals, see Subsection 6.19 Appeals and the Appeal Process (Page 268).
4.10.12. Conveyance of Open Space
(A) Procedures
Open space provided by a residential cluster development shall be conveyed as follows.
(1) City
To the City and accepted for open space, agricultural, or other specified use or uses, provided that the conveyance is approved by the City Council and is in a form approved by the City Attorney.
(2) Nonprofit
To a nonprofit organization whose principal purpose is the conservation of open space, to a corporation or trust owned or to be owned by the owners of lots or dwelling units within the residential cluster development, or to owners of shares within a cooperative development. If such a corporation or trust is used, ownership shall pass with the conveyances of the lots or dwelling units. The conveyance shall be approved by the City Council and shall be in a form approved by the city attorney.
a. In any case, where the common open space in a residential cluster development is conveyed, a deed restriction enforceable by the City shall be recorded that provides that the open space shall:
1. Be kept in the authorized conditions; and
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 201
2. Not be developed for principal uses, accessory uses (e.g., parking), or roadways. However, the following uses shall be permitted: amenity center, gazebo, fountain, and other similar uses as approved by the Director.
4.10.13. Examples of Conventional and Cluster Residential Development
Figure 4.10.13.1: Conventional and Cluster Residential Developments
Conventional Residential Development
Cluster Residential Development
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 202 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
Subsection 4.11. Voluntary Buffer Areas for Creeks and Tributaries
The following standards are voluntary to residentially zoned land with creeks and associated tributaries. If any standard listed below is found to be in conflict with another standard, the stricter of the two shall apply.
4.11.01. Purpose
The Comprehensive Plan included a recommendation to protect and enhance the floodway and floodplain areas and encourage the incorporation of open space. The purpose of this section, through the use of incentives, is to encourage the use of buffers along creeks and tributaries to achieve the following:
(A) Reduce erosion;
(B) Preserve habitat;
(C) Increase neighborhood open space;
(D) Create unique neighborhoods; and
(E) Minimize impacts to citizen safety and property
4.11.02. Benefits of Voluntary Buffer Area
(A) By allowing the Voluntary Buffer Area to remain undisturbed, residential developments receive a density bonus for the remaining portion of the property.
(B) Area may be counted toward open space requirements.
(C) Other benefits may include avoiding costly and lengthy permit processes and studies by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and incorporation of desirable open space thereby increasing the property value.
4.11.03. Boundaries of Voluntary Buffer Area
(A) Riparian Buffer and Riparian Buffer Map
Riparian buffers shall be provided as identified by the Director. The Director shall establish and maintain a Riparian Buffer Map. The total buffer width shall be divided equally on both sides of the tributary and in addition to the Erosion Hazard Setback (EHS) in the City’s Engineering Design Standards (if applicable).
(B) Major Creeks
Major Creek buffers shall be one hundred (100) feet measured from the EHS on both sides of the creek.
(C) Supplemental Area
(1) Tributaries and major creeks also may include other areas to be preserved, identified through any Army Corps of Engineers Section 404 Permit Process.
(2) The Director may also consider supplemental information when making a determination of buffer width or the requirement for a buffer, such as but not limited to:
a. Field verification;
b. Aerial photography; and/or
c. A determination by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or a qualified environmental scientist of the presence or absence of jurisdictional wetlands and waters of the United States.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 203
4.11.04. Voluntary Buffer Requirements
(A) Standards
(1) Only developable land (i.e., Net Acreage, Subdivision) within the buffer shall be considered for the density bonus.
(2) The density bonus shall be equal to the base number of dwelling units that could have been built within the buffer area plus an additional fifteen (15) percent.
a. The base number of dwelling units permitted shall be found within 4.10.06. Base Zoning District’s Net Dwelling Unit per Acre (DUA) (Page 198).
b. The resulting number of dwelling units shall be rounded to the nearest whole number.
(3) All the bonus housing units shall comply with the following conditions:
a. Parallel Street along the voluntary buffer area shall contain street trees according to Figure 4.02.10.2: Residential Street, Rear Entry (Page 134);
b. Alley served houses; and
c. No homes shall back to the buffer.
(4) In zoning districts that require open space, the buffer can be used to count towards the open space requirement.
(5) The Director, or designee, must confirm the area of the developable land.
(6) The following criteria shall also apply:
a. Buffers shall be shown on all development and construction plans;
b. Buffers are in addition to the required EHS as called out in the Engineering Design Standards as they stand or may be modified; and
c. The boundaries of the buffer area shall be clearly marked in the field for the duration of the land disturbing activities on the property, and shall be submitted with the Preliminary Plat with Global Positioning System (GPS) coordinates showing the extent of the buffer.
(B) Permitted Uses and Activities
(1) Repair, replacement or improvement of utility facilities; however, the disturbed portion of the buffer and/or stream shall be restored to City specifications.
(2) Non-native vegetation is removed from the buffer area and replaced with native vegetation as approved by the Director.
(3) Stream, wetland, and riparian enhancement or restoration project.
(4) Structures or actions permitted through NWP 40, Agricultural Activities.
(5) Routine repair and maintenance of structures, roadways, driveways, utility facilities, accessory uses and other development.
(6) Measures to remove or abate nuisances, or any other violation of State statute, administrative rule, or City Code of Ordinances.
(7) Any action taken by the City in an emergency to mitigate an existing or potential hazard.
(C) Prohibited Uses and Activities
(1) Land disturbing activity not authorized by a Letter of Permission by the Director and Director of Engineering Services.
(2) Uncontained and contained areas of hazardous materials handling areas for the receiving and storage of hazardous waste.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 204 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
(D) Exempted Standards
Developments complying with the standards of this section shall be exempt from the requirements within Subsection 4.01 Tree Preservation Requirements (Page 116).
(E) Criteria for Approval
(1) Voluntary Buffer Recommendation
The Director and the Director of Engineering Services shall recommend approval of the proposed development when the applicant demonstrates the land development activity is in compliance with the following requirements:
a. The buffer has been properly identified and indicated on the required development plans;
b. The land development activity will not cause damage to the buffer;
c. Acceptance of an approved restoration plan (if applicable as determined by the Director);
d. If jurisdictional wetlands are determined to be present by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or a qualified wetland delineator and would be impacted by the proposed project, a Section 404 Permit or Letter of Permission from the Corps shall be required before approval; and
e. The approval shall expire when the development plans expire.
(2) Voluntary Buffer Approval
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions the proposed development based on the criteria listed in 4.11.04. (E)(1)a through 4.11.04. (E)(1)e.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 205
Subsection 4.12. Multifamily Development Standards
The standards within this Subsection shall apply to all development within the MF-15 – Multifamily-15 District and MF-19 – Multifamily-19 District.
4.12.01. Supplemental Area Regulations
(A) Minimum Front Yard
(1) Adjacent to a townhouse, duplex, or single family zoning district or area shown on Future Land Use Plan for single family residential.
Building Height
Yard Depth
One-Story
Fifty (50) feet
Two-Story
Fifty (50) feet
Three-Story
MF-15 – Multifamily-15 District: One hundred fifty (150) feet
MF-19 – Multifamily-19 District: Seventy-five (75) feet
(2) Adjacent to a nonresidential or multifamily zoning district or area shown on the Future Land Use Plan as nonresidential or multifamily.
Building Height
Yard Depth
One-Story
Twenty Five (25) feet
Two-Story
Twenty Five (25) feet
Three-Story
MF-15 – Multifamily-15 District: One hundred (100) feet; Fifty (50) feet along the Dallas North Tollway for existing multifamily zoning as of May 1, 2001.
MF-19 – Multifamily-19 District: Fifty (50) feet
(B) Minimum Side Yard
(1) Adjacent to a residential zoning district or PD – Planned Development District that allows Residential or an area designated as single family residential, excluding multifamily, on the Future Land Use Plan.
Building Height
Yard Depth
One-Story
Fifty (50) feet; Detached accessory buildings and garages can be reduced to twenty five (25) feet
Two-Story
Seventy five (75) feet; Setbacks for two-story buildings can be reduced to fifty (50) feet if adjacent to a golf course or a Major Creek provided that a minimum setback from a single family lot line of one hundred fifty (150) feet is maintained.
Three-Story
One hundred fifty (150) feet
(2) Adjacent to a nonresidential or multifamily zoning district or PD – Planned Development District that allows nonresidential or multifamily development.
Building Height
Yard Depth
One-Story
Twenty five (25) feet
Two-Story
Twenty five (25) feet
Three-Story
MF-15 – Multifamily-15 District: One hundred (100) feet
MF-19 – Multifamily-19 District: Sixty (60) feet
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 206 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
(C) Minimum Rear Yard
(1) Adjacent to a residential zoning district or PD – Planned Development District that allows Residential, or an area designated as single family residential, excluding multifamily, on the Future Land Use Plan.
Building Height
Yard Depth
One-Story
Fifty (50) feet; Detached accessory buildings and garages can be reduced to twenty five (25) feet
Two-Story
Seventy-five (75) feet; Setbacks for two-story buildings can be reduced to fifty (50) feet if adjacent to a golf course or a Major Creek provided that a minimum setback from a single family lot line of one hundred fifty (150) feet is maintained.
Three-Story
One hundred fifty (150) feet
(2) Adjacent to a nonresidential or multifamily zoning district or PD – Planned Development District that allows nonresidential or multifamily development.
Height
Yard Depth
One-Story
Twenty five (25) feet
Two-Story
Twenty five (25) feet
Three-Story
MF-15 – Multifamily-15 District: One hundred (100) feet
MF-19 – Multifamily-19 District: Sixty (60) feet
(D) Minimum Lot Area
(1) Five (5) acres unless otherwise specified within a Planned Development or other zoning district.
(2) Areas zoned multifamily that are developed to single family standards must meet lot areas as described for the zoning districts listed in 2.03.12. (B)(2) above (Page 36).
(3) Properties that are zoned multifamily which are less than five (5) acres prior to April 5, 2011 are exempt from this requirement.
(E) Minimum Dwelling Area
Number of Rooms
Minimum Dwelling Area
One bedroom
Six hundred fifty (650) square feet
Two bedroom
Nine hundred (900) square feet
Each additional bedroom over two (2) bedrooms
An additional one hundred fifty (150) square feet of dwelling area (See Dwelling Unit Area (Page 284)
(F) Maximum Height Regulations
Building Height
Measured Height in Feet
One-story
Thirty (30) feet for any portion of the building
Two-Story
Forty (40) feet for any portion of the building
Three-Story
Fifty (50) feet for any portion of the building
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 207
4.12.02. Multifamily – Development Regulations
(A) Storm Water Detention
Unless otherwise approved by the Director, above ground storm water detention is prohibited within required landscape areas and open space areas unless associated with a lake or body of water that has a constant pool elevation. Additionally, dry detention ponds utilized as amenities may be approved by the Director to be within required landscape areas and open space areas.
(1) These detention areas are subject to approval by the Director of Engineering Services and shall be designed to be an amenity for the property that allows the required volume of storm water to raise the water surface elevation for the duration of the storm.
(B) Pedestrian Connections
Gated or un-gated pedestrian connections will be provided to adjacent schools, parks, and nonresidential developments.
4.12.03. Multifamily – Building Orientation and Construction
(A) Parking
(1) Parking is only allowed between the building and a public street when located at or beyond the required landscape buffer and screened with a headlight screen of earthen berms and/or a row of shrubs.
(2) Parking between the building and a public street is also subject to tree planting requirements specified in 4.12.04. (B) Other Parking and Circulation Requirements (Page 210).
(3) Buildings with enclosed garages, when adjacent to a public street, must face garage doors internally to the development. Garage doors may not face a public street.
(B) Detached Garages
(1) No detached garages may be located between residential buildings and a public street.
(2) Structured parking garages consisting of more than one (1) level must meet appropriate building setbacks as specified in 2.03.12. (C) Area Regulations (Page 36).
(C) Fiber Cement Siding
Fiber cement siding is allowed for architectural detailing and exterior trim work.
(D) Building Design
(1) All main structures within the MF-15 and MF-19 districts must have a minimum of eighty (80) percent masonry on the first and second floors and fifty (50) percent on all other floors.
a. Fiber cement siding may be used for areas not considered conducive for masonry, as determined by the Chief Building Official, and architectural features, including but not limited to bay windows, dormers, chimneys not part of an exterior wall, and gables with an area of less than ten (10) square feet.
(2) Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems (EIFS) are allowed as an alternative to stucco construction.
a. These construction methods are limited to areas nine (9) feet above the average finish grade and may not exceed ten (10) percent of the building façade elevation.
(3) Flat roofs are prohibited.
(4) All residential windows shall be operable, with the exception of decorative windows, transoms,
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 208 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
and side lights. The windows in living areas and bedrooms, except for dormer windows, shall be a minimum fifteen (15) square feet in size.
(5) All stairs (except entry stairs and stoops to individual units and shared hallways) and elevated walkways shall be screened with architectural features to avoid a direct view of a stairwell from public streets and open space.
(6) All multifamily buildings must use four (4) or more of the following architectural features.
a. Awnings/Canopies
b. Balconies (a minimum of twenty-five (25) square feet in size)
c. Dormers
d. Offsets within each building (minimum twenty (20) feet to receive credit)
e. Patio (a minimum of twenty-five (25) square feet in size)
f. Porches (a minimum of twenty-five (25) square feet in size)
g. Stoops (a minimum of two (2) feet tall by four (4) feet wide)
h. Varied roof height in building (minimum ten (10) foot difference)
i. Others as approved by the Director
(7) Mailrooms or mail kiosks shall be one hundred (100) percent masonry and constructed of the same materials as the main structure.
(8) A façade plan shall be submitted with the Preliminary Site Plan and Site Plan for a MF development and shall comply with all MF architectural design standards set forth in this ordinance.
a. Buildings may not face each other and have the same façade and/or architectural features, except as otherwise approved by the Director.
(9) Façade plans shall be reviewed according to Subsection 6.16 Façade Plan Review (Page 263).
(E) Building Orientation
(1) The residential building angle to public streets and single family zoning districts will be between a minimum of twenty (20) to a maximum of seventy (70) degrees, unless parking is provided between the building and the street.
(2) As an alternative to angling the buildings along the public street, adjacent buildings may be offset a distance equal to one-half (½) the width of the building closest to the street, not to be less than thirty (30) feet.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 209
(F) Structure Separation
(1) Multifamily structures on the same parcel shall have the following minimum distance between structures.
a. From main structure to main structure with walls that have openings for doors or windows on façades facing each other.
Site Layout
Distance between Structure
Face to Face
Fifty (50) feet
Face to End
Thirty (30) feet
Corner to Face or End
Thirty (30) feet
End to End
Thirty (30) feet
b. From main structure to main structure with walls that do not have openings, the minimum distance between structures is twenty (20) feet for one- and two-story buildings and thirty (30) feet for three-story buildings.
c. From main structure to accessory buildings or pools, the minimum distance between structures is twenty (20) feet.
d. From main structure to free standing garage building, the minimum distance between structures is thirty (30) feet
(2) A multifamily structure on a parcel of land shall not be closer than a distance of fifty (50) feet to any nonresidential building, excluding garages, on an adjacent property.
(3) The mailrooms or mail kiosk can be incorporated into another building or they must be separated from all other buildings by a minimum of twenty (20) feet.
Figure 4.12.03.1: MF – Building Orientation
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 210 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
4.12.04. Multifamily – Parking and Circulation Standards
(A) Garages, When Provided
(1) Garages shall be one hundred (100) percent masonry and be constructed of the same materials as the main structure.
(2) The garage may be part of the dwelling structure.
(3) Garage parking can only be counted toward required parking if the garage is attached to, and directly accessed from, the apartment unit that it serves through an internal doorway.
(4) Additional garage parking can be provided, but will not count towards required parking calculations.
(5) Garages shall be set back a minimum of eight (8) feet from the circulation aisle.
(6) The garage shall not be used for storage, thereby prohibiting the parking of an operable vehicle.
(B) Other Parking and Circulation Requirements
(1) Parking located between the building and a public street shall be at or beyond the required landscape buffer and requires a large tree every five (5) parking spaces along the first row of parking and a head light screen in addition to perimeter landscaping requirements.
(2) Sub-grade parking under all or a portion of the building will not count against building height if half or more of sub-grade parking is below the average finish grade of the first floor.
(3) When provided, trailer and recreational vehicle (RV) parking shall be limited to specific areas as
Figure 4.12.03.2: MF – Structure Separation
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 211
designated on the approved Site Plan. Trailer and RV parking spaces shall be ten (10) feet by twenty-five (25) feet. These spaces shall be specifically called out on the Site Plan in an area behind the building line. A solid living screen shall be placed around the specified area.
(4) Dead-end drive aisles shall have a maximum of ten (10) parking spaces.
(5) Mail kiosk shall have a minimum of five (5) of the required parking spaces for the development within fifty (50) feet, unless a drive-through facility is provided.
(6) Enclosed garage parking spaces shall be a minimum of ten (10) by twenty (20) feet.
(7) Tandem parking spaces only count toward required parking when located in front of a detached garage. Tandem parking spaces shall be a minimum of nine (9) by twenty (20) feet.
(8) Drive aisles within the apartment complex must be configured to decrease speed and shall have a maximum of five hundred (500) feet in a straight length without an offset of a minimum of thirty (30) feet, unless other traffic calming measured are approved by the Director, Director of Engineering Services, and Fire Chief.
(9) Access to a public street in a single family neighborhood will be limited access and will not function as a primary access point for the complex.
(10) Access to single family alleys is prohibited.
(11) Direct access to a median opening is required when the property is located on a divided thoroughfare. This shall be one of the minimum two points of access required.
4.12.05. Townhomes within Multifamily Zoned Areas
Areas zoned multifamily that are developed as townhomes shall comply with Subsection 9.07 Form-Based Code Manual (Page 332) standards.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 212 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
Subsection 4.13. Usable Open Space Requirements
4.13.01. Patio Home (PH) and Townhome (TH) Usable Open Space
(A) Area Requirement
(1) The area dedicated as usable open space shall be fifteen (15) percent of the platted area of the development, excluding rights-of-way dedications for thoroughfares greater than 60-feet in width.
(2) All usable open space areas shall be a minimum of 10,000 square feet with no slope greater than ten (10) percent and no width less than fifty (50) feet.
(3) The Planning & Zoning Commission and/or City Council may give full or partial credit for usable open areas that exceed the maximum slope or which are otherwise unusable, if it is determined that such areas are environmentally or aesthetically significant and is in agreement with the Comprehensive Plan.
(4) Required landscape buffers, floodplains, and erosion hazard setbacks shall not be counted towards the usable open space requirement.
a. Major creek areas delineated as the City’s linear park system as shown on either the City’s Parks Master Plan or City’s Hike & Bike Trail Master Plan shall not count towards the required open space. The Major Creeks areas not shown as part of either plan may count toward the required open space where lots do not back to the open space.
(5) During the consideration of patio home or townhome plat applications, the Planning & Zoning Commission may reduce the amount of open space to no less than ten (10) percent of the platted area per the following criteria:
a. Lots shall not back to open space;
b. The site shall be centrally located unless prohibited by physical constraints; and
c. The site shall contain at least three of the following elements:
1. Low, ornamental masonry walls or ornamental fencing – each with masonry columns and capstones – as perimeter fencing adjacent to roadways.
2. Water feature, excluding detention ponds. Detention ponds may be utilized if designed as usable open space.
3. Ornamental iron, stone or equivalent durable seating areas.
4. Internal walkways constructed of stamped or stained concrete or brick pavers.
5. Art, sculptures or fountains.
6. Durable shade structures such as pavilions, arbors and gazebos.
7. Other amenities as approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission.
d. Swimming pools and required parking for the amenities shall not count toward meeting the required amount of open space.
(B) Proximity Requirement
All residential lots must be located within 1,200 feet of usable open space as measured along a street. In order to preserve native trees or should a property have unique topography, size, or configuration, this distance may be increased by the Director. The Director shall consider:
(1) Preserving native trees;
(2) Preserving natural geographic features;
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 213
(3) Physical constraints such as overall property size, configuration, or topography exist; or
(4) Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED).
(C) Open Space Street and Location Requirements
(1) Standard
Usable open space must be easily accessible from adjacent streets. Sixty (60) percent of the perimeter of the usable open space shall be adjacent to a street (see Figure 9.01.01.14: Patio Home and Townhome Open Space Requirement (Page 325)). No alleys may be adjacent to usable open space.
(2) Reduction
During the consideration of patio home or townhome plat applications, the Planning & Zoning Commission may reduce the required sixty (60) percent of the perimeter of the usable open adjacent to a street (see Figure 9.01.01.15: Open Space Reduction Exhibit A (Page 326) and Figure 9.01.01.16: Open Space Reduction Exhibit B (Page 327)) if the following design criteria are met:
a. All portions of the open space shall be visible from adjacent streets,
b. The open space is easily accessible to all of the residents of the neighborhood, and
c. Open fencing shall be required for homes abutting to the open space.
(D) Improvements permitted in Usable Open Space
(1) Landscaping, sidewalks, and amenities such as tennis courts and swimming or wading pools may be located within usable open space areas.
a. Permitted improvements and amenities include landscaping, sidewalks, tennis courts, swimming or wading pool, gazebos, pavilions, or other similar facilities.
(E) Tree Requirement
(1) Usable open space shall contain one minimum three (3) inch caliper shade tree for per the following.
a. 2,000 square feet of required usable open space for areas less than 15,000 square feet.
b. 5,000 square feet of required usable open space for areas equal to or greater than 15,000 square feet.
c. Street trees shall count towards usable open space tree requirement.
(2) The trees shall be maintained in a healthy and growing condition, and must be replaced with trees of similar variety and size if damaged, destroyed, or removed.
(3) A Landscape Plan must be approved prior to approval of the Final Plat.
(F) Exemption
The Planning & Zoning Commission and/or City Council may prohibit the creation of any usable open space if it is determined that such area would be a security or safety concern, difficult to maintain, or an unreasonable financial burden to the homeowners association.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 214 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
4.13.02. Multifamily – Usable Open Space Requirements
(A) Planned Development Districts
For Planned Development Districts with multifamily zoning, open space shall be provided in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance, as it currently exists or may be amended, unless otherwise described in the PD requirements.
(B) Area Requirements
Each lot or parcel of land developed within the MF-15 – Multifamily-15 District or MF-19 – Multifamily-19 District shall provide open space at a rate of twenty five (25) percent net area.
(1) The open space shall have a maximum slope not exceeding ten (10) percent.
(2) The open space shall have a minimum dimension of not less than thirty (30) feet.
(3) Of the required open space, fifteen (15) percent or twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, whichever is greater, shall be grouped in one location.
a. Flood plain used for open space may receive full credit for that portion that is maintained in its natural state.
1. Flood plain that is reclaimed and used for open space shall receive a fifty (50) percent credit toward open space.
b. Required perimeter landscape buffers will not count toward open space.
(4) At the time of Preliminary Site Plan approval, the Planning & Zoning Commission may give full or partial credit for open areas that exceed the maximum slope, which are otherwise unusable, or which are less than the required twenty thousand (20,000) square feet specified in 4.13.02. (B)(3) above. These areas must be determined to protect and enhance the City’s environmental quality (areas of floodplain or extreme topography, trees and natural landscape, viewsheds, and bodies of water) and aesthetic quality (incorporation of desirable designs reflecting the community vision established in the Comprehensive Plan).
(5) A table showing square footage of each use and/or area is required on the Final Site Plan and Landscape Plan. The required table shall include required and provided open space and indicate credit for each use or area.
(6) Required landscape buffers, floodplains, and erosion hazard setbacks shall not be counted towards the usable open space requirement.
(C) Landscaping
(1) All required landscaping must be located within the required open space, exclusive of required perimeter or parking landscaped areas.
(2) One (1) large tree, three (3) inches in caliper, shall be provided per three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet of required open space.
a. A fewer number of trees can be planted where larger trees are provided.
b. The approved Landscape Plan must include the quantity and the size of the trees in the open space.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 4: Site Development Requirements Page | 215
4.13.03. Nonresidential Open Space Requirements
(A) Dedicated Amount Requirement
(1) All nonresidential development (excluding property within the Industrial District) shall provide at least seven (7) percent of the net lot area as usable open space. The required open space may be consolidated within the overall development with the Director approval. The consolidation of the open space shall be shown on the Preliminary Site Plan.
(2) The following may not count toward the open space requirement:
a. Property within the rear yard,
b. Vehicular paving,
c. Required parking lot tree islands,
d. Building footprint,
e. Utility yards, or
f. Required landscape buffers.
(B) Surface Requirements
Surface shall be one of the following materials, or a combination thereof:
(1) Grass,
(2) Quality permeable materials, such as decomposed granite or marble, or
(3) Brick pavers.
(C) Detention or Retention Ponds
(1) A detention or retention pond may count toward the requirement if it meets the following:
a. Located between the building and the street,
b. Viewable from public space,
c. Any slope of the pond area does not exceed thirty-three (33) percent, and
d. Accessible by patrons.
(2) Detention or retention ponds must include the following amenities to be considered toward the usable open space requirement:
a. Seating area, public art, or fountain, and
b. One tree or planter at least sixteen (16) square feet for every two hundred (200) square feet of open space, and be located within or adjacent to the open space.
(3) Detention and Retention Pond Designs that Count as Open Space
Figure 4.13.03.1: Examples of Retention Ponds as Open Space
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 216 Section 4: Site Development Requirements
4.13.03. (C) Requirement
1
Location
Yes
2
Viewable
Yes
3
Slope
Yes
4
Accessible
Yes
5
Seating, Art, etc.
Yes
6
Trees
Yes
(4) Detention and Retention Pond Designs that do not Count as Open Space 4.13.03. (C) Requirement
1
Location
Yes
2
Viewable
Yes
3
Slope
No
4
Accessible
No
5
Seating, Art, etc.
No
6
Trees
No
Figure 4.13.03.2: Detention and Retention Pond Design Counted as Open Space
Figure 4.13.03.3: Detention and Retention Pond Design not Counted as Open Space
Section 5. Development Review Bodies
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 218 Section 5: Development Review Bodies
Subsection 5.01. Director of Development Services
5.01.01. Director Review and Coordinating Authority.
In addition to other applications expressly delegated by City Ordinance or Charter, the Director of Development Services is responsible for reviewing and coordinating the following types of applications.
The Director is Responsible for Reviewing and/or Coordinating.
Section Number
Application
Page
3.02.01. (A)(5)c
Approval of a Listed Commercial Stealth Antenna
97
3.02.01. (A)(5)d
Approval of an Unlisted Commercial Stealth Antenna
97
4.04.06. (E)(1)
Mixed Use Shared Parking Agreement
150
4.04.06. (E)(4)
Rescinded Shared Parking Agreement Approval
151
6.19.04.
Appeal of a Rescinded Shared Parking Agreement Approval
269
6.19.06.
Appeal of a Residential Cluster Development
269
4.10.11.
Approval of a Residential Cluster Development
200
4.11.04. (E)(1)
Voluntary Buffer Recommendation
204
6.19.05.
Appeal of a Temporary Outdoor Lighting Decision
269
6.19.07.
Appeal of an Administrative Decision
269
5.04.06. (B)
Nonconforming Use Reconstruction, Extension or Enlargement
224
5.04.06. (C)
Amortization of a Nonconforming Use
224
5.04.06. (D)
Variance
224
5.04.09.
Appeal of a Board of Adjustment Decision
225
6.01.01. (C)
Application for a Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy within Newly Annexed Land
228
6.05.07.
Preliminary Site Plan
234
6.19.08.
Appeal of a Preliminary Site Plan
269
6.05.08.
Site Plan
236
6.19.09.
Appeal of a Site Plan
270
6.05.09. (B)
Substantially Conforming Site Plans (SCSP)
239
6.19.10.
Appeal of a SCSP Decision to the Planning & Zoning Commission
270
6.19.11.
Appeal of a SCSP Decision to the City Council
270
6.05.09. (C)
Revised Preliminary Site Plan (PSP) or Site Plan (SP)
239
6.19.12.
Appeal of a Revised PSP or SP Decision
270
6.06.02. (A)
Zoning District Change (Zoning Map Amendment)
242
6.06.02. (B)
Zoning Text Amendment
242
6.19.13.
Appeal of a Planning & Zoning Commission Decision to Deny a Zoning Amendment
270
6.14.07. (C)(1)
Minor PD Amendment
259
6.19.02.
Appeal of a Denial of a Unlisted Commercial Stealth Antenna
268
6.19.14.
Appeal of a Minor PD Amendment Decision
271
6.19.15. (A)
Initial Appeal of a Façade Plan
271
6.19.15. (B)
Final Appeal of a Façade Plan
271
6.19.16. (A)
Appeal of an Alternative Compliance Standard Decision made by the Director
272
6.19.16. (B)
Appeal of an Alternative Compliance Standard Decision made by the Planning & Zoning Commission
272
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 5: Development Review Bodies Page | 219
5.01.02. Director Decision Authority.
In addition to other applications expressly delegated by City Ordinance or Charter, the Director of Development Services has the authority to deciding the following applications and petitions.
The Director has the Authority to Decide.
Section Number
Application
Page
3.02.01. (A)(5)c
Approval of a Listed Commercial Stealth Antenna
97
3.02.01. (A)(18)j
Determination of a Home Occupation Use not Specifically Listed:
104
4.01.03. (B)
Tree Removal Permit
116
4.04.08. (A)(49)a
Best/Current Practices Parking Ratio Application
155
4.05.06.
Exterior Lighting Plan
163
4.10.09.
Density Bonus for Housing Integration
199
6.05.08.
Site Plan
236
6.05.09. (B)
Substantially Conforming Site Plans (SCSP)
239
6.13.01. (A)
Landscape Plan Approval
254
6.16.03. (D)
Façade Plan Approval
264
5.01.03. Director Authority to Approve Specific Standards
In addition to other applications expressly delegated by City Ordinance or Charter, the Director is authorized to consider standards subject to his or her approval. The applicable standards are located throughout the zoning ordinance and the following provides a summary of the various sections where the specific standards are found. The complete sections are listed below and each entire section should be read to determine which specific standards within those sections are authorized for the Director’s approval.
The Director has the Authority to Approve Specific Standards.
Section Number
Section
Page
2.04.04. (G)
OTC Regulations for Property not Platted or Vested
45
2.05.05. (F)(2)
Tollway Overlay Exterior Appearance of Buildings/Structures
82
4.01.05. (C)
Replacement Trees on a Different Property
118
4.01.06.
Tree Protection Measures
119
4.02.03. (A)(2)
Tree and Shrub Planting Standards
124
4.02.09. (C)(5)
Alternative Plant Coefficient (Pc) or Irrigation Efficiency (IE) Approval
133
4.03.07. (B)
Placement of Refuse and Recycling Storage Collections Facilities in a Parking Lot
143
4.04.03. (C)
Encroachment Upon the Public Right-of-Way or Required Landscaping Areas
149
4.04.03. (D)
Dead End Parking
149
4.04.05. (A)
Vehicular Access
150
4.04.06. (E)(2)
Uses Prohibited from Mixed Use Shared Parking Agreements
151
4.04.07. (D)
Drive Aisles
151
4.04.08. (A)(49)
Best/Current Practices Parking Ratio
155
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 220 Section 5: Development Review Bodies
The Director has the Authority to Approve Specific Standards.
Section Number
Section
Page
4.04.09. (B)
OTC Parking Reduction and Awarding of Downtown Public Parking Lot Spaces
157
4.07.14. (B)(4)
Open Space Credit
184
0
Interconnectivity of Residential and Nonresidential Developments
188
4.08.02. (B)
Secondary Exterior Materials
190
4.10.12.
Conveyance of Open Space
200
4.11.04. (B)
Permitted Uses and Activities
203
4.12.02. (A)
Storm Water Detention
207
4.12.03. (D)
Building Design
207
4.12.04. (B)
Other Parking and Circulation Requirements
210
0
Nonresidential Open Space Requirements
215
6.07.01. (C)(1)
Written Notice Delivery Methods
245
6.16.02. (B)
MF-15 and MF-19 Review Criteria
263
6.16.03. (D)
Façade Plan Approval
264
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 5: Development Review Bodies Page | 221
Subsection 5.02. Planning & Zoning Commission
5.02.01. Creation of Planning Commission
The Planning & Zoning Commission is established by the City Charter.
5.02.02. Commission’s Role of Review and Recommendation to the City Council
In addition to other applications expressly delegated by City Ordinance or Charter, the Planning & Zoning Commission shall be responsible for reviewing and making recommendations on the following applications to the City Council.
Applications the Planning & Zoning Commission Reviews and Recommends Actions to the
City Council
Section Number
Application
Page
3.02.01. (A)(5)d
Approval of an Unlisted Commercial Stealth Antenna
97
6.19.05.
Appeal of a Temporary Outdoor Lighting Decision
269
6.01.01. (C)
Application for a Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy within Newly Annexed Land
228
6.06.02. (A)
Zoning District Change (Zoning Map Amendment)
242
6.06.02. (B)
Zoning Text Amendment
242
5.02.03. Authority for Deciding Applications and Appeals
In addition to other applications expressly delegated by City Ordinance or Charter, the Planning & Zoning Commission shall make the final decision on the following applications and appeals.
Applications the Planning & Zoning Commission Reviews has the Authority to Decide
Section Number
Application
Page
3.02.01. (A)(18)k
Appeal of the Director’s Home Occupation Determination:
104
4.03.05. (A)(4)b
Exception to the Size Limitation of Outside Storage and Display Areas
142
4.04.06. (E)(1)
Mixed Use Shared Parking Agreement
150
4.04.06. (E)(4)
Rescinded Shared Parking Agreement Approval
151
4.10.11.
Approval of a Residential Cluster Development
200
4.11.04. (E)(2)
Voluntary Buffer Approval
204
4.13.01. (C)
Open Space Street and Location Requirement
213
6.01.01. (C)
Application for a Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy within Newly Annexed Land
228
6.05.07.
Preliminary Site Plan
234
6.19.10.
Appeal of a SCSP Decision to the Planning & Zoning Commission
270
6.05.09. (C)
Revised Preliminary Site Plan (PSP) or Site Plan (SP)
239
6.14.07. (C)(1)
Minor PD Amendment
259
6.19.15. (A)
Initial Appeal of a Façade Plan
271
6.19.16. (A)
Appeal of an Alternative Compliance Standard Decision made by the Director
272
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 222 Section 5: Development Review Bodies
Subsection 5.03. City Council
5.03.01. City Council Authority for Amendments to this Zoning Ordinance
The City Council may from time to time amend, supplement or change by ordinance the text of this Zoning Ordinance on its own initiative or upon petition for a text amendment.
5.03.02. City Council Authority for Deciding Applications and Appeals
The City Council shall make the final decision on the following applications and appeals. In addition, any other applications not otherwise delegated to another body or City official by City Ordinance or Charter, the City Council shall make the final decision.
City Council has the Authority to Decide
Section Number
Application
Page
6.19.03.
Appeal of a Temporary Building Decision to Council
268
6.19.02.
Appeal of a Denial of a Unlisted Commercial Stealth Antenna
268
6.19.04.
Appeal of a Rescinded Shared Parking Agreement Approval
269
6.19.05.
Appeal of a Temporary Outdoor Lighting Decision
269
6.19.06.
Appeal of a Residential Cluster Development
269
6.19.08.
Appeal of a Preliminary Site Plan
269
6.19.09.
Appeal of a Site Plan
270
6.19.11.
Appeal of a SCSP Decision to the City Council
270
6.19.12.
Appeal of a Revised PSP or SP Decision
270
6.06.02. (A)
Zoning District Change (Zoning Map Amendment)
242
6.06.02. (B)
Zoning Text Amendment
242
6.19.13.
Appeal of a Planning & Zoning Commission Decision to Deny a Zoning Amendment
270
6.19.14.
Appeal of a Minor PD Amendment Decision
271
6.19.15. (B)
Final Appeal of a Façade Plan
271
6.19.16. (B)
Appeal of an Alternative Compliance Standard Decision made by the Planning & Zoning Commission
272
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 5: Development Review Bodies Page | 223
Subsection 5.04. Board of Adjustment
5.04.01. Establishment of the Board of Adjustment
(A) Establishment
The Board of Adjustment (Board) is established by the City Charter.
(B) City Council Approval of All Board Rules and Regulations
All rules and regulations adopted by the Board shall be reviewed and approved by the City Council.
(1) The rules and regulations shall be consistent with and not in conflict with this ordinance, the City Charter, or other rules and regulations prescribed by the City Council.
(C) Board Operating Procedures
The Board shall function according to the laws of the State of Texas, the Charter of the City of Frisco, Texas, and the provisions of this Ordinance.
5.04.02. Board Membership
(A) Five-Member Board
The Board shall consist of five (5) members, to be appointed by the City Council for a term of two (2) years; provided, however, that of the first five (5) appointments made under this Ordinance, three (3) shall be appointed to serve a two (2) year term and two (2) shall be appointed to serve a one (1) year term; and, thereafter, three (3) shall be appointed during even-numbered years and two (2) shall be appointed during odd-numbered years, for said two (2) year term.
(B) Term Limits
No Board Member shall serve for more than three (3) consecutive terms or six (6) consecutive years (whichever is less).
(C) Vacancies
When vacancies occur on the Board, the City Council shall appoint, by majority vote, a replacement to serve the remainder of that term.
5.04.03. Board Administration and Procedures
(A) Quorum
Each case before the Board must be heard by at least four (4) members.
(B) Alternate Board Members
The Board shall have three (3) alternate Board Members appointed by the City Council to serve in the absence of one (1) or more regular Board Members when requested to do so by the Mayor or City Manager.
(1) Each alternate Board Member serves for the same period as a regular Board Member and is subject to removal in the same manner as a regular Board Member.
(2) A vacancy among the alternate Board Members is filled in the same manner as a vacancy among the regular Board Members.
(3) An alternate Board Member serves upon the same terms and conditions as a regular Board Member.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 224 Section 5: Development Review Bodies
5.04.04. Officers
(A) Board Officers and Elections
(1) The Board shall have a Chair, Vice-Chair and Secretary whose terms shall be one (1) year.
(2) The Chair, Vice-Chair and Secretary shall be elected by the members of the Board.
(3) The nomination and election of officers shall occur at the first Board meeting following the City Council’s annual appointments.
(B) Role of the Chairperson
(1) The Chairperson shall preside over meetings and shall be entitled to vote upon each issue.
(C) Role of the Vice-Chair
(1) The Vice-Chair shall assist the Chair in directing the affairs of the Board.
(2) In the absence of the Chair, the Vice-Chair shall assume all duties of the Chair.
(D) Role of the Secretary
(1) The Secretary shall keep the Minutes of all meetings, and in the Secretary's absence, the Chair shall designate another member to act as Secretary.
(2) The Secretary may accept the assistance of City personnel in taking and transcribing minutes.
5.04.05. By-Laws
(A) Development and Revision of By-Laws
The Board shall have the power to develop and revise by-laws for its own governance, which shall be subject to review and approval by the City Council. The by-laws shall include provisions for:
(1) Establishment of meeting dates; and
(2) Establishment of an appointment to certain committees made up of Board Members and other lay persons to assist the Board in the conduct of its responsibilities.
5.04.06. Duties and Responsibilities
(A) Appeal of an Administrative Decision, see Subsection 6.19 Appeals and the Appeal Process (Page 268).
(B) Nonconforming Use Reconstruction, Extension or Enlargement
The Board may permit the reconstruction, extension or enlargement of a structure occupied by nonconforming uses, on the lot or tract occupied by such building, provided such reconstruction does not prevent the return of such property to a conforming use.
(C) Amortization of a Nonconforming Use
The Board may, in specific cases, amortize a nonconforming use in accordance with those procedures set forth in Subsection 6.11 Amortization of Nonconforming Uses (Page 251).
(D) Variance
The Board of Adjustment is authorized in specific cases to grant a variance from the Zoning Ordinance terms, standards and criteria as outlined within Subsection 6.09 Variance Procedures (Page 249).
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 5: Development Review Bodies Page | 225
(E) Special Exception of Building Official Error
The Board is authorized, in specific cases, to grant a special exception from the Zoning Ordinance terms, standards and criteria as outlined within Subsection 6.10 Special Exception for Building Official Error (Page 250).
(F) Reinstatement of Nonconforming Rights
The Board is authorized in specific cases to reinstate nonconforming rights pursuant to Subsection 6.12 Reinstatement of Nonconforming Rights (Page 253).
5.04.07. Public Hearing Required
To hear and take action on an application or appeal listed under 5.04.06. Duties and Responsibilities, the Board shall hold a public hearing and shall provide the notice required by this Ordinance for a zoning district change (see Subsection 6.06 Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance / Districts and Administrative Procedures (Page 241)). At the public hearing, the Board of Adjustment shall consider public comments, the Director's recommendation, and other applicable information.
5.04.08. Concurring Vote Required
The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board is necessary for the following.
(A) Appeal of an Administrative Decision
Reverse or affirm an order, requirement, decision, or determination of an administrative official.
(B) Special Exception or Nonconforming Use Decision
Decide in favor of an applicant on a matter on which the Board is required to pass under a zoning ordinance (See 5.04.06. (B) and (C)).
(C) Variance Decision
Authorize a variation from the terms of a zoning ordinance.
5.04.09. Appeal of a Board of Adjustment Decision
The Board’s decision is final unless appealed to district court within ten (10) days after the Board’s decision is filed in the Office of the Board. Such appeal must be made in accordance with Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code. The Board’s decision is filed in the Office of the Board when the Board votes and makes its decision in open session.
5.04.10. Power to Obligate and Finance
The Board shall have no power to obligate the City in any manner whatsoever. The Board's finances shall be handled in the same manner as any division of the City Government.
5.04.11. Ex Parte Communication
No member of the Board shall hold a meeting or communicate with an applicant or member of the public regarding a pending application or appeal outside of a public hearing.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 226 Section 5: Development Review Bodies
5.04.12. Summary of the Powers of the Board of Adjustment
In addition to other applications expressly delegated by City Ordinance or Charter, the following is a summary of the powers of the Board of Adjustment.
Board of Adjustment has the Authority to Decide
Section Number
Application
Page
6.19.07.
Appeal of an Administrative Decision
269
5.04.06. (B)
Nonconforming Use Reconstruction, Extension or Enlargement
224
5.04.06. (C)
Amortization of a Nonconforming Use
224
5.04.06. (D)
Variance
224
Subsection 6.10
Special Exception for Building Official Error
250
Section 6. Development Review Procedures
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 228 Section 6: Development Review Procedures
Subsection 6.01. Zoning Upon Annexation
All territory hereinafter annexed to the City shall be classified as AG – Agricultural District,. The procedure for establishing permanent zoning on annexed territory shall conform to the procedure set forth in Subsection 6.06 Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance / Districts and Administrative Procedures (Page 241) of this Ordinance.
6.01.01. Rules of Newly Annexed Territory Classified as the Agricultural District
In an area classified as AG – Agricultural District:
(A) Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy Required
No person shall erect, construct, proceed or continue with the erection or construction of any building or structure or cause the same to be done in any newly annexed territory to the City without first applying for and obtaining a Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy from the Chief Building Official.
(B) Limited Permits within Newly Annexed Land
No permit for the construction of a building or use of land shall be issued by the Chief Building Official other than a permit which will allow the construction of a building or use permitted in the AG – Agricultural District, unless and until such territory has been classified in a zoning district other than the AG – Agricultural District, by the City Council in the manner prescribed by law except as provided in 6.01.01. (C) below.
(C) Application for a Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy within Newly Annexed Land
(1) Except as provided in 6.01.01. (C)(2) below, a building permit shall be approved if the applicant shows the following.
a. The use was already legally operating on the date the annexation proceedings were initiated for the property; or
b. The use was not already operating on the effective date of annexation, but was planned for the property before the 90th day before the effective date of annexation, and:
1. One or more licenses, certificates, permits, approvals, or other form of authorization by a governmental entity were required by law for the planned land use; and
2. A completed application for the initial authorization was filed with the governmental entity before the date the annexation proceedings were instituted. For the purpose of this section, a completed application is filed if the application includes all documents and other information designated as required by the governmental entity in a written notice to the applicant. For the purposes of this section, the date the annexation proceedings were instituted means the date the City Council approves the ordinance annexing the property.
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, a building permit shall not be issued if the use in the annexed area falls under one of the categories set forth in Section 43.002(c) of the Texas Local Government Code and such use is prohibited by City ordinance or by the City Charter.
(3) If a use described in 6.01.01. (C)(1) above does not comply with the zoning for the property, such uses shall be allowed to continue as a nonconforming use. Nothing shall prevent the City from amortizing a nonconforming use even if it existed or was planned for the property prior to the institution of annexation proceedings. The Board of Adjustment amortizes a nonconforming use only if they first determine the nonconforming use is a nuisance and/or that the nonconforming use presents a risk of imminent destruction of property or injury to persons. Pursuant to Section 43.002(c) of the Texas Local Government Code, such regulations are expressly enforceable against a use even if it existed or was planned prior to the institution of annexation proceedings.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 6: Development Review Procedures Page | 229
(4) The property owner has a right to appeal the Planning & Zoning Commission’s decision to City Council, if an appeal is submitted to the Director of Development Services in writing within ten (10) calendar days after the Planning & Zoning Commission voted and made their determination in open session. After receiving and reviewing the appeal application of the Planning & Zoning Commission decision, the City Council may, by majority vote, authorize the issuance of a Building Permit or Certificate of Occupancy or may disapprove the application pending permanent zoning.
Subsection 6.02. Platting Property Not Zoned
6.02.01. Zoning Required for Platting
(A) Denial of Plats for Lands without Permanent Zoning
The Planning & Zoning Commission shall not approve any plat of any subdivision within the City Limits until the area covered by the proposed plat shall have been zoned by the City Council, as described in Subsection 6.01 Zoning Upon Annexation (Page 228).
(B) Agricultural Exemption
A plat may be approved on land with the AG – Agricultural District designation if the proposed use of the property is determined to be the permanent use of the property.
6.02.02. Annexation Proceedings Postpones Platting Approvals
The Planning & Zoning Commission may conditionally approve any plat or any subdivision within any area where a petition or ordinance for annexation or a recommendation for annexation is pending before the City Council unless and until such annexation shall have been approved by ordinance of the City Council.
6.02.03. Subdivision Ordinance Platting Requirements
Refer to the Subdivision Ordinance for platting requirements within the City Limits and its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
6.02.04. Simultaneous Zoning and Annexation
Zoning and annexation request may be simultaneously considered. City council must adopt the annexation ordinance prior to adoption an ordinance for zoning.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 230 Section 6: Development Review Procedures
Subsection 6.03. Creation of Building Site
6.03.01. Conditions Required for Building Site, Tract, or Lot Creation
No permit for the construction of a building or buildings upon any tract or plot shall be issued until a building site, building tract, or building lot has been created by compliance with one of the following conditions.
(A) Approved Plat of Record
The lot or tract is part of a plat of record, properly approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission, and filed in the Plat Records of Collin or Denton Counties, Texas as may be applicable by location of property.
(B) Annexation
The plat, tract, or lot faces upon a dedicated street and was separately owned prior to annexation to the City, in which event a building permit for only one main building conforming to all the requirements of this Ordinance may be issued on each such original separately owned parcel without first complying with 6.03.01. (A) above.
(C) Approved Site Plan
The plat or tract is all or part of a Site Plan officially approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission, and compliance has been made with provisions and improvements approved on such Site Plan for all utility and drainage easements, dedication of streets, alleys and other public improvements required to meet the standards established for the platting of land.
6.03.02. Building Permit Issuance Requires a Plat of Record
A plat of record shall be created prior to the issuance of a Building Permit. (See also Subdivision Ordinance)
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 6: Development Review Procedures Page | 231
Subsection 6.04. Certificates of Occupancy and Compliance
6.04.01. Certificates of Occupancy Required
(A) Certificates of Occupancy shall be required for any of the following:
(1) Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or structurally altered;
(2) Change in use of an existing building to a use of a different classification;
(3) Occupancy and use of vacant land, except agricultural use;
(4) Change in the use of land to a use of a different classification;
(5) Any change in the use of a nonconforming use; and
(6) Any use in existence with an annexation request.
(B) Certificate of Occupancy Required from Chief Building Official
No such use, or change of use, shall take place until a Certificate of Occupancy therefore shall have been issued by the Chief Building Official.
6.04.02. Procedure for New or Altered Buildings
(A) Written Application
Written application for a Certificate of Occupancy for a new building or for an existing building which is to be altered shall be made at the same time as the application for the Building Permit for such building.
(B) Timing of Certificate Issuance
Said Certificate shall be issued within fourteen (14) calendar days after a written request for the same has been made to said Chief Building Official or his agent after the erection or alteration of such building or part thereof has been completed in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance.
6.04.03. Procedure for Vacant Land or a Change in Building Use
(A) Written Application
Written application for a Certificate of Occupancy shall be made to the Chief Building Official for review according to Subsection 6.03 Creation of Building Site (Page 230) for the following.
(1) The use of vacant land,
(2) For a change in the use of land or a building, or
(3) For a change in a nonconforming use to a conforming use
(B) Timing of Certificate Issuance
If the proposed use is in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance, the Certificate of Occupancy therefore shall be issued within fourteen (14) calendar days after the completed application for same has been made. The City shall not issue the CO where City taxes are delinquent.
6.04.04. Contents of a Certificate of Occupancy
(A) Building and Proposed Use
Every Certificate of Occupancy shall state that the building or the proposed use of a building or land complies with all provisions of the building and fire laws and Ordinances.
(B) Record of Certificates of Occupancy
A record of all Certificates of Occupancy shall be kept in file on the office of the Chief Building Official or his agent and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person having proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land affected.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 232 Section 6: Development Review Procedures
Subsection 6.05. Site Plan Requirements
6.05.01. Purpose
(A) Intent and Exclusion of Detached Single Family and Two Family Uses
The purpose of the Site Plan process is to establish a procedure for coordinating improvements to properties zoned other than detached single family or two family uses.
(B) Multifamily, Townhome and Nonresidential Uses
Through Site Plan review, zoning standards and other applicable municipal standards or ordinances that may apply to specific site development can be uniformly implemented by the Planning & Zoning Commission for multifamily, townhome and nonresidential uses.
(C) Results
This procedure is intended to promote, among other items, the efficient and harmonious use of land, safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation, parking and loading, lighting, screening, open space, landscaping, and natural features.
6.05.02. General
(A) Process: A Series of Two Site Plans
Subsection 6.05. Site Plan Requirements (Page 232) establishes a Site Plan review process for land development. The process involves a series of two plans, progressing from a generalized evaluation of a site and development concept, being a Preliminary Site Plan, to approval of a detailed development plan, being a Site Plan.
(1) Preliminary Site Plan
a. The first plan in the series is the Preliminary Site Plan.
b. A Preliminary Site Plan presents general information on building layout, parking, drives, landscaping, screening and other site improvements.
c. Preliminary Site Plan approval assures the applicant that the general layout is acceptable prior to proceeding with detailed engineering and design work.
(2) Site Plan
a. A Site Plan is a detailed, scaled drawing of all surface improvements, structures and utilities proposed for development.
b. Site Plan approval is required prior to the release of a grading permit and prior to the issuance building permits.
(3) Preliminary Site Plan and Site Plan Approval
a. Preliminary Site Plans require review and approval by the Planning & Zoning Commission, unless otherwise specified by ordinance.
b. Site Plans require review and approval by the Director. The Director shall review if all of the following conditions are met.
1. Valid Preliminary Site Plan;
2. A building does not move closer to an abutting residential property;
3. A building’s height does not increase;
4. A buildings size does not increase more than ten (10) percent; and
5. Screening remains the same.
(B) Process Purpose
The purpose of this process is to:
(1) Ensure compliance with adopted City development regulations and other applicable regulations that apply to the property for which the City has enforcement responsibility;
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 6: Development Review Procedures Page | 233
(2) Promote safe, efficient and harmonious use of land through application of City-adopted design standards and guidelines;
(3) Promote the vision established by the Comprehensive Plan;.
(4) Ensure adequate public facilities to serve development;
(5) Prevent or mitigate adverse development impacts, including overcrowding and congestion;
(6) Aid evaluation and coordination of land subdivision;
(7) Incorporate the assets of open space and natural features into the design of a site; and
(8) Promote the public health, safety and welfare.
6.05.03. Applicability
The Site Plan review process shall apply to the following.
(A) Nonresidential Development
(1) Nonresidential development, except as provided in 6.05.04. Exemptions.
(B) Residential Development
(1) Residential development having more than two dwelling units, including attached single family housing, townhomes, and condominiums.
(2) Manufactured home parks.
6.05.04. Exemptions
Agricultural buildings and temporary field construction offices/staging areas as permitted by the Building Inspection Division are exempted from the requirements of this Subsection 6.05. Site Plan Requirements.
6.05.05. Submission of Applications
(A) Coordinating Official
Applications for approval of plans required by this Subsection 6.05. Site Plan Requirements must be submitted to the Development Services Department.
(B) Calendar of Official Processing Dates
A calendar of official processing dates for items requiring Planning & Zoning Commission approval pursuant to this Subsection 6.05. Site Plan Requirements shall be published by the City thirty (30) calendar days prior to the beginning of each calendar year.
(C) Application Processing Date
All applications for a permit required by this Subsection 6.05. Site Plan Requirements filed on a date other than an official processing date shall be processed and presented to the Planning & Zoning Commission according to the schedule established by the first official processing date appearing on the calendar after the filing date and after the date of receipt of the application.
(D) Other Regulations for Applications
Applications are also governed by Subsection 6.07 Vesting and Complete Application Requirement (Page 245).
6.05.06. Fees, Forms and Procedures
(A) Schedule of Fees
The City Council shall establish a schedule of fees relating to the Site Plan approval process.
(B) Delinquent Taxes
No Site Plan shall be approved for properties with delinquent City taxes.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 234 Section 6: Development Review Procedures
(C) Procedures, Forms and Standards
The Director shall establish procedures, forms and standards with regard to the content, format and number of copies of information constituting an application for Preliminary Site Plans and Site Plans.
6.05.07. Preliminary Site Plan
(A) Preliminary Site Plan General
A Preliminary Site Plan is the first plan in the Site Plan approval process. A Preliminary Site Plan is less detailed and specific than a Final Site Plan in terms of exact arrangement of buildings, parking areas, open spaces, access points and any other site design features. A checklist of all required information to be depicted on a Preliminary Site Plan shall be maintained by the Director. The purpose of the plan is to:
(1) Ensure compliance with applicable development regulations and previously approved, valid plans affecting development of the property;
(2) Provide satisfactory vehicular and pedestrian connectivity to adjoining developments and within the site;
(3) Promote the long term viability of multi-parcel developments by providing visibility of internal tracts;
(4) Determine the preliminary design of drainage facilities and utilities; and
(5) Promote the health, safety and welfare of the public.
(B) Preliminary Site Plan Applicability
(1) Prerequisite for a Site Plan
Except as provided in 6.05.08. (B)(2) (Page 237), an approved, valid Preliminary Site Plan shall be required prior to the consideration of a Site Plan for development of property set forth in 6.05.08. Site Plan (Page 236).
(2) Area Scope
a. A Preliminary Site Plan must include all contiguous property of common ownership, except that approved platted lots that are not part of the intended development may be shown for informational purposes only.
b. Property which has been subdivided by metes and bounds, regardless of ownership, shall be included in the Preliminary Site Plan; since the subdivision of land was not conducted in accordance with the Subdivision Ordinance.
(3) A Site Plan may be submitted in lieu of a Preliminary Site Plan.
(C) Preliminary Site Plan Application Procedure and Requirements
(1) Preliminary Site Plan Pre-Application
a. Before preparing a Preliminary Site Plan, it is recommended that the applicant meet with an authorized representative of the Development Services Department to allow the applicant to learn the general procedures for approval, and to review the general plan of the proposed development, but the development/project shall not be discussed in sufficient detail to provide the City with fair notice of the project.
b. No applications for a permit may be submitted to or accepted for filing with representatives of the Development Services Department during the meeting.
(2) Preliminary Site Plan General Application
The property owner shall file an application for the approval of a Preliminary Site Plan. This application shall include the information listed on the Development Services’ Preliminary Site Plan Application Form and Checklist, which shall be created and maintained by the Director.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 6: Development Review Procedures Page | 235
(3) Preliminary Site Plan Details for Tracts Greater than Five (5) Acres
At a minimum, a Preliminary Site Plan that includes tracts greater than five (5) acres shall depict the following information.
a. Estimated use and size of all buildings and amount of required parking. The exact location of the buildings is not required.
b. The general design of adjacent public street improvements and right-of-way including existing or proposed deceleration lanes, median openings and left turn bays, location of driveways, drive aisles, cross access between internal developments, and access to properties adjacent to the subject site.
c. Required landscape edges and buffers adjacent to thoroughfares and bordering properties.
d. Existing natural and hydrological features including wetlands.
e. Existing or proposed easements.
f. Location and general size of drainage, detention and retention areas.
g. Location of centralized or concentrated open spaces, screening and other site improvements.
(4) Preliminary Site Plan Details for Tracts Containing Five (5) Acres or Less
Existing or proposed tracts which contain five (5) or fewer net acres shall depict a greater level of detail than tracts in excess of five (5) net acres. A checklist of the required information shall be maintained by the Director.
(5) Preliminary Site Plan Additional Requirements
In addition to meeting the requirements for Preliminary Site Plan approval, the following approvals may be necessary (such applications and plans shall be accepted for filing, however, prior to approval of the Preliminary Site Plan, and failure to submit such applications prior to approval of the Preliminary Site Plan shall be grounds for denial or rejection of the Preliminary Site Plan):
a. Failure to address City staff comments,
b. Preliminary Plat, if applicable,
c. Preliminary utility plans,
d. Traffic Impact Analysis, if required,
e. Traffic Circulation Study, if required,
f. Landscape Plan/Tree Survey,
g. Flood Study, if required, and
h. Façade Plans.
(6) Preliminary Site Plan Standards of Approval
The Planning & Zoning Commission may approve, conditionally approve, table or deny a Preliminary Site Plan based on:
a. Conformance with the Comprehensive Plan and adopted design guidelines;
b. Compliance with the Zoning Ordinance and other applicable regulations and previously approved, valid plans for the property;
c. Impact on the site's natural resources (i.e., floodplain, drainage, trees, topography, etc.) but excluding fence rows;
d. Affect on adjacent and area property and land use;
e. Safety and efficiency of vehicular and pedestrian circulation, traffic control and congestion mitigation;
f. Safety and convenience of off-street parking and loading facilities;
g. Access for firefighting and emergency equipment to buildings;
h. Use of landscaping and screening to shield lights, noise, movement or activities from adjacent properties, and to complement the design and location of buildings and parking; and
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 236 Section 6: Development Review Procedures
i. The location, size and configuration of usable open space areas to ensure that such areas are suitable for intended recreation and conservation uses.
(7) Preliminary Site Plan Effect
a. City approval of a Preliminary Site Plan shall constitute authorization by the City for the owner(s) to submit an application for Site Plan approval for development of the entire site or a portion thereof provided that the Site Plan conforms to the Preliminary Site Plan and any conditions attached to its approval.
b. During the time the Preliminary Site Plan remains valid, the location of buildings, landscaped areas, open space, streets, drives, fire lanes, median breaks, curb cuts and parking shall remain fixed except as to permit minor adjustments resulting from subsequent engineering of improvements or to prevent a condition affecting public health or safety which was not known at the time of approval.
c. Except where authorized by ordinance, a Preliminary Site Plan may not be used to approve an exception to development regulations.
d. Where an approved Preliminary Site Plan conflicts with an adopted regulation and no variance or exception is expressly approved, the regulation shall apply.
(8) Preliminary Site Plan Lapse
a. The approval of a Preliminary Site Plan shall be effective for a period of two (2) years from the date of approval, at the end of which time the Preliminary Site Plan shall expire unless the applicant demonstrates to the Director that progress has been made toward completion of the project for which the Preliminary Site Plan was approved or that a Site Plan has been approved.
b. An expired Preliminary Site Plan approval is null and void.
c. If the progress towards completion is only for a portion of the property, the Preliminary Site Plan for the remaining property shall expire.
d. Any new Preliminary Site Plan submitted for review and approval shall be subject to the then-existing regulations at the time of submittal.
(9) For appeals, see Subsection 6.19 Appeals and the Appeal Process (Page 268).
6.05.08. Site Plan
(A) Site Plan General Information
A Site Plan is the final plan required in the Site Plan approval process. The Site Plan is a detailed plan of the public and private improvements to be constructed. The purpose of the plan is to:
(1) Ensure compliance with applicable development regulations and previously approved, valid plans affecting development of the property;
(2) Coordinate and document the design of public and private improvements to be constructed;
(3) Coordinate the subdivision of land, including the granting of easements, rights-of-way, development agreements and provision of surety;
(4) Promote the health, safety and welfare of the public; and
(5) Identify and address environmental concerns (i.e., floodplain, drainage, trees, topography, etc.).
(B) Site Plan Applicability
(1) Prerequisite for the Approval of Any Construction Plan and Permit:
An approved, valid Site Plan shall be required prior to the approval of any construction plan and permit for and development of the following.
a. Nonresidential development, except as provided in 6.05.08. (B)(2) below;
b. Residential development having more than two dwelling units, including attached single family housing, townhomes and condominiums;
c. Manufactured home parks; or
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 6: Development Review Procedures Page | 237
d. Parking lot development, and reconstruction or reconfiguration of more than twenty (20) spaces.
(2) Exempted Development
The following types of development are exempted from the requirements of this 6.05.08. Site Plan:
a. Agricultural buildings; and
b. Temporary field construction offices / staging areas as permitted by the Building Inspection Division.
(C) Site Plan Application Procedure and Requirements
(1) Site Plan Pre-Application
a. Before preparing a Site Plan, the applicant may meet with Development Services Department staff to allow the applicant to learn the general procedures for approval and to review the concept of the proposed development, if desired by applicant.
b. No application for a permit may be submitted to or accepted for filing with the Development Services Department staff during the meeting.
(2) Site Plan General Application
The property owner shall file an application for the approval of a Site Plan. This application shall include the information listed on the Development Services’ Site Plan Application Form and Checklist, which shall be created and maintained by the Director.
(3) Site Plan Additional Requirements
The following plans shall be submitted with a Site Plan application and approval is necessary prior to final authorization for development:
a. Final Plat or Replat,
b. Engineering plans,
c. Traffic Impact Analysis, if applicable,
d. Tree Preservation Plan, if applicable,
e. Traffic Circulation Study, if required,
f. Landscape plans,
g. Flood Study, if required,
h. Façade plan, if applicable, or
i. Other approvals as required by ordinance or resolution.
(4) Site Plan Standards of Approval
a. Director Approval Scenario
Where application for Site Plan approval is made for development defined on an approved, valid Preliminary Site Plan, the Director may approve, conditionally approve or deny the application based upon the criteria listed below.
b. Planning & Zoning Commission Approval Scenario
If cases where no Preliminary Site Plan exists, the Planning & Zoning Commission may approve, conditionally approve, table or deny a Site Plan based upon the criteria listed below.
c. Approval Criteria
1. Conformance with the Comprehensive Plan and adopted design guidelines.
2. Compliance with the Zoning Ordinance and other applicable regulations and previously approved, valid plans for the property.
3. The design and location of off-street parking and loading facilities to ensure that all such spaces are usable and are safely and conveniently arranged.
4. The width, grade and location of streets designed to accommodate prospective traffic and to provide access for firefighting and emergency equipment to buildings.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 238 Section 6: Development Review Procedures
5. The use of landscaping and screening to provide adequate buffers to shield lights, noise, movement or activities from adjacent properties when necessary, and to complement the design and location of buildings and be integrated into the overall site design.
6. The location, size and configuration of open space areas to ensure that such areas are suitable for intended recreation and conservation uses.
7. Protection and conservation of soils from erosion by wind or water or from excavation or grading.
8. Protection and conservation of water courses and areas subject to flooding.
9. The adequacy of streets, water, drainage, sewerage facilities, garbage disposal and other utilities necessary for essential services to residents and occupants.
10. The City shall not take action on a Site Plan for property where City taxes are delinquent.
(5) Site Plan Effect
a. Approval of a Site Plan is the City's authorization to apply for approval of building permits and to receive approval of engineering plans.
b. During the time the Site Plan remains valid the City shall not apply any additional requirements concerning building placement, streets, drives, parking, landscaping or screening.
c. Site Plan approval is separate and distinct from other permits and approvals as may be required by the City and other regulatory agencies.
d. Approval of a Site Plan shall not affect other applicable regulations concerning development and land use.
e. Except where authorized by ordinance, a Site Plan may not be used to approve a variance to development regulations.
f. Where an approved plan conflicts with an adopted regulation and no variance is expressly approved, the regulation shall apply.
(6) Site Plan Lapse
a. Applications filed on or after September 1, 2005.
1. For applications filed on or after September 1, 2005, the approval of a Site Plan shall be effective for a period of two (2) years from the date of filing of the application with the Zoning and Submission Administrator or designee at the end of which time the Site Plan shall expire unless the applicant demonstrates to the Director that progress has been made towards completion of the project for which the Site Plan was approved.
2. Submission and receipt of approval of engineering plans and building permits prior to expiration of the Site Plan shall be evidence of progress towards completion.
3. However, if engineering plans and permits have been approved only for a portion of the property or if the progress towards completion is only for a portion of the property and/or improvements, the Site Plan for the remaining property and/or improvements, together with any Preliminary Site Plan for the property, shall expire.
b. Applications filed before September 1, 2005
1. For applications filed before September 1, 2005, the approval of a Site Plan shall be effective for a period of eighteen (18) months from the date of approval by the Planning & Zoning Commission, at the end of which time the applicant must have submitted and received approval of engineering plans and building permits.
2. If the engineering plans and building permits are not approved, the Site Plan approval, together with any Preliminary Site Plan for the property, is null and void.
3. If engineering plans and permits have been approved only for a portion of the property and for improvements, the Site Plan for the remaining property and/or improvements, together with any Preliminary Site Plan for the property, shall be null and void.
c. Expired Site Plans
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 6: Development Review Procedures Page | 239
1. For all expired Site Plans, the applicant shall be required to submit a new Site Plan and if required, a new Preliminary Site Plan, for review and approval by the Planning & Zoning Commission subject to the then existing regulations (see 6.05.08. (C) Site Plan Application Procedure and Requirements (Page 237).
2. Site Plan approval shall expire upon completion of the improvements shown on the plan. Permits must remain valid during the construction process.
3. Subsequent additional development, site modifications and redevelopment shall be permitted in accordance with 6.05.11. Additional Development and Redevelopment (Page 240) and shall be considered a new project subject to the then existing ordinances, laws and regulations of the City.
(7) For appeals, see Subsection 6.19 Appeals and the Appeal Process (Page 268).
6.05.09. Site Plan Amendments
As changes are proposed to an approved Preliminary Site Plan (PSP) or an approved Site Plan (SP), an applicant shall comply with the following review and approval processes.
(A) Updates During Construction Plan Reviews
(1) Updates made to a Site Plan based on modifications made during construction plan review shall be incorporated into the approved Site Plan.
(2) The applicant shall submit as-built drawings prior to final acceptance for approval by the Director.
(B) Substantially Conforming Site Plans (SCSP)
(1) This plan shall include, but is not limited to, corrections of distances and dimensions, adjustments of building configuration and placement, increase in building area not to exceed 1,000 square feet, changes to utility locations, modifications to the number or size of meters, and the addition or removal of twenty (20) or fewer parking spaces, and the addition of cellular antenna ground-mounted equipment where the use has been approved.
(2) The substantially conforming plan shall be reviewed and approved or denied by the Director.
(3) An applicant may appeal the denial of an SCSP to the Planning & Zoning Commission in accordance with the following procedures.
a. For appeals, see Subsection 6.19 Appeals and the Appeal Process (Page 268).
(4) The expiration shall be the same date of the originally approved SP. In cases where a SP has already expired, the SCSP shall expire six (6) months from the date of approval during which time all permits shall be issued for construction.
(5) Any construction plans and building plans associated with the project that have been submitted or approved shall be updated accordingly with the approval.
(6) Depending on the changes proposed, other approvals may be required, such as Landscape Plans, Façade Plans, platting, etc.
(C) Revised Preliminary Site Plan (PSP) or Site Plan (SP)
(1) This plan shall include, but is not limited to, realignments of drive aisles and fire lanes, increase in building area of 1,000 square feet or more, increase of building height, decrease in the proximity to an adjacent (off-site) residential use, and the addition or removal of more than 20 parking spaces.
(2) The revised PSP or SP shall be considered a new project and shall be evaluated under the regulations in effect at the time the application is submitted.
(3) The revised plan requires approval by the Planning & Zoning Commission.
(4) For appeals of revised PSP or SP decision, see Subsection 6.19 Appeals and the Appeal Process (Page 268).
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 240 Section 6: Development Review Procedures
(5) The revised PSP or SP shall expire two (2) years from the date of Planning & Zoning Commission approval.
(6) Construction plans and building plans associated with the project that have been submitted or approved shall be updated accordingly with the approval. The construction of the modified improvements shall not occur until after the approval of a revised Site Plan.
(7) Depending on the changes proposed, other approvals may be required, such as but not limited to Landscape Plans, Façade Plans, and plats.
6.05.10. Revocation of Site Plan Approval
The City Council or the Planning & Zoning Commission may revoke approval of a Preliminary Site Plan or Site Plan if it determines that the conditions of the approval have not been met or if the plan contains, or is based upon, incorrect information or if it is determined that it was obtained using fraud or deceit.
6.05.11. Additional Development and Redevelopment
(A) Additional Development, Site Modifications, or Redevelopment
Following the completion of improvements shown on an approved Site Plan, additional development, site modifications, or redevelopment of the site shall be permitted subject to the approval of a revised Site Plan, which shall be considered a new project and shall require submittal of a revised Site Plan and the approval of the Planning & Zoning Commission under the regulations, requirements and procedures then in effect.
(B) Minor expansions and redevelopment
Minor expansions and redevelopment may be approved by the Director under the terms of 6.05.09. Site Plan Amendments (Page 239).
6.05.12. Design Standards and Specifications
(A) Incorporation of Design Standards and Specifications
The following design standards and specifications, as they exist or may be amended, are required in addition to the design standards and specification set forth in this ordinance:
(1) Subdivision Ordinance;
(2) Downtown Architectural Guidelines;
(3) Fire Code;
(4) Engineering Design Standards and Construction Details;
(5) Any design standards and specifications approved by the City Council following the enactment of this provision; and
(6) Building Code.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 6: Development Review Procedures Page | 241
Subsection 6.06. Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance / Districts and Administrative Procedures
6.06.01. Authority to Amend Ordinance
(A) Authority
The City Council may from time to time, after receiving a final report thereon by the Planning & Zoning Commission and after public hearings required by law, amend, supplement, or change the regulations herein provided or the boundaries of the zoning districts specified on the Zoning District Map.
(B) Ordering Changes or Amendments
(1) The Planning & Zoning Commission or City Council may order the consideration of any changes or amendments to the Zoning Ordinance.
(2) Any zoning district boundary amendment (also referred to as a zoning map amendment) may be ordered for consideration by the:
a. City Council;
b. Planning & Zoning Commission; or
c. The owner of the real property (or the authorized representative of an owner of real property).
(C) Planning & Zoning Commission Recommendation Required
In no case shall the City Council act upon any zoning request prior to recommendation by the Planning & Zoning Commission.
(D) Zoning Amendment Application Submittal
(1) Each applicant for zoning or for an amendment or change to the existing provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall submit a zoning application to the Director on or before a scheduled submission date and shall be accompanied by payment of the appropriate fee as established by the City.
(2) All applications received on a date other than an official submittal date shall be dated received on the next official submittal date.
(3) Applications must be complete for acceptance.
(E) Additional Considerations
(1) Consideration for a change in any district boundary line or special zoning regulation may be initiated only with written consent of the property owner, or by the Planning & Zoning Commission or City Council on its own motion when it finds that public benefit will be derived from consideration of such matter.
(2) In the event the ownership stated on an application and that shown on the City records are different, the applicant shall submit written proof of ownership.
(3) The advertisement of a zoning change or Specific Use Permit shall be initiated by staff upon receipt of applicant’s written response to staff’s recommendation. The response shall indicate whether the applicant agrees or disagrees with the staff recommendation. Where the applicant disagrees with any portion of the recommendation, the applicant shall cite the reasons for the disagreement.
(F) Zoning Application Details
(1) To ensure the submission of adequate information, the Director is hereby empowered to maintain and distribute a list of specific requirements for zoning applications and update, modify such requirements as deemed necessary by the Director.
(2) Upon periodic review, the Development Services staff shall have the authority to update such requirements for zoning application details.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 242 Section 6: Development Review Procedures
6.06.02. Zoning Amendments Process, Public Hearing and Notice
(A) Zoning District Change (Zoning Map Amendment)
(1) One Planning & Zoning Commission Public Hearing Required
Prior to making its report to the City Council, the Planning & Zoning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing on each application.
(2) Written Notice of the Planning & Zoning Commission Public Hearing
Before the tenth (10th) calendar day before the hearing date before the Planning & Zoning Commission, written notice of each public hearing before the Planning & Zoning Commission on a proposed change in a zoning classification shall be sent to each owner, as indicated by the most recently approved Municipal Tax Roll, of property within two hundred (200) feet of the property in which the change in classification is proposed. This notice is served by deposit in the United States Postal Service.
(3) Published Notice of the City Council Public Hearing
Notice of City Council public hearing shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of the City, stating the time and place of such public hearing, a minimum of fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the date of the public hearing.
(B) Zoning Text Amendment
(1) Published Notice Prior to Public Hearing
Notice of public hearings on proposed changes in the text of the Zoning Ordinance shall be accomplished by one publication not less than fifteen (15) calendar days prior to both the Planning & Zoning Commission and City Council meetings thereto in the official newspaper of the City.
(2) Exemption
Changes in the ordinance text that do not change zoning district boundaries do not require written notification to individual property owners.
(C) Joint Public Hearing Option
(1) Whenever an application for a Zoning Map Amendment or Zoning Text Amendment must be preceded by a public hearing before both the Planning & Zoning Commission and the City Council, the Commission and the Council may conduct a joint public hearing (in accordance with Texas Local Government Code 211.007(d)) and take action on the application in the following manner:
a. The Council shall establish the date of the joint public hearing by motion at a regular or special meeting;
b. The Council shall cause notice of the joint public hearing to be provided as required by 6.06.02. (A)/6.06.02. (B), or, by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of its members, may prescribe a different type of notice for the joint public hearing;
c. The Commission and the Council shall be convened for the hearing and for any action to be taken on the petition or application; and
d. The Commission and the Council may take action on the petition or application at the same meeting, provided that the Council shall not take action until the recommendation of the Commission has been received.
(2) Special Notice
a. Pursuant to Texas Local Government Code Section 211.007(d), the City Council may, by a two-thirds vote, prescribe the type of notice to be given of the time and place of a public hearing held jointly by the City Council and the Planning & Zoning Commission.
b. If notices are prescribed under this subsection, then notice requirements within 6.06.02. (A) and 6.06.02. (B) do not apply.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 6: Development Review Procedures Page | 243
6.06.03. Failure to Appear before the Commission
The Planning & Zoning Commission may deny a zoning application if the applicant or representative fails to appear at one (1) or more hearings before the Planning & Zoning Commission.
6.06.04. Planning & Zoning Commission Consideration and Report
(A) Planning & Zoning Commission Vote
The Planning & Zoning Commission, after the public hearing is closed, may vote to approve, approve with amendments and conditions, table, or deny in whole or in part the application.
(B) Planning & Zoning Commission Table
The Planning & Zoning Commission may table for not more than ninety (90) calendar days from the time it is posted on the agenda until it has had opportunity to consider other proposed changes which may have a direct bearing thereon.
(C) Planning & Zoning Commission Consideration
In making their determination, the Planning & Zoning Commission shall consider, among other things, the following factors.
(1) Whether the uses permitted by the proposed change will be appropriate in the immediate area concerned and their relationship to the general area and the City as a whole.
(2) Whether the proposed change is in accord with any existing or proposed plans for providing public schools, streets, water supply, sanitary sewers, and other utilities to the area, and shall note the findings.
(3) The amount of vacant land currently classified for similar development in the vicinity and elsewhere in the City, and any special circumstances that may make a substantial part of such vacant land unavailable for development.
(4) The recent rate at which land is being developed in the same zoning classification as the request, particularly in the vicinity of the proposed change.
(5) How other areas designated for similar development will be, or are unlikely to be, affected if the proposed amendment is approved, and whether such designation for other areas should be modified also.
(6) The impact on the environment regarding the floodplain, riparian areas, topography, and vegetation.
(7) Whether the request is consistent with the comprehensive plan and other master plans.
(8) Any other factors which will substantially affect the health, safety, morals, or general welfare.
(9) Findings of a Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA), if required.
(D) Planning & Zoning Commission Justification for Denial
(1) If the Planning & Zoning Commission denies the zoning request, it may offer reasons to the applicant for the denial.
(E) For appeals, see Subsection 6.19 Appeals and the Appeal Process (Page 268).
6.06.05. City Council Consideration
(A) Proposal Recommended for Approval by the Commission
(1) Every proposal which is recommended favorable by the Planning & Zoning Commission shall be automatically forwarded to the City Council for setting and holding of public hearing thereon or as amended by the City Charter.
(2) No change, however, shall become effective until after the adoption of an ordinance for same and its publication as required by law.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 244 Section 6: Development Review Procedures
(B) City Council Consideration and Action
(1) City Council, after the public hearing is closed, may vote to approve, approve with amendments and conditions, table, or deny in whole or in part the application.
(C) Three-Fourths City Council Vote Required for Protested Amendments
(1) Documented Protest Requirements
a. Documented Protest Filing
Protests against proposed amendments shall be filed at least seven (7) calendar days before the date of the public hearings.
b. Documented Protest Participant Requirements
1. Interior Protester: The owners, duly signed and acknowledged, of twenty (20) percent or more of the lots or land area included within a proposed amendment boundary may participate in a documented protest for a specific case.
2. Exterior Protester: The owners, duly signed and acknowledged, of twenty (20) percent or more of the lots or land area within a two hundred (200) foot radius of the exterior boundary of the area included in a proposed amendment may participate in a documented protest for a specific case.
(2) Documented Protest Effect
If a documented protest, as defined in 6.06.05. (C)(1) above, against a proposed amendment, supplement, or change to a zoning regulation or boundary has been filed with the Director, then such amendments shall not become effective except by the affirmative vote of three-fourths (3/4), or four (4) votes of all members of the City Council.
(D) Denial by City Council
(1) The City Council may deny any request with prejudice.
(2) If a request has been denied with prejudice, the same or similar request may not be resubmitted to the City for six (6) months from the original date of denial.
(E) Final Approval and Ordinance Adoption
(1) Approval of any zoning change or amendment by the City Council at the scheduled public hearing shall constitute instruction to City staff to prepare the appropriate ordinance for final formal passage at a subsequent time.
(2) If finally approved by the required number of votes, the ordinance shall be executed by the Mayor.
(3) The Ordinance shall become effective from and after its adoption and publication as required by law and the City Charter.
Figure 6.06.05.1: Documented Protest Participant Requirements
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 6: Development Review Procedures Page | 245
Subsection 6.07. Vesting and Complete Application Requirements
6.07.01. Incomplete Application Procedures
(A) Period of Time for Determining Incomplete Application
On or before the tenth (10th) calendar day after an application for a permit is filed with the Development Services Department, the City shall determine if an application is complete.
(B) Determination of Incomplete Applications
If the application for a permit does not contain all information required by any ordinance, law or regulation governing the application for a permit, then it shall be considered incomplete.
(C) City Shall Provide Notice of Incomplete Applications
(1) Written Notice Delivery Methods
The City shall provide written notice of the failure to the applicant by one of the following methods:
a. Mail,
b. Email,
c. Facsimile,
d. Delivery service, or
e. Hand delivery or other delivery method of written notice approved by the Director.
(2) Written Notice Contents
The City shall specify within the written notice the following.
a. The documents and information necessary to make the application complete.
b. The date by which the documents and information must be received.
c. The date the application for a permit will expire if all of the requested documents and information are not received by the appropriate City department (“Notice of Incomplete Application”).
(D) Expiration of Incomplete Applications
(1) If Notice of Incomplete Application is sent to the applicant, then the application for a permit shall expire on the forty-fifth (45th) calendar day after the date the application for a permit was filed if the application for a permit is not made complete by the applicant.
(2) Any filing fee paid may be retained by the City for reviewing the application for a permit for completeness.
a. Thereafter a new application for a permit, including but not limited to the filing fee, is required if the applicant wishes it to be considered.
(3) The City may send written notice to the applicant that the application for permit has expired, but it is not required to do so and failure of the City to send notice that a permit has expired, shall not prevent the permit from expiring.
(4) Failure to provide the requested items within the timeframe will result in the case file being closed on the 46th calendar day after date of application for a permit was filed. A new case with all fees will be required on all subsequent applications.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 246 Section 6: Development Review Procedures
6.07.02. Filed Applications
(A) Applications Received from the United States Postal Service
(1) If sent to the City by the United States Postal Service, an application for a permit shall be considered filed, if it is properly addressed, on the date of the United States Postmark stamped on the envelop or package containing the application, if it is legible; or
(2) If the date is not legible, the application for permit shall be considered filed on the date immediately preceding the date it is received by the City.
(B) Applications Received by Means other than the United States Postal Services or is Hand Delivered
(1) If sent to the City by means other than United States Postal Service or hand delivered, an application for a permit shall be considered filed on the date it is received by the City.
(2) If not properly addressed to the attention of the City’s Director of Development Services, an application for a permit shall be considered filed on the date it is received by the City’s Development Services Department.
(3) If hand delivered, applications for permits must be filed with a Director or other employee designated by the Director to receive the application for a permit.
a. Documents given to City staff, other than Planning Technicians or other designated employees, shall not be considered an application for a permit, including but not limited to documents given to City staff during a meeting.
(4) For purposes of this paragraph “properly addressed” means the envelope or container for delivery is labeled “Application Enclosed” conspicuously on the outside in at least 12 point font and is addressed to:
a. Director of Development Services
Development Services Department, 3rd Floor, Ste. C301
City of Frisco
6101 Frisco Square Blvd.
Frisco, TX 75034
6.07.03. Mandated Action for Permits
If an ordinance, law or regulation mandates that an application for permit be acted upon, or deemed approved by the City if it is not acted upon, within a specified time period that is too short to allow the City to wait for the documents or information required to be requested in a Notice of Incomplete Application, the City may process the application for a permit to determine whether it is approved or denied.
6.07.04. Zoning Applications
(A) Complete Applications Required
(1) No zoning application shall be accepted for filing or processing unless such request is accompanied by a completed application and all documents required by and prepared in accordance with the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and any other applicable ordinance and it is filed with the Director.
(B) Texas Local Government Code Chapter 245 does not apply to Zoning Applications
(1) Chapter 245 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, shall not apply to a zoning application or an ordinance establishing zoning since neither is a permit under this Zoning Ordinance or Chapter 245.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 6: Development Review Procedures Page | 247
(C) Denial of Zoning Applications.
(1) The acceptance or processing by any City official of a zoning application prior to the time a complete application is submitted hereby is deemed to be null and void and, upon discovery, shall be grounds for denial or revocation of such application.
(2) A typographical error shall not constitute an incomplete application.
(3) The applicant may be notified of such denial or revocation for an incomplete zoning application in writing.
6.07.05. No Accrual of Vested Rights from Specific Applications
No rights derived from Chapter 245 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, shall accrue from an application for a permit that expires, from an application for a permit that is denied or from an application that does not provide fair notice.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 248 Section 6: Development Review Procedures
Subsection 6.08. Dormant Development Projects / Expired Projects
6.08.01. Progress Towards Completion Defined
For purposes of this 6.08.01. Progress Towards Completion Defined, progress toward completion of the development of land shall be considered to have occurred if as of May 11, 2000:
(A) No Expiration Date
The approved application did not have an expiration date; and
(B) Progress Benchmarks
Any one or more of the following had occurred.
(1) An application for a Final Plat or plan was properly filed in accordance with City ordinances, and said Final Plat or plan has not expired.
(2) A good-faith attempt was made to file an application for a permit required to begin or continue towards completion of the development.
(3) Costs were incurred for developing the project, including, without limitation, costs associated with roadway, utility, and other infrastructure facilities designed to serve, in whole or in part, the development (but not including the cost of land acquisition) in the aggregate amount of five (5) percent of the most recent appraised value of the real property on which the project is located.
(4) Fiscal security was posted with the City, or other regulatory agency, to ensure performance of obligations required by City ordinances and/or regulatory agencies.
(5) Utility connection fees or impact fees for the project were paid to the appropriate authority or regulatory agency.
6.08.02. Expiration Date for Project and Permits Filed on or After September 1, 2005
(A) Projects
For projects commenced on or after September 1, 2005 by the filing of an application for a permit, the project shall expire on the fifth (5th) anniversary of the date the first application for a permit that was approved by the City was filed if there is no progress towards completion.
(1) Following expiration of a project, any new applications for permits submitted for a project shall be subject to the then existing regulations.
(B) Permits
Applications for a permit filed on or after September 1, 2005, for which the application does not expire pursuant to 6.07.01. Incomplete Application Procedures (Page 245) or for which the permit is subsequently approved, the application for a permit and/or the permit shall expire two (2) years from the date the application for a permit was filed if there is no progress towards completion.
6.08.03. Expiration Date for Permits Filed before September 1, 2005 and Approved on or after May 11, 1999
(A) Expiration Date Specified
Applications for permits and projects filed with the City before September 1, 2005 and approved on or after May 11, 1999 shall be valid for the period of time specified in the ordinances that existed on the date the application for permit was filed.
(B) No Expiration Date Specified
If the approved application did not have an expiration date, then the permit shall be valid for eighteen (18) months beginning on the date the application for permit was filed.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 6: Development Review Procedures Page | 249
Subsection 6.09. Variance Procedures
6.09.01. Purpose and Applicability
(A) Cases for which a Variance may be Granted
The Board of Adjustment may authorize, in specific cases, a variance of from the terms of a zoning ordinance for the following:
(1) Height,
(2) Yard,
(3) Lot Area,
(4) Exterior structure,
(5) Lot coverage,
(6) Off-street parking, and
(7) Loading requirements.
(B) Variance Criteria
A variance may be granted only if the Board finds that:
(1) The requested variance is not contrary to the public interest; and
(2) The requested variance does not violate the intent of the Zoning Ordinance, as amended; and
(3) The requested variance allows the spirit of the Zoning Ordinance to be observed and substantial justice done; and
(4) The requested variance would not cause injury to or restrict development on any other parcel of land; and
(5) The requested variance is not needed merely to promote economic gain or to prevent economic loss; and
(6) A literal enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance would result in an unnecessary hardship. An unnecessary hardship only exists when a variance is needed to permit development of a specific parcel of land that differs from other parcels of land by being of such a restrictive area, shape, or slope that it cannot be developed in a manner commensurate with the development upon other parcels of land with the same zoning; and
(7) The unnecessary hardship, if any, is neither self-created nor personal to the owner of the parcel of land.
(C) Variance Limitations
(1) Completed Action Required Before a Variance
An application or request for a variance shall not be heard or granted with regard to any parcel of property or portion thereof upon which a Preliminary Site Plan, Site Plan, Preliminary Plat or Final Plat, when required by the Zoning Ordinance or the Subdivision Ordinance for any parcel of property or portion thereof, has not been finally acted upon by both the Planning & Zoning Commission and, where required, by the City Council.
(2) Exhausted all Other Options
The administrative procedures and requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, and any amendments thereto, with regard to both the Planning & Zoning Commission and City Council consideration and action, on Preliminary Site Plans, Site Plans, Preliminary Plats, and Final Plats, must be exhausted prior to requesting a variance.
(D) Public Hearing Required
(1) The Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing for each variance applicant and shall provide the notice and public hearing required by this ordinance.
(2) At the public hearing, the Board of Adjustment shall consider public comments, the Director’s recommendation, and other applicable information and shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the variance application.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 250 Section 6: Development Review Procedures
Subsection 6.10. Special Exception for Building Official Error
6.10.01. Special Exception Criteria
The Board may issue a special exception to grant nonconforming status for a structure that did not conform to this Ordinance when it was constructed or established, if the Board finds:
(A) The nonconformity was clearly and specifically shown in plans and specifications duly submitted to obtain a City permit;
(B) Before the work was done, neither the owner, the designer, the surveyor, the contractor nor any other person assisting with the work knew about the nonconformity;
(C) The nonconformity was clearly covered by the City permit (the same permit for which the plans and specifications were submitted), and the permit was otherwise regularly issued;
(D) After learning of the nonconformity, the owner promptly conferred with the administrative official and voluntarily halted any further nonconforming work;
(E) The item will cause no health or safety hazard and no significant impact upon another person or property; and
(F) The item can be brought into conformity with this Ordinance within the time period specified in the special exception, at a modest or reasonable cost.
(1) Exception: Bringing the item into conformity need not be required if the Board finds that the impact of the item on other persons or properties is either nil or extremely small.
6.10.02. Time to Comply; Conditions
No such special exception is effective unless it specifies a time period within which the item must be brought into conformity with this Ordinance (if required; see above). Nonconforming status granted for a specified time period is lost when the specified time period expires or if ownership is sooner transferred (unless the new owner acknowledges both the special exception and the date the time period expires, by written instrument filed with the administrative official before the transfer). Any special exception issued under this section may contain conditions designed to:
(A) Reduce nonconformity;
(B) Mitigate (or compensate for) the effects of nonconformity;
(C) Achieve conformity sooner than the specified time period; or
(D) Any combination of the foregoing.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 6: Development Review Procedures Page | 251
Subsection 6.11. Amortization of Nonconforming Uses
6.11.01. Initiation of Compliance Case
Only the City Council, by majority vote, may request that the Board of Adjustment consider establishing a compliance date for a nonconforming use.
6.11.02. Public Hearing Process
Upon receiving a request under 6.11.01. Initiation of Compliance Case from the City Council, staff shall schedule the First Public Hearing before the Board. The Board may establish a compliance date only after holding two separate hearings.
(A) First Public Hearing
The Board shall hold a public hearing to determine whether continued operation of the nonconforming use will have an adverse effect on nearby properties. If, based on the evidence presented at the public hearing, the Board determines that continued operation of the use will have an adverse effect on nearby properties, it shall schedule a second public hearing to establish a compliance date for the nonconforming use; otherwise, it shall not. In determining whether the continued operation will have an adverse effect on nearby properties, the Board shall consider the following factor
(1) The character of the surrounding neighborhood.
(2) The degree of incompatibility of the use with the zoning district in which it is located.
(3) The manner in which the use is being conducted.
(4) The hours of operation of the use.
(5) The extent to which continued operation of the use may threaten public health or safety.
(6) The environmental impacts of the use's operation, including but not limited to the impacts of noise, glare, dust, and odor.
(7) The extent to which public disturbances and nuisances may be created or perpetuated by continued operation of the use.
(8) The extent to which traffic or parking problems may be created or perpetuated by continued operation of the use.
(9) Any other factors relevant to the issue of whether continued operation of the use will adversely affect nearby properties.
(10) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, the Board cannot amortize a use described in 6.01.01. (C)(1) unless it finds that the use is a nuisance and/or that the use presents a risk of imminent destruction of property or injury to persons.
(B) Second Public Hearing
(1) If the Board has determined in the first public hearing that the nonconforming use has an adverse effect on nearby properties, it shall hold a second public hearing to set a date for compliance. The Board shall, in accordance with the law, provide a compliance date for the nonconforming use under a plan whereby the owner's actual investment in the use before the time that the use became nonconforming can be amortized within a definite time period. The following factors must be considered by the Board in determining a reasonable amortization period.
a. The owner's capital investment in structures, fixed equipment, and other assets (excluding inventory and other assets that may be feasibly transferred to another site) on the property before the time the use became nonconforming.
b. Any costs that are directly attributable to the establishment of a compliance date, including demolition expenses, relocation expenses, termination of leases, and discharge of mortgages.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 252 Section 6: Development Review Procedures
c. Any return on investment since inception of the use, including net income and depreciation.
d. The anticipated annual recovery of investment, including net income and depreciation.
e. A reasonable wind-up period for the nonconforming use.
(2) If the Board, at the first public hearing, requests financial documentation and/or records from the owner relating to the factors listed directly above, the owner shall provide said documents and/or records at least thirty (30) days before the second public hearing. If the owner does not provide said documentation, the Board is authorized to make its determination of a compliance date based upon any reasonably available public records as well as public testimony at the hearing. Failure by owner to provide the requested financial documents and records shall not prevent the Board from setting a compliance date.
6.11.03. Ceasing Operations
If the Board establishes a compliance date for a nonconforming use, the use must cease operations on that date and it may not operate thereafter unless it becomes a conforming use.
6.11.04. Definitions
For purposes of this subsection, "owner" means the owner of the nonconforming use at the time of the Board's determination of a compliance date for the nonconforming use.
6.11.05. Finality of Decisions
(A) Decisions that cannot be Immediately Appealed
A decision by the Board that the continued operation of a nonconforming use will have an adverse effect on neighboring property and the Board’s decision to schedule a second public hearing to establish a compliance date are not final decisions and cannot be immediately appealed.
(B) Decision to Deny a Request to Establish a Compliance Date
A decision by the Board to deny a request to establish a compliance date is final unless appealed to state court within ten (10) calendar days in accordance with Chapter 211 of the Local Government Code.
(C) Decision Setting a Compliance Date
A decision by the Board setting a compliance date is final unless appealed to state court within ten (10) calendar days in accordance with Chapter 211 of the Local Government Code.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 6: Development Review Procedures Page | 253
Subsection 6.12. Reinstatement of Nonconforming Rights
(A) Loss of Nonconforming Rights Status
If the Director and/or his designee determines that a nonconforming use has been permanently abandoned under 1.06.04. (B) Reinstatement of Nonconforming Use Rights (Page 16) and has lost its nonconforming rights, the use shall not be instituted on that parcel or other parcel in any district which does not permit the discontinued use.
(B) Notice to Owner and/or Operator Required
Notice of this determination shall be made in writing to the owner and/or operator of the abandoned nonconforming use.
(C) Application for Nonconforming Rights Reinstatement
(1) The owner and/or operator of the abandoned nonconforming use may submit a written application to the Board to have the nonconforming rights reinstated.
(2) Written application for reinstatement of nonconforming rights must be made within ten (10) business days after the Director and/or his designee issues the written notice of determination that a use has been permanently abandoned.
(D) Board Decision
The Board may reinstate nonconforming rights only if the Board finds there was a clear intent not to abandon the use even though the use was discontinued for six (6) months or more. The failure of the owner and/or operator to remove on-premise signs shall not be considered (on its own) evidence of a clear intent not to abandon the use.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 254 Section 6: Development Review Procedures
Subsection 6.13. Landscape Plan Review
6.13.01. Process
(A) Landscape Plan Approval
(1) The provisions of this Subsection shall be administered and enforced by the Director.
(2) The required landscape documents within 4.02.02. (C) Landscape Plan (Page 123) shall be submitted for review with the Preliminary Site Plan and Site Plan required in Subsection 6.05 Site Plan Requirements (Page 232) of this Ordinance.
(3) Permits for building, paving, utilities, or construction shall not be issued prior to an approval and construction release of required landscape documents by the City, unless approved by the Director.
(4) Tree preservation requirements shall be met prior to construction release with a tree permit obtained pursuant to Subsection 4.01 Tree Preservation Requirements (Page 116), prior to removal of trees and existing site vegetation.
(5) An approved Landscape Plan shall expire at the same time that the approved Site Plan with which it was submitted expires.
6.13.02. Review Criteria
(A) Objectives
The following criteria shall be used to evaluate proposed Landscape Plans.
(1) The landscape design should have proportion, balance, unity, variety of species, and a variety of color throughout the seasons.
(2) Landscape designs should define spaces including entrance areas, pedestrian paths, vehicular avenues, parking areas, sitting areas, etc.
(3) As an architectural feature, landscape designs should visually soften the mass of the buildings, parking areas, and other structures.
(4) Indigenous landscape materials should be selected whenever feasible.
(5) Landscaping should:
a. Reduce the reliance on irrigation, thus conserving the public water supply;
b. Minimize erosion pursuant to best management practices acceptable the Director of Engineering Services;
c. Allow groundwater recharge pursuant to practices approved by the Director of Engineering Services;
d. Shade seating, walking and outdoor activity areas;
e. Provide a barrier between vehicles and pedestrians;
f. Diminish the intrusion of headlights and other glare;
g. Provide a natural habitat for birds and other wildlife;
h. Shield buildings from winter wind and summer sun thereby conserving energy; and
i. Enhance overall character and ecological function of the site through and restoration of native vegetation, and eradication of invasive species.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 6: Development Review Procedures Page | 255
Subsection 6.14. PD Application and Review
6.14.01. Planned Development Requirements
(A) Modified Development Requirements
Development requirements for each PD District shall be set forth in the amending Ordinance granting the PD District and shall include, but may not be limited to standards listed in the following documents:
(1) Zoning Ordinance;
(2) Subdivision Ordinance;
(3) Engineering Design Standards and Construction Details;
(4) Sign Ordinance; and
(5) Other requirements as the City Council and Planning & Zoning Commission may deem appropriate.
(B) Reference Base Zoning District
When referencing a base zoning district, the PD ordinance will not have to provide any of the references listed in 6.14.01. (A) above unless they vary from the zoning district requirements.
(C) Different Standards List
(1) All applications to the City for PD zoning shall list all requested standards differing from the normal requirements set forth throughout this Ordinance and related City development requirements.
(2) All applications without this list will be considered incomplete.
(3) The list shall be provided in the form of a comparison table that lists all current standards and the corresponding proposed standards for the PD District.
(4) The applicant shall provide written justification for the PD request and associated standards, including a statement of impact on public health, safety, and welfare.
(D) Two PD Types
Two types of PDs can be requested, an overlay PD and a free-standing PD, described below.
(1) Overlay PD District: In the overlay PD District, uses shall conform to the standards and regulations of the base zoning district.
a. The particular zoning district must be stated in the granting ordinance.
(2) Free-Standing PD District: In the free-standing PD District, any use may be allowed for any district that is listed in this Ordinance.
a. All standards and uses shall be outlined within the granting ordinance and the PD shall be in conformance with the purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Plan.
b. A base zoning district shall be assigned and stated within the granting ordinance at the time of City Council approval of the ordinance.
c. This base zoning district will be used when any specific regulations are not listed in the granting ordinance.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 256 Section 6: Development Review Procedures
(E) PD Application Materials Submitted
An applicant for a PD District shall submit all materials required by this Zoning Ordinance, including but not limited to 6.14.01. (C) above, with the application.
(1) The Director shall send written notice, within fourteen (14) calendar days after the date the application is filed, to any applicant that has submitted incomplete materials stating the remaining documents or other information needed to make the application complete.
(2) The application for a PD District shall expire on the forty-fifth (45th) calendar day after the date the application was filed if the applicant fails to submit the remaining documents or other information needed to make the application complete on or before such forty-fifth (45th) calendar day.
(3) In addition, the applicant is encouraged to conduct a neighborhood meeting with area homeowners within the vicinity of the request prior to appearing before the Planning & Zoning Commission. The applicant shall notify the Director of any scheduled neighborhood meetings at least seven (7) calendar days prior the meeting.
(F) PD District Map (Zoning Exhibit “A”)
The PD District Map shall include all lands within the PD district and adjacent properties.
(1) The Director shall establish all dimensional requirements for PD District Maps.
(G) Development Schedule
A development schedule may be requested by staff, the Planning & Zoning Commission, or the City Council at any time during the PD request process.
(H) Conformity
The PD District standards shall conform to all other sections of this Ordinance unless specifically excluded or modified in the granting ordinance.
(I) Minimum Net Acreage
The minimum net acreage for a PD request shall be fifteen (15) acres unless a specific finding is made by the City Council that the establishment of the district is required to implement the Comprehensive Plan, a strategic focus area, a special project, or any other purpose (see Section 6.14.04. Infill Development Standards for Planned Developments (Page 257)).
6.14.02. Appropriate Plans and Standards for Planned Developments (Zoning Exhibit “B” and “C”)
In establishing a PD District in accordance with this section, the City Council shall approve and file as part of the amending ordinance appropriate plans and standards for each PD District, which shall be attached as Zoning Exhibit “B” to the PD ordinance.
(A) Proposed Standards
Zoning Exhibit “B” shall outline the list of proposed standards for the PD.
(B) Different Standards for Different Tracts
If different standards will be applied to different tracts within the PD, then separate regulations for each tract shall be specified.
(C) Additional Requirements (Zoning Exhibit “C”)
(1) If the proposed PD is amending uses only, nothing additional is required unless supplemental information is necessary to clarify the request.
(2) If the proposed PD amends any other standards, a zoning exhibit of the proposed PD will be
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 6: Development Review Procedures Page | 257
required (which shall be attached as Zoning Exhibit “C” to the PD ordinance), unless otherwise determined by the Director.
(3) Zoning Exhibit “C” shall facilitate understanding of the request during the review and public hearing process, and will serve as a guide for future development within the PD District.
(4) If required, the Zoning Exhibit “C” shall reflect the overall layout of the entire development and the Director shall maintain a list of required details within the Development Handbook.
(5) If the PD is nonresidential and/or mixed use in nature, the Zoning Exhibit “C” shall also include but not be limited to building dimensions and location, structure height, uses, parking specifications, floor area ratio and lot coverage, open space specifications, drainage features, landscaping and trees, floodplain/riparian details, and architectural style or elevations for illustrative purposes.
(6) The City may require further written documentation that describes and explains the Exhibit “C” layout.
(7) The Exhibit “C” shall in no way vest rights for the property that are outside the regulations of the Zoning Ordinance and other applicable City ordinances, as they currently exist or shall be amended.
6.14.03. Mixed Use Standards for Planned Developments
(A) Mixed Use Standards
A PD may be requested to encourage mixed use development that utilizes characteristics similar to the following mixed use standards.
(1) Mixed use may be accomplished by a vertical mixing of varying uses within the same building or group of buildings.
(2) Mixed use may be accomplished by a new urbanism design or traditional neighborhood development (see 6.14.05. below).
(3) Mixed use development shall be compatible with adjacent properties.
(4) Mixed use developments shall integrate open space.
(5) Mixed use developments shall be located along major thoroughfares wherever possible. A Traffic Impact Analysis will be required unless it is waived by the Director.
(6) Mixed use planned development ordinances shall contain architectural standards that tie the entirety of the development together.
6.14.04. Infill Development Standards for Planned Developments
(A) PD for Developing or Redeveloping Infill Sites
A Planned Development may be used for the purpose of developing or redeveloping infill sites such as those in older areas or those that have remained vacant and are currently surrounded by development on fifty (50) percent or more of their perimeter.
(B) Resource Guides
(1) The Director shall maintain resource guides regarding infill development for Planned Developments. These are to be referenced as guidelines only. The use of these specific guidelines for infill developments shall be subject to City Council approval.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 258 Section 6: Development Review Procedures
6.14.05. New Urbanism Planned Developments
(A) Purpose
A PD may be used for the purpose of creating a new urbanism neighborhood.
(B) New Urbanism Criteria
When the claim is made that the purpose of a PD is for new urbanism purposes, the applicant shall use the following criteria to qualify the PD.
(1) Uses
The creation of neighborhoods with a range of uses and housing types (i.e., mixed uses). Commercial uses and more intensive residential uses are frequently located in a neighborhood center.
(2) Design Focus
Limits on the size, location, and design of buildings as opposed to the strict separation of uses.
(3) Interconnected Streets
An interconnected network of streets that are safe also designed for pedestrians and which provide a variety of routes for local traffic.
(4) Transportation Options
A range of transportation options are available due to the pattern of streets and the proximity of various land uses.
(5) Public Spaces
High quality public space (greenbelts, parks, plazas and streets) are an organizing feature and gathering place for the neighborhood.
(C) Statement of Purpose
In the case of a new urbanism development, the statement of purpose and intent shall describe how the proposed development will be in compliance with the above criteria.
(1) The Director shall maintain a listing of resources identifying textual and visual references for new urbanism concepts.
(2) The use and application of standards from these references will be evaluated by staff prior to the presentation of the PD to the Planning & Zoning Commission.
6.14.06. Form-Based Code Manual Requirement for Planned Developments
The procedure for establishing a Planned Development District shall incorporate applicable sections of the Form-Based Code Manual, listed in Subsection 9.07 Form-Based Code Manual (Page 332) as it currently exists or may be amended.
6.14.07. District Procedures for Planned Developments
The procedure for establishing a PD District shall follow the procedure for zoning amendments as set forth in Subsection 6.06 Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance / Districts and Administrative Procedures (Page 241). This procedure is further expanded as follows for approval of Zoning Exhibit “C”.
(A) Zoning Exhibit “C” Approval
The Planning & Zoning Commission and City Council may approve the Exhibit “C,” separately or jointly in public hearings. A single public hearing for the PD request may be adequate when:
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 6: Development Review Procedures Page | 259
(1) The applicant submits adequate data with the request for the Planned Development (PD) District to fulfill the requirement; or
(2) Information on the Zoning Exhibit “C” and attached application is sufficient to determine the appropriate use of the land.
(B) Zoning Exhibit “C” Approval Prerequisite
The Ordinance establishing the PD District shall not be approved until the Zoning Exhibit “C” is approved, if required.
(C) PD Amendment Procedure (Minor and Major Amendments)
The procedure for amending a PD is based upon the type of change being proposed and shall follow the guidelines regarding minor amendments and major amendments, as follows:
(1) Minor PD Amendment
a. A minor amendment to a PD shall be requested at the time of Preliminary Site Plan, is subject to approval by the Planning & Zoning Commission, and shall be defined as a change that meets the following standards:
1. Does not propose any new general type of use beyond those approved initially;
2. Does not increase heights of buildings or floor area ratio;
3. Does not decrease the amount of open space being provided and/or the residential density of the PD; and/or
4. Does not change access, circulation, or infrastructure in a way that would impact surrounding properties.
b. A minor amendment shall be submitted at the time of the development application, and the application shall include supporting data with an outline of any minor amendments being proposed on the plan(s).
c. For appeals, see Subsection 6.19 Appeals and the Appeal Process (Page 268).
(2) Major PD Amendment
Where an amendment to a PD does not meet the criteria of a minor amendment, a major amendment to a PD shall be processed through the normal PD procedure as described herein. The process will require reconsideration of the entire PD with the amendment. In the case of amending a portion or tract of the PD, the following actions are required:
a. Signatures of all property owners within the PD on the application for the PD request;
b. Public notification to all the property owners within the PD in addition to property owners within 200 feet of the tract; and
c. The three-fourths (¾) majority vote shall apply to the property owners within two hundred (200) feet of the tract being re-zoned.
6.14.08. Impact Report for Planned Developments
(A) Written Report
When a PD District is being considered, a written report from the Director, discussing the impact on public infrastructure, City services, and parks, environmental, and written comments from the applicable public school district may be submitted to the Planning & Zoning Commission prior to the Commission making any recommendations to the City Council.
(B) Denial
In the event written comments are not forthcoming in a reasonable amount of time, the Commission may, at its discretion, deny the request.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 260 Section 6: Development Review Procedures
6.14.09. Zoning Map and PD List
All PD Districts approved in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance in its original form, or by subsequent amendments thereto, shall be referenced on the Zoning District Map, and a list of such Planned Development Districts, together with the category of uses permitted therein, shall be listed and maintained as part of this ordinance in Subsection 9.02 Planned Developments (Page 328).
6.14.10. City-Initiated Zoning Change for Planned Developments
The Planning & Zoning Commission or the City Council on its own motion may initiate a zoning change to a PD designation if it finds that public benefit will be derived from consideration of such matter. Refer to 6.06.01. Authority to Amend Ordinance (Page 241) in this Zoning Ordinance, as it exists or may be amended, for zoning or rezoning procedures.
6.14.11. Existing Planned Development Ordinances
The Planned Development District Ordinances listed in Subsection 9.02 Planned Developments (Page 328) (the "Existing Ordinances") are PD Ordinances previously adopted by the City Council. These Existing Ordinances are affected by the amendments to this Zoning Ordinance according to the following guidelines.
(A) Existing PD Regulations Established by Reference to a Previous Zoning Ordinance Amended
(1) Any allowable uses and/or development standards set forth in the Existing Ordinances that are established by reference to a previously adopted zoning ordinances, such as Ordinance No. 84-02-03 or No.93-07-11, shall be governed by the allowable uses and/or development standards established in this Zoning Ordinance for the applicable zoning district shown on the equivalency table, Subsection 2.02 Equivalency Table (Page 21).
(B) Existing PD Regulations not Established by Reference to a Previous Zoning Ordinance Remain
(1) Any allowable uses and/or development standards set forth in the Existing Ordinances that are not established by reference to a previously adopted zoning ordinances, such as Ordinance No. 84-02-03 or No. 93-07-11 shall be governed by the allowable uses and/or development standards set forth in the Existing Ordinances.
(C) All other Applicable PD Provision Amended
Except as provided above, all other provisions of the Existing Ordinances are amended by this Zoning Ordinance, and to the extent amended, development shall be governed by the terms and conditions of this Zoning Ordinance.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 6: Development Review Procedures Page | 261
Subsection 6.15. Specific Use Permit (SUP) Application and Review
6.15.01. Specific Uses Permit Regulations and Procedures
(A) Compatibility Considerations
The City Council and the Planning & Zoning Commission in considering any request for Specific Use Permit shall only approve such request after they have determined that the use or uses allowed will not be detrimental to the adjacent properties or to the City as a whole.
The Director, City Council and the Planning & Zoning Commission may require from the applicant any plans, information, operational data, and expert evaluation concerning the location, function, and characteristics of the proposed use or buildings.
The City Council when establishing a Specific Use Permit, and the Planning & Zoning Commission when making a recommendation concerning a Specific Use Permit, shall establish conditions and regulations, in addition to those of the base zoning district, necessary to protect the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the neighborhood and/or the City. In addition, the use shall be in general conformance with the Comprehensive Plan and general objectives of the City. These conditions may include but are not limited to:
(1) Paving of streets, alleys, and sidewalks,
(2) Means of ingress and egress to public streets,
(3) Provisions for drainage,
(4) Adequate off-street parking,
(5) Protective screening, landscaping, and open space,
(6) Area or security lighting,
(7) The locations and heights of structures,
(8) Architectural compatibility of buildings,
(9) Intensity of the use, and
(10) Adequate traffic circulation required to contain all stacking activity on the site.
(B) Imposed Conditions for Approval
(1) In granting a Specific Use Permit, the City Council may impose conditions which shall be complied with by the owner or grantee before a certificate of occupancy may be issued by the Chief Building Official for use of the building on such property pursuant to such Specific Use Permit and such conditions precedent to the granting of the certificate of occupancy.
(2) Any special conditions shall be set forth in writing in the ordinance granting the SUP.
(C) Compliance Mandatory with Written Requirements
No Specific Use Permit shall be granted unless the applicant, owner and grantee of the Specific Use Permit shall be willing to accept and agree to be bound by and comply with the written requirements of the Specific Use Permit, as attached to the Preliminary Site Plan or Site Plan drawing(s) and approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission and City Council.
(D) Timing
(1) If required, a building permit shall be applied for and secured within six (6) months from the time of granting the Specific Use Permit, provided however, that the City Council may authorize an extension of this time upon recommendation by the Planning & Zoning Commission and City Council may review the Site Plan for continued validity.
(2) If the Site Plan is determined invalid, the property owner(s) must submit a new or revised Site Plan for approval prior to any construction or application for building permit for the area designated for the Specific Use Permit.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 262 Section 6: Development Review Procedures
(E) Enlargement, Modification, or Structural Alternation
(1) A building, premise, or land used under a Specific Use Permit may be enlarged, modified, structurally altered, or otherwise changed provided the changes do not:
a. Increase the height of structures, including antenna support structures;
b. Increase building square footage from its size at the time the original Specific Use Permit was granted by greater than ten (10) percent;
c. Reduce the distance between a building or noise-generating activity on the property and an adjacent, off-site residential use. This provision shall not apply should the property and the residential use be separated by a major thoroughfare depicted on the City’s Thoroughfare Plan; or
d. Reduce the amount of open space as indicated on the previously approved zoning exhibit.
(2) All other enlargements, modifications, structural alterations, or changes shall require the approval of a new Specific Use Permit. Antennas may be placed on antenna support structure that is already permitted by an existing Specific Use Permit without approval of a separate Specific Use Permit subject to approval of a Final Plat and Site Plan for the property if appropriate.
(F) Board of Adjustment Exclusion
The Board of Adjustment shall not have jurisdiction to hear, review, reverse, or modify any decision, determination, or ruling with respect to the specific land use designated by any Specific Use Permit.
(G) Zoning Map
(1) When the City Council authorized granting of a Specific Use Permit, the Zoning Map shall be amended according to its legend to indicate that the affected area has conditional and limited uses, and said amendment is to indicate the appropriate zoning district for the approved use and prefixed by an “S” designation.
(2) Specific Use Permits granted shall be indicated by numerical designation on the Zoning District Map.
(3) Subsection 9.03 Specific Use Permits (Page 328) of this Ordinance shall list by the numerical designate each SUP and the conditions of approval.
(4) Specific Use Permits are issued to the property.
(H) Amend, Change, or Rescind a Specific Use Permit
Upon holding a properly notified public hearing, the City Council may amend, change, or rescind a Specific Use Permit after recommendation by the Planning & Zoning Commission if:
(1) There is a violation and conviction of any of the provisions of this ordinance or any ordinance of the City that occurs on the property for which the Specific Use Permit is granted;
(2) The building, premise, or land uses under a Specific Use Permit is enlarged, modified, structurally altered, or otherwise significantly changed without approval of a separate Specific Use Permit for such enlargement, modification, structural alteration, or change;
(3) Violation of any provision of the terms or conditions of a Specific Use Permit;
(4) Ad valorem taxes on the property are delinquent by more than six (6) months;
(5) The Specific Use Permit was obtained by fraud or with deception; or
(6) The advertisement of a zoning change or Specific Use Permit shall be initiated by staff upon receipt of applicant’s written response to staff’s recommendation. The response shall indicate whether the applicant agrees or disagrees with the staff recommendation. Where the applicant disagrees with any portion of the recommendation, the applicant shall cite the reasons for the disagreement.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 6: Development Review Procedures Page | 263
Subsection 6.16. Façade Plan Review
6.16.01. Applicability
An approved façade plan is required prior to issuance of a building permit for the following developments.
(A) OTR and OTC Districts
All new construction shall require an approved façade plan.
(B) MF-15 and MF-19 Districts
All new multifamily residential construction
(C) PRO and TO Zoning Districts
All new nonresidential construction
(D) All Nonresidential and Mixed Use Zoning Development
All nonresidential and mixed use development
6.16.02. Façade Plan Review Criteria
(A) OTR and OTC Review Criteria
(1) OTR – Original Town Residential District
All new construction shall comply with the following section.
a. 4.07.09. (E) OTR Façade Plan Requirement (Page 180)
b. Subsection 9.06 Downtown Architectural Design Standards; OTC & OTR (Page 331)
(2) OTC – Original Town Commercial District
All new construction development shall comply with the following section.
a. 4.07.09. (F) OTC Façade Plan Requirement (Page 181)
b. Subsection 9.06 Downtown Architectural Design Standards; OTC & OTR (Page 331)
(B) MF-15 and MF-19 Review Criteria
(1) Buildings with the same façade and/or architectural features may not face each other, except as otherwise approved by the Director.
(2) All new multifamily residential construction shall comply with 4.12.03. Multifamily – Building Orientation and Construction (Page 207).
(C) PRO and TO Review Criteria
(1) PRO – Preston Road Overlay District
All new nonresidential construction shall comply with the following section.
1. 2.05.04. (D)(5) PRO Exterior Appearance of Buildings and Structures (Page 59)
2. 2.05.04. (D)(6) PRO Building Materials and Colors Page (59)
3. Subsection 4.09 Nonresidential Design Standards (Page 193)
(2) TO – Tollway Overlay District
All new nonresidential and mixed use construction shall comply with the following section.
1. 2.05.05. (F)(2) Tollway Overlay Exterior Appearance of Buildings/Structures (Page 82)
2. Subsection 4.09 Nonresidential Design Standards (Page 193)
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 264 Section 6: Development Review Procedures
(D) All Nonresidential Development Review Criteria
(1) All nonresidential buildings shall comply with the following section.
a. 4.07.09. Exterior Construction of Main Buildings (Page 179)
b. Subsection 4.09 Nonresidential Design Standards (Page 193)
6.16.03. Façade Plan Application Process
(A) Application Requirements
The Director will establish, maintain, and revise as necessary the application requirements for the façade plan review.
(B) Required Façade Plans Submittals
(1) OTC, OTR, MF-15, MF-19, PRO, TO, and all nonresidential and mixed use development.
a. The applicant may submit a preliminary façade plan and sample material boards with the Preliminary Site Plan application for all new development as specified above to ensure consistency and compatibility for all buildings within a development.
1. The purpose of the preliminary façade plan is to ensure consistency and compatibility for all buildings within a single development.
2. The preliminary façade plan is required for every Preliminary Site Plan.
b. The applicant shall submit a final façade plan and sample material boards with the Final Site Plan application to ensure minimum requirements have been met.
c. If a Site Plan is not required, then the applicant will submit a façade plan application without a Site Plan prior to building permit approval.
(C) Façade Plan Review
(1) The Director shall review the façade plan application for compliance with this Ordinance and standards referenced herein.
a. Façade plans will be used only to ensure minimum standards are met.
(2) Corporate identities that conflict with the building design criteria but meet the overall design intent of the applicable regulations may be reviewed on a case by case basis and approved by the Director.
(D) Façade Plan Approval
(1) The Director may approve or deny the façade plan application based on compliance or violation of this Ordinance and standards referenced herein.
(2) Corporate identities that conflict with the building design criteria but meet the overall design intent of the applicable regulations may be approved be reviewed on a case by case basis and approved by the Director.
(E) Façade Plan Denial
(1) If the Director denies the façade plan, the Director shall send the applicant a report with the reason for the denial.
(F) For appeals, see Subsection 6.19 Appeals and the Appeal Process (Page 268).
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 6: Development Review Procedures Page | 265
Subsection 6.17. Historic Landmark Procedures
6.17.01. “HL” Designation Criteria
(A) In making an “HL” designation, the Planning & Zoning Commission and City Council shall consider one or more of the following criteria.
(1) Character, interest or value as a part of the development, heritage or cultural characteristics of the City, Counties of Collin and Denton, State of Texas, or United States.
(2) Location as the site of a significant historic event.
(3) Identification of a person or persons who significantly contributed to the culture and development of the City.
(4) Exemplifications of the cultural, economic, social or historical heritage of the City.
(5) Portrayal of the environment of a group of people in an era of history characterized by a distinctive architectural style.
(6) Embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an architectural type of specimen.
(7) Identification as the work of an architect or master builder whose individual work has influenced the development of the City.
(8) Embodiment of elements of architectural design, detail, materials or craftsmanship.
(9) Relationship to other distinctive buildings, sites or areas which are eligible for preservation according to a plan based on historic, cultural or architectural theme.
(10) Unique location of singular physical characteristics representing an established and familiar visual feature of a neighborhood community of the City.
(11) Archaeological value in that is has produced or can be expected to produce data affecting theories of historic or prehistoric interest.
(12) Value as an aspect of community sentiment or public pride.
(B) The applicant shall provide responses to the Director regarding the criteria listed above.
6.17.02. Demolition Review for Historic Landmarks
(A) Purpose
(1) The demolition review process is established to encourage alternatives to the demolition of properties which have received a historical designation.
(2) This review applies only to those properties which have received an “HL” designation by the City Council.
(B) Demolition Review Procedure
(1) Certificate of Appropriateness for Demolition Required
No structure, or any portion of a structure, which has received an “HL” designation may be demolished without City Council approval of a Certificate of Appropriateness for demolition upon recommendation from the Planning & Zoning Commission.
(2) Demolition Application Process
a. Any application for demolition will be submitted to the Director who will then schedule the permit application for the next available Planning & Zoning Commission meeting.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 266 Section 6: Development Review Procedures
b. City staff will forward with the application a recommendation regarding the condition of the building, the reasonableness of the cost of restoration or repair, the purpose of preserving the designated structure, and any other factors deemed appropriate for consideration.
(3) Demolition for Health and Safety Reasons
In instances where the Chief Building Official and/or the Fire Chief or their representatives determines that the continued existence of a structure poses extreme health or safety dangers to the public, they may institute demolition proceedings without action by the Planning & Zoning Commission and the City Council.
6.17.03. Economic Hardship for Demolition of Historic Landmarks
(A) Criteria
If an applicant’s Certificate of Appropriateness for proposed demolition has been denied, then the applicant may apply for relief on the ground of hardship. In order to prove the existence of a hardship, the applicant shall establish, to the satisfaction of the City Council, that:
(1) The property is incapable of earning a reasonable return, regardless of whether that return represents the most profitable return possible;
(2) The property cannot be adapted for any other use, whether by the current owner or by a purchaser, which would result in a reasonable return;
(3) Efforts to find a purchaser interested in acquiring the property and preserving it have failed; and/or,
(4) The structure or property is in irreparably damaged condition and as such poses a nuisance to the surrounding area and is a “threat” to the health, safety and general welfare of the community.
(B) Procedure
(1) In cases where the City Council denies a Certificate of Appropriateness for demolition, an applicant may commence the hardship process. No building permit or demolition permit shall be issued unless the City Council makes a finding that a hardship exists.
(2) The City Council may hold a public hearing on the hardship application at which time an opportunity will be provided for proponents and opponents of the application to present their views.
(3) The applicant shall consult in good faith with the City Council, local preservation groups and interested parties in a diligent effort to seek an alternative that will result in preservation of the property.
(4) All decisions of the City Council shall be in writing. A copy shall be sent to the applicant and a copy filed with the City Secretary’s office for public inspection. The City Council’s decision shall state the reasons for granting or denying the hardship application.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 6: Development Review Procedures Page | 267
Subsection 6.18. Alternative Compliance Standards
Alternative compliance is a method for the Director, P&Z, or City Council to approve predetermined alternative compliance standards listed throughout this Zoning Ordinance. These predetermined alternative compliance standards may not be suitable for all scenarios of land development. The purpose of the alternative compliance standards is to allow for different standards that are in agreement with the City’s Comprehensive Plan and will produce an equal level of results as intended by the original development standards.
6.18.01. Applicability
Alternative compliance standards are only applicable to properties zoned nonresidential and designated as mixed use within the Comprehensive Plan or properties zoned nonresidential within the PRO – Preston Road Overlay District or TO – Tollway Overlay District. The following standards are eligible for alternative compliance standards.
(1) Front Yard Setbacks
May not adversely affect or potentially adversely affect adjacent residential property.
(2) Building Heights
May not adversely affect or potentially adversely affect adjacent residential property.
(3) Façade Requirements
Alternative building materials and designs of similar quality shall be used.
(4) Land Uses
Apply only to vertical mixed use, where appropriate based on the Comprehensive Plan.
6.18.02. Action Required
The Director shall process alternative compliance standards requests as outlined in 6.18.04. Approval Process (Page 267).
6.18.03. Review and Approval Criteria
(A) Comprehensive Plan
The alternative compliance standard shall be in agreement with and promote concepts from the Comprehensive Plan.
(B) An Equal or Greater Level of Intensity
The alternative compliance standard shall be in compliance with the standards outlined in the Form-Based Code Manual.
(C) Building Orientation/Pedestrian Environment
The alternative compliance standard promotes the concept of orienting buildings close to the street and/or sidewalk to enhance the pedestrian environment.
(D) Redevelopment
Redevelopment considerations with attention toward out parcels, parking areas, vehicular circulation, building layout, and connectivity to surrounding streets and trails/sidewalks.
6.18.04. Approval Process
Approval of an alternative compliance standards application subject to the approval chart below. For appeals, see Subsection 6.19 Appeals and the Appeal Process (Page 268).
Standard
Director Approval
P&Z Approval
City Council Approval
Front Yard Setbacks
X
Building Heights
X
Façade Requirements
X
Land Uses
X
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 268 Section 6: Development Review Procedures
Subsection 6.19. Appeals and the Appeal Process
This section establishes the appeal process for different applicants. All appeals are not processed in the same manner. Appeals are based on an applicant’s judgment that the person or body rendering a Zoning Ordinance decision may be incorrect in either the process to reach a decision or in the decision itself.
6.19.01. Summary of Appeal Applications
Appeals and Appeal Process
Section Number
Application
Page
6.19.02.
Appeal of a Denial of a Unlisted Commercial Stealth Antenna
268
6.19.03.
Appeal of a Temporary Building Decision to Council
268
6.19.04.
Appeal of a Rescinded Shared Parking Agreement Approval
269
6.19.05.
Appeal of a Temporary Outdoor Lighting Decision
269
6.19.06.
Appeal of a Residential Cluster Development
269
6.19.07.
Appeal of an Administrative Decision
269
5.04.09.
Appeal of a Board of Adjustment Decision
225
6.19.08.
Appeal of a Preliminary Site Plan
269
6.19.09.
Appeal of a Site Plan
270
6.19.10.
Appeal of a SCSP Decision to the Planning & Zoning Commission
270
6.19.11.
Appeal of a SCSP Decision to the City Council
270
6.19.12.
Appeal of a Revised PSP or SP Decision
270
6.19.13.
Appeal of a Planning & Zoning Commission Decision to Deny a Zoning Amendment
270
6.19.14.
Appeal of a Minor PD Amendment Decision
271
6.19.15. (A)
Initial Appeal of a Façade Plan
271
6.19.15. (B)
Final Appeal of a Façade Plan
271
6.19.16. (A)
Appeal of an Alternative Compliance Standard Decision made by the Director
272
6.19.16. (B)
Appeal of an Alternative Compliance Standard Decision made by the Planning & Zoning Commission
272
6.19.02. Appeal of a Denial of a Unlisted Commercial Stealth Antenna
The decision of the Planning & Zoning Commission may be appealed to the City Council using the Site Plan appeal procedure outlined in 6.19.09. Appeal of a Site Plan (Page 270).
6.19.03. Appeal of a Temporary Building Decision to Council
(A) The applicant may challenge a decision of the Chief Building Official or Planning & Zoning Commission, by appealing, in writing, to the City Council within fourteen (14) calendar days of a decision of the Chief Building Official or the Planning & Zoning Commission.
(1) The City Council’s decision is final.
(B) Four (4) or more members of City Council may appeal the decision of the Planning & Zoning Commission by submitting a written notice of appeal to the Development Services Department.
(1) The City Council shall consider and act on whether it will appeal the Commission’s decision no later than fourteen (14) calendar days from the date of such decision or at its first regular meeting
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 6: Development Review Procedures Page | 269
(for which there is time to post an agenda as required by law) that occurs after the Commission meeting at which the decision was made, whichever is later.
(2) Written notice of the City Council’s vote to appeal shall be submitted to the Development Services Department within seven (7) calendar days of the City Council’s vote.
(3) The City Council shall consider the appeal at a public meeting no later than forty-five (45) calendar days after the date on which the notice of appeal is submitted to the Development Services Department.
(4) The City Council may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the Planning & Zoning Commission.
6.19.04. Appeal of a Rescinded Shared Parking Agreement Approval
A decision by the Planning & Zoning Commission to rescind a shared parking approval may be appealed to the City Council (see appeal procedure in 6.19.08. Appeal of a Preliminary Site Plan (Page 269).
6.19.05. Appeal of a Temporary Outdoor Lighting Decision
(A) The applicant may appeal the Chief Building Official’s decision within ten (10) calendar days after the Chief Building Official’s decision, in writing, to the Director for his or her consideration.
(B) The applicant may appeal the Director’s decision within ten (10) calendar days after the Director’s decision, in writing, to the City Council
(C) The City Council’s decision shall be final.
6.19.06. Appeal of a Residential Cluster Development
(A) Appeal of Cluster Development
Upon appeal, if the City Council finds that the requirements in 4.10.10. Director Review Criteria are satisfied, it may approve the residential cluster development, subject to any special conditions.
(B) Special conditions to residential cluster development
The City Council may, in its opinion, apply such special conditions to its approval of a residential cluster development as may be required to maintain harmony with neighboring uses and to promote the objectives and purposes of this Ordinance, Subdivision Ordinance, and/or the Comprehensive Plan.
6.19.07. Appeal of an Administrative Decision
(A) The Board may hear and decide an appeal that alleges error in an order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of this ordinance or Section 211.007, Texas Local Government Code ("the Code") as it exists or may be amended.
(B) In exercising the Board's authority herein, the Board may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the administrative official's order, requirement, decision, or determination from which an appeal is taken and make the correct order, requirement, decision, or determination, and for that purpose the Board has the same authority as the administrative official.
6.19.08. Appeal of a Preliminary Site Plan
(A) The applicant, Director of Development Services, or four (4) members of City Council may appeal the decision of the Planning & Zoning Commission regarding a Preliminary Site Plan by submitting a written notice of appeal to the Development Services Department.
(1) The applicant or Director of Development Services must submit said written notice of appeal no later than fourteen (14) calendar days from the date of such decision.
(2) Written notice of the City Council’s vote to appeal shall be submitted to the Development Services Department within seven (7) calendar days of the City Council’s vote.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 270 Section 6: Development Review Procedures
(B) The City Council shall consider the appeal at a public meeting no later than forty-five (45) calendar days after the date on which the notice of appeal is submitted to the Development Services Department.
(C) The City Council may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the Planning & Zoning Commission.
6.19.09. Appeal of a Site Plan
(A) The applicant, Director, or four (4) members of City Council may appeal the decision regarding a Site Plan by submitting a written notice of appeal to the Director.
(1) The applicant or Director must submit said written notice of appeal no later than fourteen (14) calendar days from the date of such decision.
(2) The City Council shall consider and act on whether it will appeal the Commission’s decision no later than fourteen (14) calendar days from the date of such decision or at its first regular meeting (for which there is time to post an agenda as required by law) that occurs after the Commission meeting at which the decision was made, whichever is later.
(3) Written notice of the City Council’s vote to appeal shall be submitted to the Development Services Department within seven (7) calendar days of the City Council’s vote.
(B) The City Council shall consider the appeal at a public meeting no later than forty-five (45) calendar days after the date on which the notice of appeal is submitted to the Development Services Department.
(C) The City Council may affirm, modify, or reverse the Site Plan decision.
6.19.10. Appeal of a SCSP Decision to the Planning & Zoning Commission
(A) Disapproval from the Director may be appealed to the Planning & Zoning Commission by the applicant in writing no later than fourteen (14) calendar days from the date of such decision.
(B) The Planning & Zoning Commission shall consider the appeal at a public meeting no later than forty-five (45) calendar days after the date on which the notice of appeal is submitted to the Development Services Department.
(C) The Planning & Zoning Commission may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the Director.
6.19.11. Appeal of a SCSP Decision to the City Council
(A) The Planning & Zoning Commission decision may be appealed to City Council in accordance with the procedures set forth in 6.19.09. Appeal of a Site Plan (Page 270).
6.19.12. Appeal of a Revised PSP or SP Decision
(A) An applicant may appeal the denial of a revised PSP or SP to the City Council in accordance with Section 6.19.09. Appeal of a Site Plan (Page 270).
6.19.13. Appeal of a Planning & Zoning Commission Decision to Deny a Zoning Amendment
(A) When the Planning & Zoning Commission determines that a proposal should be denied, it shall so report and recommend to the City Council and Planning staff shall notify the applicant.
(B) If the proposal is denied by the Commission, the request shall not be forwarded to the City Council
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 6: Development Review Procedures Page | 271
unless the applicant requests an appeal to the City Council or the request is sent for review by the Commission by simple majority vote.
(C) Upon denial of a request by the Planning & Zoning Commission, the applicant may, upon his own motion within fourteen (14) calendar days, file with the Director a written request that a public hearing be scheduled and held before the City Council regarding the application. In the applicant’s written request for appeal, it shall state why the appeal is being made and provide all necessary documentation to support the request.
(D) The applicant shall be responsible for the costs of re-notification, including postage.
(E) When a proposed zoning request is heard by the City Council that has been denied by the Planning & Zoning Commission, a vote of three-fourths (3/4) of the Council Members present, or four (4) votes, whichever is greater is required to overrule a recommendation of the Commission that a proposed zoning amendment, supplement, or change be denied.
(F) The City shall not take action on a property where City taxes are delinquent.
6.19.14. Appeal of a Minor PD Amendment Decision
(A) The denial of a minor amendment may be appealed to the City Council upon denial by the Planning & Zoning Commission (see 6.19.09. Appeal of a Site Plan (Page 270).
6.19.15. Façade Plan Appeal Process
(A) Initial Appeal of a Façade Plan
(1) If the Director denies the application, the applicant or two (2) members of the Planning & Zoning Commission may appeal the Director’s decision to the Planning & Zoning Commission.
(2) The appellant shall submit a written statement requesting the appeal stating specific reasons for the request to the Director within fourteen (14) calendar days of the decision, which shall be forwarded to the Planning & Zoning Commission.
(3) The Planning & Zoning Commission shall review façade plan application for compliance with this Ordinance and standards referenced herein.
(4) The Planning & Zoning Commission may approve or deny the façade plan application based on compliance or violation of this Ordinance and standards referenced herein.
(B) Final Appeal of a Façade Plan
(1) If the Planning & Zoning Commission denies the application, the applicant or two (2) members of the City Council may appeal the Planning & Zoning Commission’s decision of the City Council.
(2) The appellant shall submit a written statement requesting the appeal stating specific reasons for the request to the Director within fourteen (14) calendar days of the decision, which shall be forwarded to the City Council.
(3) The City Council shall review façade plan application for compliance with this Ordinance and standards referenced herein.
(4) The City Council may approve or deny the façade plan application based on compliance or violation of this Ordinance or standards referenced herein.
(5) The decision of the City Council is final.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 272 Section 6: Development Review Procedures
6.19.16. Appeal Process
(A) Appeal of an Alternative Compliance Standard Decision made by the Director
a. Denial from the Director may be appealed to the Planning & Zoning Commission by the applicant in writing no later than fourteen (14) calendar days from the date of such decision.
b. The Planning & Zoning Commission shall consider the appeal at a public meeting no later than forty-five (45) calendar days after the date on which the notice of appeal is submitted to the Development Services Department.
c. The Planning & Zoning Commission may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the Director.
(B) Appeal of an Alternative Compliance Standard Decision made by the Planning & Zoning Commission
a. The applicant, Director, or four (4) members of City Council may appeal the decision of the Planning & Zoning Commission regarding a Site Plan by submitting a written notice of appeal to the Director.
1. The applicant or Director must submit said written notice of appeal no later than fourteen (14) calendar days from the date of such decision.
2. The City Council shall consider and act on whether it will appeal the Commission’s decision no later than fourteen (14) calendar days from the date of such decision or at its first regular meeting (for which there is time to post an agenda as required by law) that occurs after the Commission meeting at which the decision was made, whichever is later.
3. Written notice of the City Council’s vote to appeal shall be submitted to the Development Services Department within seven (7) calendar days of the City Council’s vote.
b. The City Council shall consider the appeal at a public meeting no later than forty-five (45) calendar days after the date on which the notice of appeal is submitted to the Development Services Department.
c. The City Council may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the Planning & Zoning Commission.
Section 7. Definitions
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 274 Section 7: Definitions
Subsection 7.01. Terms and Words Defined
For the purpose of this Zoning Ordinance, certain terms and words are to be used and interpreted as defined hereinafter. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words in the singular number include the plural and words in the plural number include the singular, except where the natural construction of the writing indicates otherwise. The word shall is mandatory and not discretionary. The following are the Zoning Ordinance definitions.
Accessory Structure
Any structure, either attached or detached from the main dwelling, the use of which is incidental to that of the main structure and located on the same lot. Accessory structures include, but are not limited to patio covers, arbors, gazebos, cabanas, outdoor kitchens and/or recreational fire enclosures, trellis, and structures/sheds or the like. A permit is required for all accessory structures. Also, referred to as accessory buildings.
Acts of Nature
An extraordinary interruption by a natural cause (such as a flood or earthquake) of the usual course of events that experience, prescience, or care cannot reasonably foresee or prevent.
Advertising Sign or Structure
Any cloth, card, paper, metal, glass, wooden, plastic, plaster or stone sign or other sign, device or structure of any character whatsoever, including a statuary or place for outdoor advertising purposes on the ground or any tree, wall, bush, rock, post, fence, building or structure. The term placed shall include erecting, constructing, posting, painting, printing, tacking, mailing, gluing, sticking, carving, or otherwise fastening, affixing or making visible in any manner whatsoever. The area of an advertising structure shall be determined as the area of the largest cross-section of such structure. Neither directional, warning nor other signs posted by public officials in the course of their public shall be construed as advertising signs for the purpose of this Ordinance. See Sign Ordinance for further details.
Agricultural Use
A use that consist of the growing of crops mainly for food and fiber, or the keeping, grazing, breeding, or feeding of animals for the products they produce or for eventual sale.
Airport/Heliport
A place where aircraft and/or helicopters can land and take off, usually equipped with hangars, facilities for refueling and repair, and various accommodations for passengers.
Alcoholic Beverage Establishment
Any establishment that derives seventy-five (75) percent or more of its gross revenue on a quarterly basis from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages, as defined in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended, for on-premise consumption.
Alcoholic Beverage Sales
Any establishment, place of business, or person engaged in the selling of alcoholic beverages, as defined in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended, to the general public for off-premise personal or household consumption.
(Ord. No. 12-12-81; 12/18/2012)
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 7: Definitions Page | 275
Alley
A minor right-of-way, dedicated to public use, which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street, and which may be used for public utility purposes.
Amenity Center
A recreational facility, including, but not limited to, clubhouse, swimming pool, play area, operated for the exclusive use of private residents or neighborhood groups and their guests, and not the general public.
Antenna
An instrument or device consisting of wires, poles, rods, or reflecting discs, designed for transmitting or receiving any portion of the radio, microwave, or electromagnetic spectrum.
Antenna, Stealth
A Stealth Antenna is a commercial antenna that is designed to be non-obtrusive, or virtually transparent or invisible to the surrounding neighborhood. Stealth Antennas include, but are not limited to:
(A) Antennas within a building’s attic space,
(B) Antennas on the roof of a minimum three-story building and not visible from the property line of the lot on which the antenna is located,
(C) Antennas on a public utility structure, such as a water tower or high transmission line support tower, and painted to match the structure,
(D) Antennas located within a structure such as a flagpole, church steeple, subdivision monument, clock tower, or similar architectural feature, and antennas located on an athletic field light pole
(E) Example of Stealth Antennas.
Antenna and/or Antenna Support Structure, Commercial
An antenna and its support structure used for commercial broadcasting or telecommunication purposes. This definition shall also include a satellite dish exceeding twelve (12) feet in diameter and a microwave-transmitting tower. All radiating equipment must comply with Federal Communications Commission (FCC), Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Occupational Health and Safety Administration (OSHA), and all other applicable State and Federal regulatory agency requirements and guidelines for human safety, as they exist or may be amended. Definition includes ancillary ground equipment.
Figure 6.19.16.1: Stealth Antenna
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 276 Section 7: Definitions
Antenna and/or Antenna Support Structure, Non-Commercial
An instrument or device consisting of wires, poles, rods, or reflecting discs and its support structure not exceeding forty (40) feet in height above the ground elevation at the base of the support structure, designed for transmitting or receiving any portion of the radio, microwave, or electromagnetic spectrum. This definition shall also include a satellite dish antenna not to exceed twelve (12) feet in diameter.
Antenna Support Structure
Any tower, mast, pole, tripod, box frame, or other structure utilized for the purpose of transmission, retransmission, and/or reception of electromagnetic, radio, television, or microwave signals.
Antique Shop and Used Furniture
A retail establishment engaged in the selling of works of art, furniture, or other artifacts of an earlier period, with all sales and storage occurring inside a building.
Apartment
A room or suite of rooms in a multifamily residence arranged, designed, or occupied as a place of residence by a single family, individual, or group of individuals.
Applicant
Any person or entity that submits to the City an application for a permit required by the City for a Project. To be qualified as an Applicant under this Ordinance, the person or entity must have sufficient legal authority or proprietary interests in the land to commence and maintain proceedings under this Ordinance. The term shall be restricted to include only the Property Owner(s), or a duly authorized agent and representative of the Property Owner.
Application for a Permit
Any document filed with the City that clearly indicates that the applicant is seeking consideration for a permit, the type of permit sought and provides the City with fair notice of the project, and when used in this Zoning Ordinance, shall include a plan for development of real property or a plan for development; but excluding applications to establish or amend a zoning district, including but not limited to a request to establish or amend a Planned Development District or to receive or amend a Specific Use Permit.
Artisan's Workshop
An establishment used for the preparation, display, and sale of individually crafted artwork, jewelry, furniture, sculpture, pottery, leather-craft, hand-woven articles, and related items.
Assisted Living Facility
A facility providing residence, supervision and daily assistance for individuals, generally persons 55 years of age or older, with common dining and recreational areas designed for the needs of the elderly. Services in these establishments include assistance with routine living functions that are non-medical in nature, such as dressing, grooming, bathing, and social and recreational services, such as meal services, transportation, housekeeping, linen and organized social activities. An assisted living facility may include an adult daycare as an accessory use.
Athletic Stadium or Field, Private
A private field(s) and structure used for sporting events with associated spectator seating, either permanent or temporary.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 7: Definitions Page | 277
Athletic Stadium or Field, Public
A field(s) and structure owned and operated by the City and/or a local independent school district used for sporting events with associated spectator seating, either permanent or temporary.
Auto Parts Sales, Outside
The use of any land area for the display and sale of new or used parts, including tires, for automobiles, panel trucks or vans, trailers, or recreation vehicles.
Automobile
A self-propelled mechanical vehicle designed for use on streets and highways for the conveyance of goods and people, including, but not limited to, passenger cars, trucks, buses, motor scooters, and motorcycles.
Automobile Paid Parking Lot/Garage
An area or structure where a fee is charged for parking automobiles and which serves as the primary use on the lot. This use does not include the storage of gasoline.
Automobile Parking Lot/Garage
An area or structure where the parking of automobiles serves as the primary use on the lot. This use does not include the storage of gasoline.
Automobile Repair, Major
General repair or reconditioning of engines, air-conditioning systems, and transmissions for automobiles; wrecker or towing service with on-site storage of vehicles; collision services including body, frame, or fender straightening or repair; customizing; painting; vehicle steam cleaning; tire retreading; insurance estimations with on-site storage; undercoating and rust proofing, and other similar uses.
Automobile Repair, Minor
An establishment used for the dispensing or sales of automobile fuels, lubricants, and automobile accessories; the minor repair or replacement of parts and performing state inspections and making minor repairs necessary to pass said inspection; automobile detailing; window tinting, and the sales and installation of automobile radios. Uses listed under “Automobile Repair, Major” or any other similar uses are not included. Vehicles, which are inoperative or are being repaired, may not remain parked outside for a period greater than seven (7) calendar days.
Automobile Sales, Used
Sales of used automobiles or light load vehicles.
Automobile Sales/Leasing, New
Sales, rental, and/or leasing of new automobiles or light load vehicles, including, as accessory uses: Automobile Sales, Used; Automobile Repair, Major; and Automobile Storage.
Automobile Storage
The storage on a lot or tract of operable automobiles for the purpose of holding such vehicles for sale, lease, distribution, or storage.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 278 Section 7: Definitions
Bank, Savings and Loan, or Credit Union
An establishment for the custody, loan, exchange or issue of money, the extension of credit, and/or facilitating the transmission of funds, including automated teller machines.
Basement (or Cellar)
A story partly or wholly underground. For purposes of height measurement, a basement shall be counted as a story when more than one-half (½) of its height is above the average level of the adjoining ground or when subdivided and used for commercial or dwelling purposes by other than a janitor employed on the premises.
Beauty Salon/Barber Shop
Establishments primarily engaged in providing services generally involved in the care of the person or his apparel including, but not limited to, barber and beauty shops, tanning salons, ear piercing shops, cosmetic tattooing shops, and reducing salons.
Bed and Breakfast Inn
An owner (or operator) occupied residence with up to five (5) bedrooms available for overnight guests. A Bed and Breakfast Inn may provide for guest stays up to fourteen (14) consecutive calendar days; however, it shall not offer weekly rental rates. Kitchen and dining facilities may be included to provide meals for guests only; however, no food preparation shall be permitted in guest bedrooms. A Bed and Breakfast Inn shall not include restaurants, banquet facilities, or similar services.
Big Box Retail Development
Big Box uses are defined as single tenant retail buildings over 70,000 square feet.
Block
A grouping of residential lots (and their alleys) that are partially or fully surrounded by one or more streets. A block consists of one or two tiers of lots. Lots that are separated by an alley are in the same block, but lots that are separated by a street are in different blocks.
Block Face
The portion of a block that abuts a street.
Block Length
The length of the block face between two intersections
Boarding or Rooming House
A building other than a motel or hotel where, for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals or lodging are provided for three or more persons, but not to exceed eight persons.
Body Art Studio
An establishment whose services include tattooing and/or body piercing. Tattooing shall mean the placing of designs, letters, figures, symbols, or other marks upon or under the skin of any person, using ink or other substances that result in the permanent coloration of the skin by means of the use of needles or other instruments designed to contact or puncture the skin. Body piercing shall mean the creation of an opening in an individual's body to insert jewelry or another decoration.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 7: Definitions Page | 279
Buildable Area
The allowable area available to construct a building or structure after complying with the City’s applicable set back and maximum lot coverage requirements.
Building
Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
Building, Main
A building in which the principal use of the lot on which it is situated is conducted. In a residential district any dwelling shall be deemed to be a main building on the lot on which it is situated.
Building Height
The vertical distance between the average of the highest and lowest points of grade of that portion of the lot covered by the building to the highest point of a structure.
Building Line
A line parallel, or approximately parallel, to any front lot line at a specific distance therefrom, marking the minimum distance from the front lot line that a building may be erected. (see Figure 9.01.01.3: Front Yard, Building Line, and Lot Width Measurement (Page 319))
Building Material and Hardware Sales, Major
An establishment for the sale of materials customarily used in the construction of buildings and other structures, including outside storage or display of materials or merchandise.
Building Material and Hardware Sales, Minor
An establishment for the sale of materials customarily used in the construction of buildings and other structures, without any outside storage or display of materials or merchandise.
Building Official, Chief
The inspector or administrative official charged with responsibility for issuing permits and enforcing the Zoning Ordinance and Building Code.
Build-to-Line
A line parallel, or approximately parallel, to any lot line at a specific distance therefrom, marking the minimum distance from the lot line that a building may be erected, and marking the building envelope, which is the area in which a building may be erected.
Bus Terminal
Any premises for the transient parking or storage of motor-driven buses and the loading and unloading of passengers.
Business Service
An establishment primarily engaged in providing services not elsewhere classified, to business enterprises on a fee contract basis, including, but not limited to, advertising agencies, computer programming and software services, and office equipment sales, rental, leasing, or repair.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 280 Section 7: Definitions
Cabinet/Upholstery Shop
An establishment for the production, display, and sale of cabinets, furniture, and soft coverings for furniture.
Campground or Recreational Vehicle Park
Any area that is designed for occupancy by transients using tents, mobile trailers, or recreational vehicles for temporary sleeping purposes.
Candlepower
The quantity of light required to illuminate a surface one (1) foot distance from a light source to the intensity of one (1) foot-candle.
Caretaker's/Guard's Residence
A residence located on a premises with a main nonresidential use and occupied only by a caretaker or guard, and his/her family, employed on the premises.
Carport
A structure open on a minimum of two sides designed or used to shelter not more than three (3) vehicles and not to exceed twenty-four (24) feet on its longest dimension. Also called "covered parking area."
Car Wash, Full Service
A facility where a customer can have a motorcycle, automobile and light load vehicle washed in exchange for financial consideration.
Car Wash, Self Service
A facility, typically coin operated, used by the customer to wash motorcycles, automobiles and light load vehicles.
Cemetery or Mausoleum
Property used for the interring of the dead.
Certificate of Occupancy
An official certificate issued by the City through the Chief Building Official that indicates conformance with or approved conditional variations from the zoning regulations and authorizes legal use of the premises for which it is issued; may be referred to as an Occupancy Permit.
Certified Arborist
An individual certified by the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA) as a certified arborist.
Child-Care: Foster Family Home (Independent)
Per the definition of the Department of Family and Protective Services (DFPS) or as amended by the DFPS, a single independent home that is the primary residence of the foster parents and licensed to provide care for six or fewer children up to the age of 18 years.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 7: Definitions Page | 281
Child-Care: Foster Group Home (Independent)
Per the definition of the Department of Family and Protective Services (DFPS) or as amended by the DFPS, a single independent home that is the primary residence of the foster parents and licensed to provide care for seven to 12 children up to the age of 18 years.
Child-Care: Licensed Child-Care Center
Per the definition of the Department of Family and Protective Services (DFPS) or as amended by the DFPS, an operation providing care for seven or more children younger than 14 years old for less than 24 hours per day at a location other than the permit holder’s home.
Child-Care: Licensed Child-Care Home
Per the definition of the Department of Family and Protective Services (DFPS) or as amended by the DFPS, the primary caregiver provides care in the caregiver’s own residence for children from birth through 13 years. The total number of children in care varies with the ages of the children, but the total number of children in care at any given time, including the children related to the caregiver, must not exceed 12.
Child-Care: Listed Family Home
Per the definition of the Department of Family and Protective Services (DFPS) or as amended by the DFPS, a caregiver at least 18 years old who provides care in her own home for compensation, for three or fewer children unrelated to the caregiver, ages birth through 13 years. Regular care is provided, which is care provided for at least four hours a day, three or more days a week, and more than nine consecutive weeks. The total number of children in care, including children related to the caregiver, may not exceed 12.
Child Care: Registered Child-Care Home
Per the definition of the Department of Family and Protective Services (DFPS) or as amended by the DFPS, a caregiver who provides regular care in her own home for not more than six children from birth through 13 years. Child day care can be provided for six additional school-aged children before and after the customary school day. The total number of children in care at any given time, including the children related to the caregiver, must not exceed 12.
Church, Temple, Synagogue, Mosque, or Other Place of Worship
A building used primarily for religious assembly and worship and those accessory activities which are customarily associated therewith, and the place of residence for ministers, priests, nuns, rabbis, or other religious personnel on the premises (tax exempt as defined by State law). For the purposes of this ordinance, Bible study and other similar activities that occur in a person's primary residence shall not apply to this definition.
City
References to the "City" shall mean the City of Frisco, Texas.
City Council
The governing body of the City of Frisco, Texas.
Civic/Convention Center
A building or complex of buildings used for cultural, recreational, athletic, convention, or entertainment purposes.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 282 Section 7: Definitions
Clear-Cutting
Any indiscriminate cutting, plowing, or grubbing of tree(s) without regard to their type or size for the purpose of clearing an area of land of trees.
College, University, Trade, or Private Boarding School
An institution established for educational purposes offering courses for study beyond the secondary education level, including trade schools and commercial schools offering training or instruction in a trade, art, or occupation. A boarding school is an educational institution offering primary and secondary level courses. Dormitories for students and employees only are permitted in conjunction with these uses.
Commercial Amusement, Indoor
An enterprise providing for indoor recreational activities, services, amusements, and instruction for an admission fee. Uses may include, but are not limited to, bowling alleys, ice or roller skating rinks, bingo parlors, amusement arcades, and/or practice areas.
Commercial Amusement, Outdoor
An enterprise providing for outdoor recreational activities, services, amusements, and instruction for an admission fee, including, but not limited to, batting cages, miniature golf, go-kart tracks, and carnivals.
Community Center
A building or portion of a building owned and/or operated by a government entity or not-for-profit agency in which facilities are provided for civic, educational, political, or social purposes.
Comprehensive Plan
Graphic and textual form policies which govern the future development of the City and which consists of various components governing specific geographic areas and functions and services of the City. Current Comprehensive Plan as it exists or may be amended,
Concrete/Asphalt Batching Plant, Permanent
A permanent manufacturing facility for the production of concrete or asphalt.
Concrete/Asphalt Batching Plant, Temporary
A temporary manufacturing facility for the on-site production of concrete or asphalt during construction of a project, and to be removed when the project is completed.
Construction Yard and Field Office, Temporary
A building, structure, or storage/assembly yard used in conjunction with a development project for housing temporary supervisory or administrative functions related to development, construction, or the sale of real estate properties within the development and subject to removal at completion of construction.
Contractor’s Shop and/or Storage Yard
A building, part of a building, or land area for the construction or storage (inside or out) of materials, tools, products, and vehicle fleets.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 7: Definitions Page | 283
Convenience Store with Gas Pumps
A retail establishment that sells food and other consumable and non-consumable products for off-premise use or consumption. This definition shall also include the dispensing or sales of motor vehicle fuels, lubricants, and accessories, but shall not include automobile repair or the sale of replacement parts.
Convenience Store without Gas Pumps
A retail establishment that sells food and other consumable and non-consumable products for off-premise use or consumption.
Conversion Factor
A number that converts the Landscape Water Allowance and Estimated Landscape Water use from acre-inches per acre per year to gallons per square foot per year. The conversion factor is calculated as follows: (325,851 gallons/43,560 square feet)/12 inches = (0.62)
(A) 325,851 gallons = one acre foot
(B) 43,560 square feet = one acre
(C) 12 inches = one foot
Court
An open, unobstructed space, bounded on more than two sides by the walls of a building. An inner court is entirely surrounded by the exterior walls of a building. An outer court has one side open to a street, alley, yard, or other permanent open space.
Coverage
The lot area covered by all structures located thereon. Structures shall include main structures and accessory structures with or without a permeable roof.
Cutoff
The point at which all light rays emitted by a lamp, light source or luminary are completely eliminated (cutoff) at a specific angle above the ground.
CPTED (Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design)
The concept of CPTED is based upon the following theory: the proper design and effective use of the built environment can lead to the reduction in the incidence and fear of crime, and an improvement in the quality of life.
Cutoff Angle
The maximum angle formed by a line drawn in the direction of emitted light rays at the light source and a line perpendicular to the ground from the light source, beyond which no light is emitted.
Day Services, Adult
A facility that provides services under an Adult Day Care Program on a daily or regular basis, but not overnight, to four or more elderly or handicapped persons who are not related by blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner of the facility. Adult Day Services Centers (also referred to as Adult Day Care Centers) must be licensed by the Texas Department of Human Services.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 284 Section 7: Definitions
Development
Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings and/or other structures, paving, drainage, utilities, storage, and agricultural activities.
Director
The Director of Development Services or his/her designee or representative.
Disability or Handicap
With respect to an individual:
(A) A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities,
(B) A record of having such an impairment, or
(C) Being regarded as having such an impairment, but such term does not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance (as defined in section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802)).
District
Any section or sections of the City for which the regulations governing the use of land and the use, density, bulk, height and coverage of buildings and other structures are uniform for each class or kind of building therein.
Downtown Public Parking Lot(s)
An area, other than street or public way, provided for self-parking by employees, visitors, and/or patrons of any state or local government, any public accommodations, retail or office establishments, or any other business open to the general public.
Drip Line
A vertical line running through the outermost portion of the crown of a tree and extending to the ground.
Dry Cleaning, Major
An industrial facility where fabrics are cleaned with substantially non-aqueous organic solvents on a commercial or wholesale basis.
Dry Cleaning, Minor
A custom cleaning shop or pick-up station not exceeding six thousand (6,000) square feet of floor area, including, but not limited to, dry cleaning plants having no more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet of floor area for dry cleaning equipment.
Dwelling Unit Area
Dwelling unit area is defined as that area devoted to the living area in a residence or dwelling unit and is exclusive of porches, enclosed or open breezeways, storage area or closets, or other non-living space.
Easement
A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation or another person or entity.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 7: Definitions Page | 285
Educational Use
A use that provides instruction and training in a wide variety of subjects provided by specialized establishments, such as schools, colleges, universities, and training centers.
Electrical Power Generating Plant
All equipment, fixtures, and property operated or maintained in connection with the production of electricity and transmission of electricity produced.
Equipment and Machinery Sales and Rental, Major
A building or open area used for the display, sale, rental, or storage of heavy equipment and machinery.
Equipment and Machinery Sales and Rental, Minor
A building or structure used for the inside display, sale, rental, or storage of light machinery, including, but not limited to, bicycles, lawn mowers, tools, and other small machinery.
Estimated Landscape Water Use (ELWU)
The annual total amount of water estimated to be needed to keep the plants in the landscape area healthy, it is based upon the local reference evapotranspiration rate, the size of the landscape area, the types of plants, and the efficiency of the irrigation system.
ET – Evapotranspiration
Loss of water from the soil both by evaporation and by transpiration from the plants growing thereon.
ET0 Adjustment Factor
A factor applied to Evapotranspiration, reference (ET0) that adjusts for plant coefficients and irrigation efficiency, two major influences upon the amount of water that needs to be applied to the landscape. For the purpose of this example, the plant coefficient (Pc) shall be 0.3 and irrigation efficiency shall be 0.6. Therefore,
(A) Example: ET0 Adjustment Factor = (0.3/0.6) = 0.5
Evapotranspiration, reference (ET0)
The rate of evapotranspiration from a hypothetical reference crop that is assumed to be free of water stress and disease.
Fair Notice
An application for a permit containing information sufficient for the City to determine:
(A) The size, number, location and shape of all lots involved in the project;
(B) The desired zoning district and the specific uses allowed within the zoning district that will be developed on the property as part of the project;
(C) The size, number, location and type of improvements to be made on the property as part of the project; and
(D) The streets, alleys, water mains and taps, sanitary sewer mains and taps and storm sewers that will be necessary to adequately serve the property when the project is complete.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 286 Section 7: Definitions
Fairgrounds/Exhibition Area
An area where outdoor fairs, circuses, or exhibitions are held.
Family
One or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, or a group not to exceed four (4) persons not all related by blood or marriage, adoption or guardianship, occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single housekeeping unit.
Farm, Ranch, Stable, Garden, or Orchard
An area which is used for the cultivation of vegetables, fruits, and grain or for the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and farm animals such as horses, cattle, and sheep and including the necessary accessory uses for raising, treating, and storing products raised on the premises, but not including the commercial feeding of offal or garbage to swine or other animals and not including any type of agriculture or husbandry specifically prohibited by ordinance or law.
Farmer's Market
An area containing individual vendors who offer fruits, vegetables, herbs, spices, edible seeds, nuts, live plants, flowers, and honey for sale. This definition does not include the sale of any type of meat, fish, poultry, eggs, refrigerated dairy products, or home canned or packaged items.
Feed Store
An establishment for the selling of corn, grain, and other foodstuffs for animals and livestock and including other implements and goods related to agricultural processes, but not including farm machinery.
Fire Lane
A Fire Apparatus Access Road according to the International Fire Code.
Flea Market, Inside
A building or structure wherein space is rented to vendors on a short-term basis for the sale of merchandise. The principal sales shall include new and used household goods, personal effects, tools, art work, small household appliances, and similar merchandise, objects, or equipment in small quantities. The term flea market shall not be deemed to include wholesale sales establishments or rental services establishments, but shall be deemed to include personal services establishments, food services establishments, retail sales establishments, and auction establishments.
Flea Market, Outside
An outdoor site where space is rented to vendors on a short-term basis for the sale of merchandise. The principal sales shall include new and used household goods, personal effects, tools, art work, small household appliances, and similar merchandise, objects, or equipment in small quantities. The term flea market shall not be deemed to include wholesale sales establishments or rental services establishments, but shall be deemed to include personal services establishments, food services establishments, retail sales establishments, and auction establishments.
Flood or Spot Light
Any light fixture or lamp that incorporates a reflector or a refractor to concentrate the light output into a directed beam in a particular direction.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 7: Definitions Page | 287
Floodplain
Any property within the limits as delineated by FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency) of the 100-year floodplain or as amended by an engineering flood study of the ultimate developed conditions prior to any reclamation.
Floor Area
The total gross square feet of floor space within the outside dimensions of a building including each floor level, but excluding carports, residential garages, and breezeways.
Floor Area Ratio (FAR)
The floor area of a main building or buildings on a lot, excluding structured parking garages, divided by the lot area. See Figure 9.01.01.1: Floor Area Ratio Illustration of 1:1 (Page 318)
Foot-Candle
A unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points of which are one (1) foot from a uniform point source of one (1) candle. When metric units are used, lux is the unit of light quantity. One (1) lux equals one (1) lumen per square meter of area. One (1) foot-candle equals 10.76 lux.
Fortune Teller/Psychic
A use involving the foretelling of the future in exchange for financial or other valuable consideration. Fortune telling shall include, but is not limited to, uses where the fortune is told through astrology, augury, card or tea reading, cartomancy, clairvoyance, clairaudience, crystal gazing, divination, magic mediumship, necromancy, palmistry, psychometry, phrenology, prophecy, and spiritual reading. Fortune telling does not include forecasting based on historical trends or patterns or religious dogma.
Fraternal Organization, Lodge, Civic Club, Fraternity, or Sorority
An organized group having a restricted membership and specific purpose related to the welfare of the members including, but not limited to, Elks, Masons, Knights of Columbus, Rotary International, Shriners, or a labor union.
Full Cutoff-Type of Luminaires or Horizontal Limited Luminaires
Luminaires constructed or shielded to direct all light at a cutoff angle of less than ninety (90) degrees.
Furniture Restoration
A workshop that specializes in furniture refinishing, including the use of all materials, tools, and chemicals associated with the use.
Garage, Private
An enclosed (on at least three (3) sides) accessory building, or a part of a main building, used for storage of automobiles and used solely by the occupants and their guests. Also called "enclosed parking space."
Garage Apartment
A dwelling unit erected in conjunction with a garage when the main structure is an owner occupied detached dwelling unit.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 288 Section 7: Definitions
Gas Pumps
Any facility, equipment, or fixture, including a canopy, used for retail dispensing of motor vehicle fuels.
General Manufacturing/Industrial Use Complying with Performance Standards
Manufacturing of finished products and component products or parts through the processing of materials or substances, including basic industrial processing. Such operations shall be determined by Health, Fire, and Chief Building Official not to be a hazard or nuisance to adjacent property or the community at large, due to the possible emission of excessive smoke, noise, gas, fumes, dust, odor, or vibration, or the danger of fire, explosion, or radiation.
Glare
Direct light emitted from a light source, which is sufficient to cause annoyance, discomfort, or temporary loss of visual performance and visibility.
Golf Course and/or Country Club
A land area and buildings used for golf, including fairways, greens, tee boxes, driving range, putting green, and associated maintenance and retail facilities. This definition shall also include clubhouses, dining rooms, swimming pools, tennis courts, and similar recreational or service uses available only to members and their guests.
Governmental Office
A building used for the provision of governmental executive, management, administrative, and/or postal services. Governmental offices include those facilities owned and/or operated by city, special district, county, state, and federal agencies.
Guest House
An accessory building used to house guests of the owner(s) of the main residential structure, and which is never rented or offered for rent.
Gymnastics/Dance Studio
A building or portion of a building used as a place of work for a gymnast, dancer, or martial artist or for instructional classes in gymnastics, dance, or martial arts.
Hall, Dance
An establishment open to the general public for entertainment, in particular, dancing.
Hall, Reception/Banquet/Meeting
A building, facility, room, or portion thereof, which is rented, leased or otherwise made available to any person or group for a private event function, that is not open to the general public, whether or not a fee is charged.
Health/Fitness Center
A public or private facility operated to promote physical health and fitness. Activities may include exercise, physical therapy, training, and education pertaining to health and fitness. Uses or combinations of uses or facilities would typically include, but are not limited to, game courts, weight lifting and exercise equipment, aerobics, swimming pools and spas, and running or jogging tracks.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 7: Definitions Page | 289
Heavy Load Vehicle
A self-propelled vehicle having a Manufacturer's Recommended Gross Vehicle Weight (GVW) of greater than 11,000 pounds, such as large recreational vehicles (originally manufactured as RVs, not converted), tractor-trailers, buses, vans, and other similar vehicles. The term "truck" shall be construed to mean "Heavy Load Vehicle" unless specifically stated otherwise.
Height of Luminary
The height of a luminary shall be the vertical distance from the ground directly below the centerline of the luminary to the lowest direct light emitting part of the luminary.
Helistop
An accessory use where helicopters can land and take off but excluding refueling, maintenance, repairs, and storage of helicopters.
High-Water Use Zone
A Landscape Zone composed of high-water usage or non-drought tolerant plants.
Home Occupation
An occupation, which is secondary to the primary use of a dwelling as a residence, conducted on residential premises by the occupant of the residence. Home occupations shall be subject to the conditions set forth in 3.02.01. (A)(18) Home Occupation (Page 102) of the Zoning Ordinance.
Homebuilder Marketing Center
A building or structure used for the marketing and sale of lots or homes.
Hospital
An institution providing primary health services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity, and other abnormal physical or mental conditions, and including, as an integral part of the institution, related facilities such as laboratories, helistops, outpatient facilities, or training facilities as licensed by the State of Texas.
Hotel
A building or group of buildings used as a temporary dwelling place for individuals in exchange for financial consideration where customary hotel services such as linen, housekeeping service, and telephone are provided. Hotel room units are accessed through doorways into an internal hallway, courtyard, or lobby. Financial consideration for Hotel room units is generally calculated on a nightly basis.
Household Care Facility
A dwelling unit which provides residence and care to not more than nine persons, regardless of legal relationship, who are elderly; disabled; orphaned, abandoned, abused, or neglected children; victims of domestic violence; convalescing from illness; terminally ill; or rendered temporarily homeless due to fire, natural disaster or financial setbacks, living together with not more than two supervisory personnel as a single housekeeping unit. Where applicable, a household care facility shall have appropriate licensing and/or registration by the State of Texas.
(Ord. No. 13-06-36; 06/18/13)
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 290 Section 7: Definitions
Illumination Level
Average lighting intensity measured at grade (in foot-candles).
Incandescent Light
Illumination produced by a filament, which is heated by an electric current, including quartz and halogen lights.
Incidental Use
Any use different from the primary use but which complements and/or supplements the primary use. Incidental shall mean an area that constitutes not more than fifteen (15) percent of the main use. An incidental use is also an accessory use.
Indoor Gun or Archery Range
Any indoor facility open to the public and occupying all or a portion of a building where firearms and/or archery are discharged for testing or recreation purposes.
Industrial Park
A large tract of land that has been planned, developed and operated as an integrated facility for a number of individual industrial uses, with special attention to circulation, parking, utility needs, aesthetics, and compatibility.
Infill Development:
The development of structures within previously developed areas which utilize the existing infrastructure.
Institutional Use
A use that provides health, social, or community services, including uses such as hospitals, churches, public recreational centers, or rehabilitation care facilities.
Irrigation Efficiency (IE)
The measurement of the amount of water beneficially used by plants divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices.
Irrigator
A person who holds a license to practice irrigation in the State of Texas.
iSWM
The integrated Storm Water Management (iSWM) program, a site development design manual developed by the North Central Texas Council of Governments (NCTCOG).
Kennel
A use primarily engaged in providing pet care services (except veterinary) for four (4) or more animals, such as boarding, grooming, sitting, and training pets.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 7: Definitions Page | 291
Lamp
The component of a luminary that produces the actual light.
Landfill
A tract of land used for the burial of farm, residential, institutional, industrial, or commercial waste that is not hazardous, medical, or radioactive.
Landscape Architect
A person who holds a license to practice landscape architecture in the State of Texas.
Landscape Water Allowance (LWA)
For design purposes, the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscape area. It is based upon the local reference evapotranspiration rate ET0 (Evapotranspiration, reference (ET0) (Page 285)), the ET0 Adjustment Factor (Page 285), and the size of the landscape area.
Landscape Zone
A portion of the landscape area having plants with similar water requirements, site conditions or functions. (See Natural Landscape Zone, Water Resource Zone, and High Water Usage Zone).
Landscaping
Material such as, but not limited to, grass, groundcovers, shrubs, vines, hedges, trees , and non-living durable material commonly used in landscaping, such as, but not limited to, rocks, pebbles, sand, walls or fences, but excluding paving.
Laundromat
A facility where patrons wash, dry, or dry-clean clothing and other fabrics in machines operated by the patron.
Light Load Vehicles
A self-propelled vehicle having a Manufacturer's Recommended Gross Vehicle Weight (GVW) not greater than 11,000 pounds, and having no more than two (2) axles, such as pick-up trucks, vans, recreational vehicles (less than thirty-two [32] feet in length), campers and other similar vehicles but not including automobiles and motorcycles.
Light Pollution
The shining of light produced by luminaires above the height of the luminaires and into the sky.
Light Trespass
The shining of light produced by luminaires beyond the boundaries of the property on which it is located.
Limited Assembly and Manufacturing Use Complying with Performance Standards
The fabrication, assembly, manufacturing, and packaging of finished products or parts, predominantly from previously prepared materials, but excluding basic industrial processing. Such operations shall be determined by Health, Fire, and Building officials not to be a hazard or nuisance to adjacent property or the community at large, due to the possible emission of excessive smoke, noise, gas, fumes, dust, odor, or vibration, or the danger of fire, explosion, or radiation.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 292 Section 7: Definitions
Loading Space
An off-street space or berth used for the delivery and loading or unloading of vehicles.
Locksmith/Security System Company
Establishments primarily engaged in providing, installing, repairing, and/or monitoring locks and electronic security systems.
Lot
Any plot of land occupied or intended to be occupied by one main building and the required parking, or a group of main buildings, and accessory building and uses, including such open spaces as are required by the Ordinance, and other laws or ordinances, and having its principal frontage on a public street or officially approved place.
(A) See Figure 9.01.01.3: Front Yard, Building Line, and Lot Width Measurement (Page 319)
(B) See Figure 9.01.01.5: Determining Lot Depth on an Irregular Shaped Lot (Page 320)
(C) See Figure 9.01.01.6: Yard Measurements (Page 320)
Lot, Area
The total area, measured on a horizontal plane, included within lot lines.
Lot, Corner
A lot which has at least two adjacent sides abutting for their full lengths on a street, provided that the interior angle at the intersection of such two sides is less than one hundred thirty-five degrees (135°).
Lot, Depth
The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. Thoroughfare easements shall not be included in lot depth calculations.
(A) See Figure 9.01.01.5: Determining Lot Depth on an Irregular Shaped Lot (Page 320)
Lot, Double Frontage
A lot having a frontage on two (2) non-intersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot.
Lot, Flag or Panhandle
A lot having access to a street by means of a parcel of land having a depth greater than its frontage, and having a width less than the minimum required lot width, but not less than twenty-five (25) feet. The maximum distance of the area less than the required width from the front property line shall be one hundred ten (110) feet.
Lot, Interior
A lot other than a corner lot.
Lot, Key
A corner lot that is so designed that the lots located directly behind it face the side street of the corner lot and are not separated by an alley shall be considered a key lot.
(A) See Figure 4.07.03.1: Key Lot (Page 176)
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 7: Definitions Page | 293
Lot Frontage
That dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a street, excluding the side dimension of a corner lot.
Lot Line, Front
The narrower side of the lot abutting a street. Where two lot lines abutting streets are of equal length, the owner shall have a choice in designating which shall be the lot frontage. For a lot which has a boundary line which does not abut the front street line, is not a rear lot line and lies along the same general directional orientation as the front and rear lot lines, said line shall be considered a front lot line in establishing minimum setback lines.
(A) See Figure 9.01.01.3: Front Yard, Building Line, and Lot Width Measurement (Page 319)
Lot Line, Rear
The lot line farthest from and most parallel to the front lot line. For triangular lots, the point opposite the front lot line shall be considered the rear lot line and have a value of zero.
(A) See Figure 9.01.01.6: Yard Measurements (Page 320)
Lot Line, Side
Any lot line not the front or rear lot line.
Lot Lines or Property Lines
The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
Lot of Record
A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the County Clerk of Collin or Denton County or a lot subdivided by metes and bounds description prior to February 1984.
Lot Width
The horizontal distance measured between side lot lines parallel to the front lot line, and measured from the point on the building line that is closest to the front lot line.
(A) See Figure 9.01.01.3: Front Yard, Building Line, and Lot Width Measurement (Page 319)
Lumen
Unit used to express the light output of a lamp or fixture.
Luminary
A complete lighting unit consisting of a light source and all necessary mechanical, electrical and decorative parts.
Luminous Tube Lighting
Gas-filled tubing which, when subjected to high voltage, becomes luminescent in a color characteristic of the particular gas used (e.g. neon, argon, etc.).
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 294 Section 7: Definitions
Machine Shop
A workshop where metal fabrication tools, including, but not limited to, lathes, presses, and mills, are used for making, finishing, or repairing machines or machine parts.
Major Thoroughfare
A six lane divided roadway as identified on the Thoroughfare Plan of the Comprehensive Plan.
Masonry Construction
(A) Primary Materials
Unless otherwise provided for in this Ordinance, exterior construction materials are fired brick, natural and manufactured stone, granite, marble, architectural concrete block, and 3-step stucco process for all structures.
(B) Other Materials
Other exterior construction materials for nonresidential structures are tilt wall concrete panels and sealed and painted concrete block.
Massage Therapy, Licensed
Any place of business in which massage therapy is practiced by a massage therapist, as defined and licensed by State law. "Massage therapy", as a health care service, means the manipulation of soft tissue for therapeutic purposes. The term includes, but is not limited to, effleurage (stroking), petrissage (kneading), tapotement (percussion), compression, vibration, friction, nerve strokes, and Swedish gymnastics, either by hand or with mechanical or electrical apparatus for the purpose of body message. Massage therapy may include the use of oil, salt glows, heat lamps, hot and cold packs, tub, shower or cabinet baths. Equivalent terms for "massage therapy" are massage, therapeutic massage. Massage and "therapeutic" do not include diagnosis, the treatment of illness or disease, or any service or procedure for which a license to practice medicine, chiropractic, physical therapy, or podiatry is required by law.
Massage Therapy, Unlicensed
Any place of business in which massage therapy is practiced by an unlicensed massage therapist. "Massage therapy", as a health care service, means the manipulation of soft tissue for therapeutic purposes. The term includes, but is not limited to, effleurage (stroking), petrissage (kneading), tapotement (percussion), compression, vibration, friction, nerve strokes, and Swedish gymnastics, either by hand or with mechanical or electrical apparatus for the purpose of body message. Massage therapy may include the use of oil, salt glows, heat lamps, hot and cold packs, tub, shower or cabinet baths. Equivalent terms for "massage therapy" are massage, therapeutic massage. Massage and "therapeutic" do not include diagnosis, the treatment of illness or disease, or any service or procedure for which a license to practice medicine, chiropractic, physical therapy, or podiatry is required by law.
Mini-Warehouse/Self-Storage
A building(s) containing separate, individual self-storage units for rent or lease. The conduct of sales, business, or any activity other than storage shall be prohibited within any individual storage unit.
Miscellaneous Hazardous Industrial Use
Any industrial use not specifically defined in this section that is a hazard or nuisance to adjacent property or the community at large, due to the possible emission of excessive smoke, noise, gas, fumes, dust, odor, or vibration, or the danger of fire, explosion, or radiation.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 7: Definitions Page | 295
Mobile Food Vendor
Any person or persons who operates or sells food from a stationary cart, or trailer mounted on chassis, but without an engine for period of fifteen (15) calendar days or greater per year. Mobile food vendors who operate for fourteen (14) calendar days or less shall be considered temporary food establishments, as defined by the City Health Ordinance as it exists or may be amended.
Manufactured Home (HUD Code)
A factory-built, single-family structure, which is manufactured or constructed under authority of 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5403, Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards, and is to be used as a place for human habitation and is constructed with a permanent chassis and displays a red HUD certification label.
Model Home
A single family dwelling in a developing subdivision located on a legal lot of record that is limited to temporary use as a sales office for the subdivision and to provide an example of the dwellings which have been built or which are proposed to be built in the same subdivision.
Modular Home (or Industrialized Housing)
Per Section 1202 of the Texas Occupations Code or as may be amended:
(A) Modular or Industrialized housing is a residential structure that is:
(1) Designed for the occupancy of one or more families,
(2) Constructed in one or more modules or constructed using one or more modular components built at a location other than the permanent site, and
(3) Designed to be used as a permanent residential structure when the module or the modular component is transported to the permanent site and erected or installed on a permanent foundation system.
(B) Modular or Industrialized housing includes the structure's plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems.
(C) Modular or Industrialized housing does not include:
(1) A residential structure that exceeds three stories or 49 feet in height as measured from the finished grade elevation at the building entrance to the peak of the roof,
(2) Housing constructed of a sectional or panelized system that does not use a modular component, or
(3) A ready-built home constructed in a manner in which the entire living area is contained in a single unit or section at a temporary location for the purpose of selling and moving the home to another location.
Mortuary/Funeral Parlor
A place for the storage of human bodies prior to their burial or cremation, or a building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial and the display of the deceased and ceremonies connected therewith before burial or cremation.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 296 Section 7: Definitions
Motel
A building or group of buildings used as a temporary dwelling place for individuals in exchange for financial consideration where customary hotel services such as linen, housekeeping service, and telephone are provided. Each motel room unit has direct access to the outside. Financial consideration for Motel room units is generally calculated on a nightly basis.
Motorcycle
A usually two-wheeled self-propelled vehicle having one or two saddles or seats, and which may have a sidecar attached. For purposes of this ordinance, motorbikes, motor scooters, mopeds, and similar vehicles are classified as motorcycles.
Motorcycle Sales/Service
The display, sale, repair, and servicing of new or used motorcycles.
Motor Vehicle
Any vehicle designed to carry one or more persons, which is propelled or drawn by mechanical power, such as automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, and buses.
Multifamily Residence
Attached dwelling units designed to be occupied by three or more households living independently of one another, exclusive of hotels, motels, or residence hotels.
Municipal Uses Operated by the City
Any area, land, building, structure, and/or facility owned, used, leased, or operated by the City, including, but not limited to, administrative office, maintenance facility, fire station, library, sewage treatment plant, police station, water tower, service center, park, heliport, helistop, and golf course.
Museum/Art Gallery
A building serving as a repository for a collection of natural, scientific, artistic, or literary objects of interest, and designed to be used for viewing, with or without an admission charge, and which may include as an accessory use the sale of goods.
Natural Landscape Zone
A landscape zone composed of native and adapted plants that do not require irrigation after establishment.
Net Acreage, Lot
The acreage within the platted lot.
Net Acreage, Subdivision
The total remaining acres of a subdivision after subtracting land dedicated for rights-of-way greater than sixty (60) feet, floodplains, and erosion hazard setbacks, easements greater than twenty (20) feet, areas for thoroughfare screening, and land provided for City and school district purposes.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 7: Definitions Page | 297
New Urbanism
The process of reintegrating the components of modern life – housing, workplace, shopping, and recreation – into compact, pedestrian friendly, mixed-use neighborhoods linked by transit and set in a larger regional open space framework. New Urbanism is commonly referred to as “neotraditional planning” or “traditional neighborhood development.”
Nonconforming Use
A building, structure, or use of land lawfully occupied at the time of the effective date of this ordinance or amendments thereto, but which does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is situated.
Nonresidential
Property zoned or used for other than residential purposes.
Notice of Incomplete Application
See Subsection 6.07 Vesting and Complete Application Requirement (Page 245).
Nursery, Major
An establishment for the cultivation and propagation, display, storage, and sale (retail and wholesale) of large plants, shrubs, trees, and other materials used in indoor or outdoor plantings; and the contracting for installation and/or maintenance of landscape material as an accessory use. Outdoor display and storage is permitted.
Nursery, Minor
A retail business for the display and/or sale of trees, shrubs, flowers, ornamental plants, seeds, garden and lawn supplies, and other materials used in indoor and outdoor planting, without outside storage or display.
Nursing/Convalescent Home
An institutional facility licensed by the State of Texas providing in-patient health care, personal care or rehabilitative services over a long period of time generally exceeding thirty days to persons chronically ill, aged or disabled who need on-going health supervision but not including hospitals. This use excludes the provision of surgical or emergency medical services and the provision of care for alcoholism, drug addiction, mental disease, or communicable disease.
Occupancy Classification
The use or intended use of the land or buildings by proprietors or tenants.
Office, Administrative, Medical, or Professional
A building used for the provision of executive, management, or administrative services. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, administrative offices and services including real estate, property management, investment, medical, architect, engineer, travel, secretarial services, accounting organizations and associations, and vehicle rental office without on-site storage of fleet vehicles.
Office and Storage Area for Public/Private Utility
The pole yard, maintenance yard, or administrative office of public or private utilities.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 298 Section 7: Definitions
Office Center
A building or complex of buildings used primarily for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry or government, or like activity, that may include ancillary services for office workers such as a coffee shop, newspaper or candy stand.
Office/Showroom
A building that primarily consists of sales offices and sample display areas for products and/or services delivered or performed off-premises. Catalog and telephone sales facilities are appropriate. Incidental retail sales of products associated with the primary products and/or services are permitted. Warehousing facilities shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the total floor area. This designation does not include contractor’s shop and storage yard.
Office/Warehouse/Distribution Center
A building primarily devoted to storage, warehousing, and distribution of goods, merchandise, supplies, and equipment. Accessory uses may include retail and wholesale sales areas, sales offices, and display areas for products sold and distributed from the storage and warehousing areas.
Officially Approved Place of Access
Access, other than a dedicated street, to a property, which is approved by the City.
Oil Well/Gas Well and Mineral Extraction
Area used for development and production and all operational activities associated with oil and gas for any well drilled, to be drilled, or used for the intended or actual production of oil or natural gas, or a well classified as an oil or gas well under the laws of the State of Texas. Mineral extraction is the process of extracting sand, gravel, stone, or other minerals/natural resources from the earth.
Open Ornamental Fence
Fencing constructed with wrought iron, tubular steel or similar materials and designed to allow for partial visibility from one side of the fence to the other. Open ornamental fences may have solid masonry foundations, columns, or similar features. Chain link fences are not included in this definition.
Figure 6.19.16.2: Open Ornamental Fence with Landscape Materials
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 7: Definitions Page | 299
Outdoor Lighting
The nighttime illumination of an outside area or object by any man-made device located outdoors that produces light by any means.
Outside Storage and Display
A primary land use providing outdoor storage or display of commodities, materials, goods, equipment, vehicles, or merchandise in its normal day-to-day business activities. This definition excludes new and used sale or lease of automobiles, motorcycles recreational vehicles, boats, or watercrafts.
This definition does not include temporary outside merchandise display, such as a sidewalk sale.
Outside Merchandise Display, Temporary
A temporary display of merchandise for sale outside of a building for no more than 72 hours.
Park or Playground
An area developed for active play and recreation that includes, but is not limited to, open space, sports courts, play equipment, and trails.
Parking Lot
An off-street, ground level area, usually surfaced and improved, for the temporary storage of motor vehicles.
Parking Space
An area reserved exclusively for the parking of a motor vehicle.
Patio Home (or Zero Lot Line Residence)
A lot which is designed in such a manner that the side yard and adjacent use easement make maximum use of available land area to preserve an open, yet private, use of the side yard, and permits construction of a detached single family dwelling with one side of such dwelling placed on the side property line.
Pawn Shop
An establishment where money is loaned on the security of personal property pledged in the keeping of the owners (pawnbroker).
Permit
A license, certificate, approval, registration, consent, permit, contract or other agreement for the construction or provision of service from a utility owned, operated, or controlled by the City, or other form of authorization required by law, rule, regulation, order, or ordinance, which has been approved by the City, that a person or entity must obtain to perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project for which the permit is sought, and for which the application for the permit or information required to be submitted for consideration provides fair notice of the project to the City. Notwithstanding, an ordinance establishing or changing a zoning district, including but not limited to an ordinance establishing or amending a Planned Development District or Specific Use Permit, is not considered a permit.
Photometric Plan
A point-by-point plan depicting the intensity and location of lighting on the property.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 300 Section 7: Definitions
Plan for Development of Real Property or a Plan for Development
An administratively complete application for a Preliminary Site Plan or Site Plan. An application for a Preliminary Site Plan or Site Plan shall be considered administratively complete when all information required to be submitted by Subsection 6.05 Site Plan Requirements (Page 232) for consideration has been received by the City, in addition to any required fees.
Planned Development District
Planned associations of uses developed as integral land use units such as industrial parks or industrial districts, offices, commercial or service centers, shopping centers, residential developments of multiple or mixed housing, including attached single family dwellings or any appropriate combination of uses which may be planned, developed or operated or integral land use units either by a single owner or a combination of owners.
Planning & Zoning Commission
A board, appointed by the City Council as an advisory body, authorized to recommend changes in the zoning and other planning functions as delegated by the City Council. Also referred to as the "Commission."
Plant Coefficient (Pc)
A coefficient that, when multiplied by the reference evapotranspiration rate, estimates the amount of water used by plants.
Plat
A plan of a subdivision of land creating building lots and showing all essential dimensions and other information essential to comply with the subdivision standards of the City and subject to approval by the Planning & Zoning Commission and filed in the plat records of either Collin or Denton County.
Plot
A single unit or parcel of land that can be identified and referenced to a recorded plat or map.
Portable Building Sales
An establishment that displays and sells structures which are capable of being carried and transported to another location, not including manufactured homes.
Premises
Land together with any buildings or structures situated thereon.
Primary Use
The principal or predominant use of any lot or building.
Print Shop, Major
An establishment specializing in long-run printing operations including, but not limited to, book, magazine, and newspaper publishing using engraving, die cutting, lithography, and thermography processes.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 7: Definitions Page | 301
Print Shop, Minor
An establishment specializing in short-run operations to produce newsletters, flyers, resumes, maps, construction documents and plans, and similar materials using photocopying, duplicating, and blue printing processes. This definition shall include mailing and shipping services, but excludes the on-site storage of heavy load fleet vehicles.
Private Club
An establishment holding a Private Club permit under Chapter 32 or 33 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended, that derives thirty-five (35) percent or more of its gross revenue from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption and that is located within a dry area as defined in Title 6 (Local Option Elections) of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended.
Private Club does not include a fraternal or veteran’s organization, as defined in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended, holding a private club permit under Chapter 32 or 33 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code.
A Private Club does not include the holder of a food and beverage certificate, as defined in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended. Unless the person owning or operating the use supplies the Chief Building Official with records to prove otherwise, an establishment holding a Private Club permit under Chapter 32 or 33 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended, is presumed to derive thirty-five (35) percent or more of its gross revenue from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption.
Private Street Development
A development of two (2) or more lots sharing private gated vehicular access ways that are not dedicated to the public and are not publicly maintained. Private streets and alleys may be established only under the terms of the Subdivision Ordinance. The term "Private Street" shall be inclusive of alleys.
Private Utility (other than listed)
A non-public utility requiring special facilities in residential areas or on public property such as electricity, natural gas, or telecommunications not customarily provided by the municipality or public utilities. All radiating equipment must comply with current Federal Communications Commission (FCC), Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Occupational Health and Safety Administration (OSHA), and all other applicable State and Federal regulatory agency requirements and guidelines for human safety.
Progress Towards Completion
See Section 245.005(c) of the Texas Local Government Code, as it exists or may be amended, unless another meaning is specified.
Project
An endeavor over which the City exerts its jurisdiction and for which one or more permits are required to initiate, continue, or complete the endeavor.
Protected Residential Property
Any property within the City that meets one of the following requirements:
(A) The property is zoned a residential district as defined within the Zoning Ordinance or zoned a planned development for residential uses;
(B) The property is designated in the Comprehensive Plan as any type of residential; or
(C) The property is used or subdivided for use as residential.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 302 Section 7: Definitions
Public/Semi-Public Uses
Any uses that are educational, governmental or institutional in nature.
Railroad Track and Right-Of-Way
The right-of-way and track used by a railroad, but not including railroad stations, sidings, team tracks, loading facilities, dockyards, or maintenance areas.
Recreational Vehicle (RV)
A portable or mobile living unit used for temporary human occupancy away from the place of permanent residence of the occupants and self-propelled (motorized). Also see heavy load vehicle.
Recreational Vehicle Sales and Service, New/Used
Sales and/or leasing of new and/or used recreational vehicles or boats, including, as an accessory use, repair work of recreational vehicles and boats.
Recreational Vehicle/Truck Parking Lot or Garage
An area or structure designed for the short or long-term parking or storage of recreational vehicles, boats, or heavy load vehicles.
Recycling Center
A facility in which recoverable resources, such as newspapers, glassware, and metal cans are collected, stored, flattened, crushed, or bundled, essentially by hand within a completely enclosed building.
Recycling Collection Point
An incidental use that serves as a neighborhood drop-off point for temporary storage of recoverable resources. No processing of such items is allowed. This facility would generally be located in a shopping center parking lot or in other public/quasi-public areas such as in churches and schools.
Recycling Plant
A facility that is not a junkyard and in which recoverable resources, such as newspapers, magazines, books, and other paper products; glass; metal cans; and other products, are recycled, reprocessed, and treated to return such products to a condition in which they may again be used for production.
Redevelopment
Any manmade change or alteration to a design and/or layout of an existing Development(s) including repair, expansion and/or removal and replacement of existing building and/or structure, paving drainage, utilities, storage and/or agricultural uses.
Rehabilitation Care Facility
Subject to being licensed to operate by the Texas Department of Aging and Disability Services (DADS), a dwelling unit which provides residence and care to not more than nine (9) persons regardless of legal relationship who have demonstrated a tendency towards alcoholism, drug abuse, mental illness, or antisocial or criminal conduct living together with not more than two supervisory personnel as a single housekeeping unit.
(Ord. No. 13-06-36; 06/18/13)
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 7: Definitions Page | 303
Rehabilitation Care Institution
Subject to being licensed to operate by the Texas Department of Again and Disability Services (DADS), a facility which provides residence and care to ten (10) or more persons, regardless of legal relationship, who have demonstrated a tendency toward alcoholism, drug abuse, mental illness, or antisocial or criminal conduct together with supervisory personnel.
Research and Development Center
A facility that includes laboratories and experimental equipment for medical testing, prototype design and development, and product testing. Any facility that is determined by Health, Fire, or Building officials to be a hazard or nuisance to adjacent property or the community at large, due to the possible emission of excessive smoke, noise, gas, fumes, dust, odor, or vibration, or the danger of fire, explosion, or radiation is not to be included in this category.
Residence
Any building or portion thereof, which is designed or used as living quarters for one (1) or more households.
Residence Hotel (Extended Stay Hotel)
A building or group of buildings used as a temporary dwelling place for individuals in exchange for financial consideration where customary hotel services such as linen, housekeeping service, and telephone are provided. Residence Hotel room units are designed to be suitable for long term occupancy with financial consideration being calculated on a nightly, weekly, and/or monthly basis. Typical Residence Hotel attributes include, but are not limited to, kitchen facilities, two-story design, and external doorways into room units.
Residential District
District where the primary purpose is residential use.
Restaurant
An establishment where food and drink are prepared and consumed primarily on the premises. Drive-up windows are permitted.
Restaurant, Drive-In
An eating establishment where primarily food or drink is served to customers in motor vehicles or where facilities are provided on the premises which encourage the serving and consumption of food in automobiles on or near the restaurant premises.
Retail Stores and Shops
An establishment engaged in the selling of goods and merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods.
Retail/Service, Incidental
Any use different from the primary use but which complements and/or supplements the primary use. Said use shall be operated for the benefit or convenience of the employees, visitors, or customers of the primary use. Incidental shall mean an area that constitutes not more than fifteen (15) percent of the main use.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 304 Section 7: Definitions
Retirement Housing
Any age restricted development which may be in any housing form, including detached and attached dwelling units, apartments, and residences, offering private and semiprivate rooms and designed to provide meals and nursing care.
Riparian Buffer
An area of permanent vegetation adjacent to a water course and actively managed to maintain the integrity of stream channels and shorelines to reduce the impact of upland sources by trapping, filtering, and converting pollutants and supplying food, cover, and thermal protection to fish and other wildlife. The Director shall establish and maintain a Riparian Buffer/Corridor Map.
Riparian Corridor
An ecosystem that includes three (3) major components: stream channel, floodplain, and transitional upland fringe. The Director shall establish and maintain a Riparian Buffer/Corridor Map indicating Riparian Corridor locations.
Room
A building or portion of a building that is arranged, occupied, or intended to be occupied as living or sleeping quarters but not including toilet or cooking facilities.
Salvage Yard
Any lot upon which two (2) or more motor vehicles of any kind, which are incapable of being operated due to condition or lack of license, have been placed for the purpose of obtaining parts for recycling or resale.
Satellite Dish Antenna
An oval or round, parabolic apparatus capable of receiving television communications.
School, Private
A school operated by a private or religious agency or corporation other than an independent school district, having a curriculum generally equivalent to a public elementary or secondary school.
School, Public
A school operated by an independent school district and providing elementary or secondary curriculum.
School District Bus Yard
Any premises owned and/or operated by an independent school district used for the parking and storage of motor-driven buses.
Servant's Quarters
An accessory dwelling in a residential district for the sole use and occupancy of a member of the immediate family or a person or persons employed on the premises by the occupant on a full time basis as domestic help.
Sewage Treatment Plant/Pumping Station
A facility owned and/or operated by a private entity that is designed for the collection, removal, treatment, and/or disposal of water borne sewage.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 7: Definitions Page | 305
Sexually Oriented Uses
Sexually oriented establishments and businesses as defined in City Ordinance Nos. 87-05-03, 91-02-05, 97-10-18, and 97-10-19 as they exist or may be amended. Sexually oriented uses include, but are not limited to, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult theater, adult cabaret, sexual encounter center, and nude modeling center.
Shopping Center
A group of primarily retail and service commercial establishments planned, constructed and managed as a total entity with customer and employee parking provided on-site, provision for goods delivery separated from customer access, provision of aesthetically appropriate design and protection from the elements.
Single Family Residence, Attached
A building having separate accommodations for, and occupied by not more than, two (2) households, whereby each individual dwelling unit is located on a separate lot of record as a result of the property line being coincident with the common wall separating each dwelling unit, such that dwelling units may be individually owned.
Single Family Residence, Detached
A dwelling designed and constructed for occupancy by one (1) household and having no physical connection to a building located on any other separate lot or tract.
Small Engine Repair Shop
A shop for the repair of lawnmowers, chainsaws, lawn equipment, and other small engine equipment and machinery.
Smart Controller
Smart controllers estimate or measure depletion of available plant soil moisture in order to operate an irrigation system, replenishing water as needed while minimizing excess water use. A properly programmed smart controller requires initial site specific set-up and will make irrigation schedule adjustments, including run times and required cycles, throughout the irrigation season without human intervention.
Stable, Commercial
A stable used for the rental of stall space or for the sale or rental of horses or mules.
Storage or Wholesale Warehouse
A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials.
Story
That portion of a building included between the upper surface of a floor and the upper surface of the floor or roof next above (also see “Mezzanine” and Section 502.1 from the 2006 International Building Code). It is measured as the vertical distance from top to top of two successive tiers of beams or finished floor surfaces and, for the topmost story, from the top of the floor finish to the top of the ceiling joists or, where there is not a ceiling, to the top of the roof rafters.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 306 Section 7: Definitions
Story, Half
A single room within a dwelling unit above the second floor. A half-story will occupy no less than two-thirds (2/3) of the area under the roof, and shall have non-operating opaque windows for façades that face adjacent properties. Transparent windows may face the front yard. A half-story containing independent apartment, living quarters, or bedroom shall be counted as a full story.
Street
Any dedicated public thoroughfare that affords the principal means of access to abutting property.
Street, Intersection
Any street that joins another street at an angle, whether or not it crosses the other.
Structural Alterations
Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams, or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls.
Structural Soil
A soil medium which is designed to meet or exceed pavement load bearing requirements while remaining root penetrable and supportive of tree growth.
Structure
Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or which is attached to something having a location on the ground (also see definition of Building).
Studio Residence
A residence that includes up to fifty (50) percent of its total floor area as a work area for a photographer, artist, musician, architect, or similar occupation. The primary occupant of the work area must also be a permanent resident of the dwelling unit. All activities associated with the studio shall take place in the primary structure, as opposed to an accessory building or yard.
Taxidermist
An establishment whose principal business is the practice of preparing, stuffing, and mounting the skins of dead animals for exhibition in a lifelike state.
Telephone Exchange
A central switching hub servicing the public at large in which telephone lines are connected to permit communication.
Temporary Building
An industrialized or modular building or structure without a permanent foundation shall be considered a temporary building. Membrane structures shall not be considered a temporary building.
Temporary Irrigation
An irrigation system that is used to establish native and adapted plants species and is removed after a one year establishment period.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 7: Definitions Page | 307
Temporary Outdoor Lighting
The specific illumination of an outside area or object by any man-made device located outdoors that produces light by any means for a period of less than four (4) calendar days with at least one-hundred and eighty (180) calendar days passing before being used again.
Theater, Drive-In
An open lot devoted to the showing of motion pictures or theatrical productions on a paid admission basis to patrons seated in automobiles.
Theater, Neighborhood
A building or part of a building devoted to the showing of motion pictures or for dramatic, musical, or live performances, with a maximum of ten screens, stages, or combination thereof or a combined seating capacity of 2,500 or less.
Theater, Regional
A building or portion of a building used primarily for showing motion pictures or for dramatic, musical, or live performance having more than ten screens, stages, or combination thereof or a combined seating capacity greater than 2,500.
Townhome
A structure containing three (3) to eight (8) dwelling units with each unit designed for occupancy by one household and each unit attached to another by a common wall.
Tract
An un-platted area, parcel, site, piece of land, or property that is the subject of a zoning or development application.
Trailer, Hauling
A vehicle to be pulled behind an automobile or truck which is designed for hauling animals, produce, goods or commodities, including boats.
Trailer, Travel or Camping
A portable or mobile living unit used for temporary human occupancy away from the place of residence of the occupants, and not constituting the principal place of residence of the occupants designed to be towed behind another vehicle.
Trailer Rental
The display and offering for rent of trailers designed to be towed by light load vehicles.
Trailer/Manufactured Home Display and Sales
The offering for sale, storage, or display of trailers or manufactured homes on a parcel of land but excluding the use of such facilities as dwellings either on a temporary or permanent basis.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 308 Section 7: Definitions
Transit Center
Any premises, including train or bus stations, for the loading and unloading of passengers and the temporary parking of transit vehicles between routes or during stopovers and excluding overnight parking and storage of transit vehicles.
Tree
A plant having a permanently woody main stem or trunk, ordinarily growing to a considerable height, and usually developing branches at some distance from the ground.
Tree, Protected
(A) Trees that meet the following requirement and are determined to be healthy by the Director:
(1) Any tree six (6) inches or larger in diameter when measured at a point four and one-half feet (4½') above the ground level and which normally attains a height of at least twelve (12) feet at maturity.
(B) The following trees are excluded from the above definition of Protected Tees.
#
Common Name
Botanical Name
1
Bois d’ Arc
Maclura pomifera
2
Chinaberry
Melia azedarach
3
Cottonwood
Poplus deltoides
4
Hackberry, Texas Sugarberry
Celtis laevigata
5
Honey Locust
Gleditsia triacanthos
6
Mesquite
Poplus deltoides
7
Mimosa
Mimosa sp.
8
Mulberry
Morus rubra
9
Silver Leaf Maple
Acer saccharinum
10
White Poplar
Poplus alba
11
Willow
Willow sp.
Tree, Replacement or Transplanted
(A) Any tree that is listed under 4.02.03. (A) Approved Plant Materials (Page 124) of the Zoning Ordinance, as it exists or may be amended, and/or utilized for mitigation of Protected Trees that have been or are required to be removed and replaced or transplanted under the requirements of the Ordinance.
(B) A Replacement Tree is one that has been planted to mitigate the removal of a tree from the property.
(C) A Transplanted Tree is one that exists on the property and is relocated within the property.
(D) Replacement/Transplanted Trees are a minimum size of three (3) inches when measured at a point twelve (12) inches above the natural ground level and will normally attain a height of at least twelve (12) feet at maturity.
Tree, Street
A street tree is a tree required between the back of the curb and the sidewalk.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 7: Definitions Page | 309
Truck
A light or heavy load vehicle (see definition for light and heavy load vehicle).
Truck Sales, Heavy Trucks
The display, storage, sale, leasing, or rental of new or used panel trucks, vans, trailers, recreational vehicles, or buses in operable condition.
Truck Terminal
An area and building where cargo is stored and where trucks, including tractors and trailer units, load and unload cargo on a regular basis, including facilities for the temporary storage of loads prior to shipment.
Truck/Bus Repair
An establishment providing major and minor repair services to panel trucks, vans, trailers, recreational vehicles, or buses.
Two Family Residence (Duplex)
A detached dwelling designed with a common vertical wall between units and to be occupied by two households living independently of each other.
Urban Mixed Use
A development or portion of a development that includes a mixture of residential and nonresidential uses in a configuration where a majority of the buildings are two or more stories tall and pedestrian oriented.
Usable Open Space
(A) Usable Open Space
(1) An area or recreational facility that is designed and intended to be used for outdoor living and/or recreation.
(B) Space Defined
(1) An area of common usable open space:
a. Shall have a slope not exceeding ten (10) percent;
b. Shall have no dimension of less than fifteen (15) feet; and
c. May include recreational facilities, water features, required perimeter landscape areas, floodplain areas and decorative objects such as art work or fountains.
(C) Usable open space shall not include:
(1) Walks,
(2) Rooftops,
(3) Accessory buildings, except those portions or any building designed specifically for recreational purposes,
(4) Parking areas,
(5) Landscaped parking requirements,
(6) Driveways,
(7) Turn-arounds, or
(8) Right-of-way or easement for streets or alleys.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 310 Section 7: Definitions
Utility Distribution/Transmission Line
Facilities, including subsidiary stations, that serve to distribute, transmit, transform, or reduce the pressure of gas, water, or electric current, including, but not limited to, electrical transmission lines, gas transmission lines, and metering stations.
Variance
An adjustment in the application of the specific regulations of the Zoning Ordinance to a particular parcel of property which, because of special conditions or circumstances of hardship peculiar to the particular parcel, is necessary to prevent the property from being deprived of rights and privileges enjoyed by other parcels in the same vicinity and zoning district. Only the Board of Adjustment of the City can grant a variance.
Veterinarian Clinic and/or Kennel, Indoor
An establishment, not including outside pens/kennels, where animals and pets are admitted for examination and medical treatment, or where domesticated animals are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained, or sold for commercial purposes.
Veterinarian Clinic and/or Kennel, Outdoor
An establishment with outdoor pens/kennels, where animals and pets are admitted for examination and medical treatment, or where domesticated animals are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained, or sold for commercial purposes.
Village Green
A communal usable open space area or park central to a neighborhood.
Water Resource Zone
A landscape zone that is designed for the purpose of capturing, filtering, reusing or infiltrating rainwater with the intended purpose of protecting and conserving water resources.
Water Treatment Plant
A facility owned and/or operated by a private entity that is used to alter the physical, chemical, or biological quality of water.
Wind Energy Conversion Systems, Farm or Utility
The principal use of the land is the commercial production of energy through one or multiple wind energy conversion systems (WECS).
Wind Energy Conversion Systems, Small
A small wind energy conversion systems (WECS) shall be defined as any device such as a wind charger, windmill, or wind turbine, which converts wind energy to a form of usable energy and is an incidental use to the primary use of a property.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 7: Definitions Page | 311
Yard
An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except where otherwise specifically provided in this Ordinance that the building or structure may be located in a portion of a yard required for a main building. In measuring a yard for the purpose of determining the width of the side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the shortest horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used.
(A) See Figure 4.07.02.2: Method for Measuring Front Yards (Page 173).
Yard, Front
A yard located in front of the front elevation of a building and extending across a lot between the side yard lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the front property line and the outside wall of the main building.
(A) See Figure 9.01.01.3: Front Yard, Building Line, and Lot Width Measurement (Page 319).
Yard, Rear
The area extending across the rear of a lot measured between the lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the outside wall of the main building. On both corner lots and interior lots, the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard.
(A) See Figure 9.01.01.6: Yard Measurements (Page 320).
Yard, Side
The area between the building and side line of the lot and extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line and being the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the outside wall of the side of the main building.
(A) See Figure 9.01.01.6: Yard Measurements (Page 320).
Zoning Application
A request to consider an ordinance establishing or changing a zoning district, including but not limited to an ordinance establishing or amending a Planned Development District or Specific Use Permit.
Zoning District Map
The official map upon which the boundaries of the various zoning districts are drawn and which is an integral part of the Zoning Ordinance.
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 312 Section 7: Definitions
THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK FOR DOUBLE-SIDED PRINTING
Section 8. Administrative Clauses
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 314 Section 8: Administrative Clauses
Subsection 8.01. Savings / Repealing
(A) Illegal Uses
By the passage of this Ordinance, no presently illegal use shall be deemed to have been legalized unless specifically such use falls within a use district where the actual use is a conforming use.
(1) Otherwise, such uses shall remain nonconforming uses where recognized, or an illegal use, as the case may be.
(B) Repealing
All provisions of any ordinance in conflict with this Ordinance are hereby repealed; but such repeal shall not abate any pending prosecution for violation of the repealed ordinance, nor shall the repeal prevent a prosecution from being commenced for any violation if occurring prior to the repeal of the Ordinance.
Subsection 8.02. Penalty for Violations
(A) Violation
A person who knowingly violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each day during which the violation is continued.
(B) Fine
Each offense is punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000 nor less than $200, imprisonment, or both. The minimum fine established in this paragraph shall be doubled for the second conviction of the same offense within any 24-month period and tripled for the third and subsequent convictions of the same offense within any 24-month period. At no time shall the minimum fine exceed the maximum fine established in this paragraph.
(C) Legal Rights
The penal provision imposed under this Ordinance shall not preclude the City of Frisco from filing suit to enjoin the violation. The City of Frisco retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state, and federal law.
Subsection 8.03. Severability
(A) Unconstitutional or Invalid Section
Should any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance be declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, it is expressly provided that any and all remaining portions of this Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.
(B) Independent Sections
The City hereby declares that it would have passed this Ordinance, and each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and/or phrases be declared unconstitutional or invalid.
Subsection 8.04. Estoppel /Waiver
The failure of the City to enforce any term or condition of this Ordinance shall not constitute a waiver or estoppel or any subsequent violation of this Ordinance.
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 8: Administrative Clauses Page | 315
Subsection 8.05. Publication
This Ordinance shall become effective after its passage and publication as required by law and the City Charter of the City of Frisco, Texas.
Approved as to Form:
Passed and Enrolled
__________Day of, _____________, 20_____
City Attorney (Signature in above box)
Adoption Date
Mayor, City of Frisco, Texas (Signature in above box)
Attest:
City Secretary, City of Frisco, Texas (Signature in above box)
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 316 Section 8: Administrative Clauses
THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK FOR DOUBLE-SIDED PRINTING
Section 9. Appendices
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 318 Section 9: Appendices
Subsection 9.01. Illustrations
9.01.01. Purpose and Use of Illustrations
The following illustrations are intended to be used as references through this Zoning Ordinance.
Figure 9.01.01.1: Floor Area Ratio Illustration of 1:1
Figure 9.01.01.2: Off-Street Maneuvering for Loading and Parking Areas
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 9: Appendices Page | 319
Figure 9.01.01.3: Front Yard, Building Line, and Lot Width Measurement
Figure 9.01.01.4: Front Yard Coverage
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 320 Section 9: Appendices
Figure 9.01.01.5: Determining Lot Depth on an Irregular Shaped Lot
Figure 9.01.01.6: Yard Measurements
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 9: Appendices Page | 321
Figure 9.01.01.7: Lot Lines, Front
Figure 9.01.01.8: Lot Lines, Side
Figure 9.01.01.9: Lot Lines, Rear
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 322 Section 9: Appendices
Figure 9.01.01.10: Parking Layouts
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 9: Appendices Page | 323
Figure 9.01.01.11: Determination of Building Line of Lots with Curved Corners
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 324 Section 9: Appendices
Figure 9.01.01.12: Parking Space Standards
Figure 9.01.01.13: Accessory Building Setbacks
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 9: Appendices Page | 325
Figure 9.01.01.14: Patio Home and Townhome Open Space Requirement
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 326 Section 9: Appendices
Figure 9.01.01.15: Open Space Reduction Exhibit A
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 9: Appendices Page | 327
Figure 9.01.01.16: Open Space Reduction Exhibit B
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 328 Section 9: Appendices
Subsection 9.02. Planned Developments
The Director shall maintain and update a list of all Planned Developments that shall be adopted in reference to this ordinance.
Subsection 9.03. Specific Use Permits
The Director shall maintain and update a list of all Specific Use Permits that shall be adopted in reference to this ordinance.
Subsection 9.04. Historic Landmark Designations
The following tracts of land have been designated as Historic Landmarks. Their locations are indicated on the Zoning District Map by an HL with a numerical value. The following describes the location of the property and various characteristics and conditions of approval:
#
Ordinance
Address (Location)
HL-1
00-09-17
7546 Oak Street (0.6± acre located on the northeast corner of North County Road and Oak Street)
HL-2
07-04-15
7604 Oak Street (1.0 acres)
HL-3
07-04-16
7210 Oak Street (0.6 acres on the northwest of County Road and Oak Street)
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 9: Appendices Page | 329
Subsection 9.05. Conversion Chart for Ordinance Nos. 93-07-11 and 00-11-01
Section
Location within
Ordinance No. 93-07-11
Location within
Ordinance No. 00-11-01
Current Ordinance No. 11-04-09
Enacting Clause
Section 1
Article I, Section 1
Subsection 1.01
Purpose
Section 2
Article I, Section 2
Subsection 1.02
Zoning District Map
Section 3
Article I, Section 3
Subsection 1.03
Zoning District Boundaries
Section 4
Article I, Section 4
0
Compliance Required
Section 5
Article I, Section 5
Subsection 1.05
Zoning Upon Annexation
Section 6
Article I, Section 6
Subsection 6.01
Zoning Districts Established and Definitions
Section 7
Article II, Section 1
Subsection 2.01
Use of Land and Buildings
Section 8
Article II, Section 3
Subsection 3.01
A – Agricultural District
Section 9
Article III, Section 1 (1.01)
2.03.01.
RE – Residential Estate District
Section 10
Article III, Section 1 (2.01)
2.03.02.
SF-1 – Single Family Residential District
Section 11
Article III, Section 1 (3.01)
2.03.03.
SF-2 – Single Family Residential District
Section 12
Article III, Section 1 (4.01)
2.03.04.
SF-3 – Single Family Residential District
Section 13
Article III, Section 1 (5.01)
2.03.05.
SF-4 – Single Family Residential District
Section 14
Article III, Section 1 (6.01)
2.03.06.
SF-5 – Single Family Residential District
Section 15
Article III, Section 1 (7.01)
2.03.07.
SF-6 – Single Family Residential District
Section 16
Article III, Section 1 (8.01)
2.03.08.
PH – Patio Home Residential District
Section 17
Article III, Section 1 (9.01)
2.03.09.
TH – Townhome District
Section 18
Article III, Section 1 (11.01)
2.03.11.
2F – Two Family Residential (Duplex)
Section 19
Article III, Section 1 (10.01)
2.03.10.
MF-1 – Multiple Family District – 1
Section 20
Article III, Section 1 (12.01)
2.03.12.
MF-2 – Multiple Family District – 2
Section 21
Article III, Section 1 (13.01)
2.03.13.
MH – Mobile Home District
Section 22
Article III, Section 1 (14.01)
2.03.14.
O-1 – Office District –1
Section 23
Article III, Section 2 (1.01)
2.04.01.
O-2 – Office District –2
Section 24
Article III, Section 2 (2.01)
2.04.02.
NS – Neighborhood Service District
Section 25
Article III, Section 2 (3.01)
R – Retail
Section 26
Article III, Section 2 (4.01)
2.04.03.
OT – Original Town
Section 27
Article III, Section 2 (5.01)
2.04.04.
C-1 – Commercial District – 1
Section 28
Article III, Section 2 (6.01)
2.04.06.
C-2 – Commercial District – 2
Section 29
Article III, Section 2 (7.01)
2.04.07.
H – Highway District
Section 30
Article III, Section 2 (8.01)
2.04.05.
CO - Corporate Office District
Section 31-1
Article III, Section 2 (9.01)
IT - Information & Technology District
Section 31-2
Article III, Section 2 (10.01)
2.04.08.
I – Industrial District
Section 32
Article III, Section 2 (11.01)
2.04.09.
PD – Planned Development District
Section 33
Article III, Section 3 (1.01)
2.05.01.
SUP or “S” – Specific Use Permits
Section 34
Article III, Section 3 (2.01)
2.05.02.
HL – Historic Landmark District
Section 34[A]
Article III, Section 3 (3.01)
2.05.03.
Preston Road Overlay District
Article III, Section 3 (4.01)
2.05.04.
Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements
Section 35
Article IV, Section 4
Subsection 4.04
Special and Additional Supplementary Regulations
Section 36
Article IV, Section 9
Subsection 4.07
Accessory Building and Use Regulations
Section 37
Article IV, Section 7
Subsection 4.06
Site Plan Approval
Section 38
Article IV, Section 1
Subsection 6.05
Landscape Requirements
Section 39
Article IV, Section 2
Subsection 4.02
Screening Fence and Wall Standards
Section 40
Article IV, Section 5
Subsection 4.03
Lighting and Glare Standards
Section 41
Article IV, Section 6
Subsection 4.05
Tree Preservation Requirements
Article IV, Section 3
Subsection 4.01
Sign Regulations
Article IV, Section 8
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 330 Section 9: Appendices
Section
Location within
Ordinance No. 93-07-11
Location within
Ordinance No. 00-11-01
Current Ordinance No. 11-04-09
Definitions
Section 42
Article II, Section 4
Section 7
Platting Property Not Permanently Zoned
Section 43
Article I, Section 7
Subsection 6.02
Creation of Building Site
Section 44
Article I, Section 8
0
Nonconforming Uses and Structures
Section 45
Article I, Section 10
Subsection 1.06
Changes and Amendments to All Zoning Ordinances and Districts and Administrative Procedures
Section 46
Article I, Section 11
Subsection 6.06
Certificates of Occupancy and Compliance
Section 47
Article I, Section 9
0
Preserving Rights in Pending Litigation and Violations Under Existing Ordinances
Section 48
Article V, Section 1
Subsection 8.01
Penalty for Violations
Section 49
Article V, Section 2
Subsection 8.02
Severability
Section 50
Article V, Section 3
Subsection 8.03
Estoppel/Waiver
Section 51
Article V, Section 4
Subsection 8.04
Publication
Section 52
Article V, Section 5
Subsection 8.05
Illustrations
Appendix A
Article VI, Appendix 1
Subsection 9.01
Planned Developments
Appendix B
Article VI, Appendix 2
Subsection 9.02
Specific Use Permits
Appendix C
Article VI, Appendix 3
Subsection 9.03
Historic Landmarks
Appendix D
Article VI, Appendix 4
Subsection 9.04
Equivalency Table
Subsection 2.02
TO – Tollway Overlay District
2.05.05.
Development Standards Tables
Subsection 2.06
Use Chart
Subsection 3.02
Nonresidential Development Standards
Subsection 4.08
Nonresidential Design Standards
Subsection 4.09
Residential Cluster Development Option
Subsection 4.10
Voluntary Buffer Areas for Creeks and Tributaries
Subsection 4.11
Multifamily Development Standards
Subsection 4.12
Usable Open Space Requirements
Subsection 4.13
Director of Development Services
Subsection 5.01
Planning & Zoning Commission
Subsection 5.02
City Council
Subsection 5.03
Board of Adjustment
Section 46
Article I, Section 11
Subsection 5.04
Vesting and Complete Application Requirements
Article I, Section 12
Subsection 6.07
Dormant Development Projects / Expired Projects
Article I, Section 13
Subsection 6.08
Variance Procedures
Section 46
Article I, Section 11
Subsection 6.09
Amortization of Nonconforming Uses
Subsection 6.11
Landscape Plan Review
Subsection 6.13
PD Application and Review
Section 33
Article III, Section 3 (1.01)
Subsection 6.14
Specific Use Permit (SUP) Application and Review
Section 34
Article III, Section 3 (2.01)
Subsection 6.15
Façade Plan Review
Subsection 6.16
Historic Landmark Procedures
Section 34[A]
Article III, Section 3 (3.01)
Subsection 6.17
Alternative Compliance Standards
Subsection 6.18
Appeals and the Appeal Process
Subsection 6.19
Downtown Architectural Design Standards; OTC & OTR
Subsection 9.06
Form-Based Code Manual
Subsection 9.07
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 9: Appendices Page | 331
Subsection 9.06. Downtown Architectural Design Standards; OTC & OTR
The Downtown Architectural Design Standards; OTC & OTR, as they exist in Ordinance No. 02-09-104, as amended, are adopted into this ordinance as if fully set forth herein.
Figure 9.01.01.1: Cover Page of the Downtown Architectural Design Standards; OTC & OTR
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 332 Section 9: Appendices
Subsection 9.07. Form-Based Code Manual
The Form-Based Code Manual, as it exists in Ordinance No. 07-12-69, as amended, is adopted into this ordinance as if fully set forth herein.
Figure 9.01.01.1: Cover Page of the Form-Based Code Manual
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 9: Appendices Page | 333
INDEX
A
Accessory Structures, 166
Exterior Façades and Construction, 171
Garage Apartment or Guest House, 166
Residential Districts, 167
Setbacks Illustration, 324
Alternative Compliance Standards, 267
Amendments, 3, 241, 242
Annexation, 228
Antenna, 89, 96, 97, 177, 178, 239, 262, 268, 275, 276
Appeals, 268
C
Certificate of Occupancy, 121, 163, 228, 231, 280
Cluster Development, 197
Conditional Development Standards, 95–114
Accessory Structures in OTR, 95
Alcoholic Beverage Establishment, 95
Alcoholic Beverage Sales, 106
Antenna, 96
Antenna, Stealth, 97
Big Box, 98
Convenience Store with Gas Pumps, 99
Gas Pumps as Accessory Use, 100
Home Occupation, 102
Household Care Facilities, 114
Licensed Child-Care Center, 98
Mobile Vendor, 104
Private Club, 108
Private Street Development, 109
Rehabilitation Care Facility, 110
Restaurant, 111
Temporary Buildings, 112
D
Definitions, 273–311
Accessory Structure, 274
Alcoholic Beverage Establishment, 274
Alcoholic Beverage Sales, 274
Antenna, Stealth, 275
Assisted Living Facility, 276
Automotive Repair (Major, Minor), 277
Big Box, 278
Building Height, 279
Built-to-line, 279
Carport, 280
Certificate of Occupancy, 280
Child Care (all iterations), 280
ET - Evapotranspiration, 285
Floor Area Ratio, 287
Foot-Candle, 287
Garage, Private, 287
Guest House, 288
Home Occupation, 289
Household Care Facility, 289
Incidental Use, 290
Lot, Key, 292
Masonry Construction, 294
New Urbanism, 297
Nonconforming Use, 297
Nursing / Convalescent Home, 297
Open Ornamental Fence, 298
Patio Home, 299
Place of Worship, 281
Planned Development District, 300
Private Club, 301
Property Line Identification, 321
Rehabilitation Care Facility, 303
Story, Half, 306
Tree, Protected, 308
Usable Open Space, 309
Density bonus, 199
Dormant / Expired Projects, 248
E
Entryway Wall Standards for Subdivisions, 145
Exterior Material Requirements, 179, 181
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 334 Section 9: Appendices
F
Façade Plan
Appeal, 271
Application Process, 264
Big Box, 195
MF, 208, 263
OTC, 181, 263
OTR, 180, 263
PRO, 59, 263
Review Criteria, 263
TO, 82, 263
Front Porch Standards, 186
G
Garage
Front Entry Garage Standards, 189
J-Swing, 175
Side Yard Setback, 177
Guest House, 166
H
Height Regulations, Special, 177
I
Incomplete Applications, 245
Interconnectivity, 188
J
Joint Public Hearing, 242
L
Landscape Plan, 254
Landscape Requirements, 122
Approved Plant Materials, 124
Drive Landscape Areas, 131
Façade Landscape Areas, 130
Nonresidential, Mixed Use, and MF, 125, 132
Rights-of-Way, 134
SF, 2F, and TH Lots, 133
Street Frontage, 126
Water Resource Landscape Zones, 129
Water Resource Zones, 132
Lighting Standards, 159
Exemptions, 164
Exterior Lighting Plan, 163
Prohibited Fixtures, 164
M
Major Creeks, 183
Buffers, 202
Nonresidential and MF Requirements, 183
Single Family Residential Density Bonus, 185
Metal Buildings, 180
Mini-Warehouse / Self-Storage Facilities
Additional Regulations, 181
Parking, 153
Mixed-Use Standards, 257
Multifamily
Development Standards, 205
Development Standards Chart, 85
Districts, 36–37
Exterior Material Requirements, 180
Major Creeks, 184
Open Space, 214
Parking, 152
N
Nonconforming Uses and Structures, 15
Amortization, 251
Expansion of, 17
Loss of Nonconforming Rights Status, 253
Nonresidential
Adjacency to Residential, 182
Design Standards, 193
Development Standards, 190
Development Standards Chart, 86
Districts, 39–53
C-1 – Commercial-1, 50
C-2 – Commercial-2, 51
H - Highway, 49
I - Industrial, 53
IT – Information and Technology, 52
O-1 – Office-1, 39
O-2 – Office-2, 40
OTC - Original Town Commercial District, 43
R - Retail, 42
Exterior Material Requirements, 180
Floor Area Ratio, 318
Front Yard Setback Reduction, 174
Landscape and Tree Requirements, 125
Landscape Zones, 132
Major Creeks, 184
Open Space, 215
Retail Market Study, 192
Use Chart, 89
City of Frisco, Texas ZONING ORDINANCE Last Amended: June 18, 2013
Section 9: Appendices Page | 335
O
Open Space
Adjacent to Railways, 183
Cluster Development, 197
Conveyance of, 200
Credit, Nonresidential and MF, 184
Landscape Requirements, 122
Major Creeks, 202
MF, 214
Nonresidential, 215
PH District, 31, 212, 325
Reduction Exhibit A, 326
Reduction Exhibit B, 327
TH District, 34, 212, 325
TO District, 100
Usable, 212
OTC - Original Town Commercial District, 43
Façade Plan Requirement, 181
OTR - Original Town Residential District, 29
Façade Plan Requirement, 180
P
Pad Site Requirements, 191
Parking, 147
Computing Number of Spaces, 150
Handicap parking, 149
Nonresidential and MF Districts, 148
Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements, 147
Parking Layouts Illustration, 322
PRO, 59
Requirements Based on Use, 151
Residential Districts, 147
Shared Parking Calculations, 150
Stacking Requirements, 155
PD - Planned Development District, 54
Application and Review, 255
Mixed-Use Standards, 257
Planning & Zoning Commission, 221
Authority, 221
Preliminary Site Plan, 234
PRO – Preston Road Overlay District, 57
District Map, 68
Main Street Sub-District, 64
Retail Corridor Sub-District, 65
Rural Corridor Sub-District, 63
SH 121 Gateway Sub-District, 66
US 380 Sub-District, 62
R
Residential
Adjacent to Railways, 182
Circular Driveways, 148
Cluster Development, 197, 269
Corner Lot, 175
Cul-de-sac, 174
Density Bonus, 199
Development Standards Chart, 85
Districts, 22–38
AG - Agricultural, 22
MF-19 – Multifamily-15, 36
MF-19 – Multifamily-19, 37
MH – Manufactured Home, 38
OTR - Original Town Residential District, 29
RE – Residential Estate, 23
SF-10 – Single Family Residential-10, 26
SF-12.5 – Single Family Residential-12.5, 25
SF-16 – Single Family Residential-16, 24
SF-7 – Single Family Residential-7, 28
SF-8.5 – Single Family Residential-8.5, 27
TH – Townhome, 34
Exterior Material Requirements, 179
Fence Height, 136
Front Porch Standards, 186
Front Yard Impermeable Surface, 23, 319
Front Yard Setback Reduction, 173, 175
Front Yard Setbacks, 172, 173
Garage Apartment or Guest House, 166
Garage Standards, 177, 189
Landscaping, 124
Lighting, 164, 165
Location of Dwellings and Buildings, 172
Major Creeks, Density Bonus, 185
Minimum Lot Area, 172
Modular Home, 178
Parking, 147
Side Yard Setbacks, 175
Subdivision Entryway Wall Standards, 145
Tree Requirements, 124, 133
Retail Market Study, 192
Last Amended: June 18, 2013 ZONING ORDINANCE City of Frisco, Texas
Page | 336 Section 9: Appendices
S
Screening Requirements
Trash and Recycling Containers, 143
Utilities, Mechanical, and Service Facilities, 145
Screening Standards, 135
Living Screen, 138
Loading Docks, Bays and Service Areas, 142
Location of Required Screening, 140
Natural Area with Enhanced Buffer, 139
Outside Storage and Display, 141
Screening Wall with Topographic Change, 137
Screening/Buffer Areas, 137
Setbacks, 172
Front Yard, 172
Front Yard, Nonresidential, 174
Front Yard, Reduction, 173, 175
Side Yard, 175
Site Plan, 236
Amendments, 239
Appeal, 270
Requirements, 232
Substantially Conforming Site Plan, 239
Stormwater Detention, 207, 215
SUP - Specific Use Permit
Amend, Change or Rescind, 262
Application and Review, 261
Enlarement or Modification of, 262
SUP - Specific Use Permits, 55
Supplementary Regulations, 172
T
Temporary Outdoor Lighting, 162
TO - Tollway Overlay District, 80
District Map, 81
Pad Site Requirements, 191
Tree Preservation Requirements, 116
Mitigation Requirements, 118
Protected Trees List, 308
Tree Protection Measures, 119
Tree Removal Permit, 116
Tree Surveys and Preservation Plans, 120
U
Use Chart, 89
V
Variance Procedures, 249
Vesting, 245, 247
W
Water Resource Zones, 129, 132
Wind Energy Conversion Systems, 177, 310
Z
Zoning Applications, 241, 246
City Council Process, 243
Complete Application Required, 246
Denial, 247
P&Z Process, 243
Process, Public Hearings and Notice, 242
Protests, 244
Zoning Districts, 20
Equivalency Table, 21
Nonresidential, 39–53
Residential, 22–38
Special Districts, 54–83

Subdivision Ordinance
C I T Y O F F R I S C O , T E X A S
S U B D I V I S I O N O R D I N A N C E
Adopted July 7, 2009
Ordinance No. 09-07-38
Amended June 19, 2012
Ordinance No. 12-06-42
Subdivision Ordinance
Subdivision Ordinance
City of Frisco
Subdivision Ordinance
Adoption and Summary of Amendments
Ordinance Number Date of Adoption Summary
09-07-38 July 7, 2009 New Subdivision Ordinance; repealed all previous
Subdivision Ordinances and amendments
12-06-42 June 19, 2012 Ordinance amended in its entirety by incorporating new
Engineering Standards as an Appendix. The terms,
“Engineering Design Standards and Construction Details”
and “Thoroughfare and Circulation Design Requirements”
were replaced throughout the ordinance by the term,
“Engineering Standards.”
Subsections 8.13 (a) through (d) and (f) through (j) were
deleted; Subsection 8.13 (e) Private Streets was moved to
Section 8.04 as a new subsection (c)
Subdivision Ordinance
(This page intentionally left blank.)
Subdivision Ordinance
Table of Contents
Section 1: General Subdivision Authority of the City......................................... 1-1
Section 1.01 Authority, Purpose & Applicability .......................................................................... 1-1
Section 2: Authority of Decision-Makers............................................................ 2-1
Section 2.01 General Provisions................................................................................................. 2-1
Section 2.02 Responsible Official Assigned................................................................................ 2-2
Section 2.03 Director of Development Services.......................................................................... 2-3
Section 2.04 Director of Engineering Services............................................................................ 2-3
Section 2.05 Director of Parks & Recreation............................................................................... 2-4
Section 2.06 City Manager & Other Officials............................................................................... 2-4
Section 2.07 Planning & Zoning Commission............................................................................. 2-5
Section 2.08 City Council............................................................................................................ 2-5
Section 3: Development Application Submittal & Processing Procedures........ 3-1
Section 3.01 Pre-Submittal Meeting ........................................................................................... 3-1
Section 3.02 General Application Contents ................................................................................ 3-1
Section 3.03 Initiation, Complete Application & Expiration.......................................................... 3-2
Section 3.04 Application Processing, Action, and Notification Following Decision ..................... 3-4
Section 3.05 Public Hearings...................................................................................................... 3-5
Section 3.06 Amendments & Expiration...................................................................................... 3-5
Section 3.07 Expiration for Projects Approved Prior to September 1, 2005................................ 3-6
Section 4: Subdivision Procedures.................................................................... 4-1
Section 4.01 General Subdivision & Platting Procedures ........................................................... 4-1
Section 4.02 Preliminary Plats.................................................................................................... 4-2
Section 4.03 Final Plats .............................................................................................................. 4-7
Section 4.04 Conveyance Plats................................................................................................ 4-10
Section 4.05 Minor Plats........................................................................................................... 4-11
Section 4.06 Replats and Amending Plats – General Requirements........................................ 4-13
Section 4.07 Replats................................................................................................................. 4-14
Section 4.08 Amending Plats.................................................................................................... 4-15
Section 4.09 Plat Vacation........................................................................................................ 4-18
TOC Page i
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 5: Construction Plans & Procedures..................................................... 5-1
Section 5.01 Construction Plans................................................................................................. 5-1
Section 5.02 Pre-Construction Meeting ...................................................................................... 5-3
Section 5.03 Timing of Public Improvements.............................................................................. 5-3
Section 5.04 Improvement Agreements and Security for Completion......................................... 5-4
Section 5.05 Inspection, Maintenance & Acceptance of Public Improvements........................... 5-6
Section 6: (Reserved for Future Use)................................................................ 6-1
Section 7: Special Extraterritorial Jurisdiction Policies & Regulations .............. 7-1
Section 7.01 General Policies in the Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) ....................................... 7-1
Section 7.02 Collin & Denton County Regulations...................................................................... 7-2
Section 7.03 City Participation in Improvements in the Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) ........... 7-3
Section 8: Subdivision Requirements................................................................ 8-1
Section 8.01 General Policies..................................................................................................... 8-1
Section 8.02 Water & Wastewater Requirements...................................................................... 8-5
Section 8.03 Drainage and Environmental Standards .............................................................. 8-11
Section 8.04 Street Requirements............................................................................................ 8-16
Section 8.05 Alleys ................................................................................................................... 8-21
Section 8.06 Thoroughfare Screening ...................................................................................... 8-21
Section 8.07 Sidewalks............................................................................................................. 8-25
Section 8.08 Driveways, Fire Lanes and Access Easements ................................................... 8-25
Section 8.09 Easements, Lot & Block Design, Monuments, Subdivision Names, Franchise
Utilities................................................................................................................. 8-26
Section 8.10 Subdivision Amenities.......................................................................................... 8-29
Section 8.11 Homeowners’ Association (HOA) Requirements ................................................. 8-30
Section 8.12 Parks & Open Spaces.......................................................................................... 8-35
Section 9: Relief Procedures ............................................................................. 9-1
Section 9.01 Petition for Waivers................................................................................................ 9-1
Section 9.02 Proportionality Appeal............................................................................................ 9-4
Section 9.03 Vested Rights Petition............................................................................................ 9-8
TOC Page ii
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 10: Definitions ..................................................................................... 10-1
Section 10.01 Usage & Interpretation.........................................................................................10-1
Section 10.02 Definitions ............................................................................................................10-1
Section 11: Amendments; Fees; Violations; Conflicts..................................... 11-1
Section 11.01 Amendments........................................................................................................11-1
Section 11.02 Filing Fees & Charges .........................................................................................11-1
Appendix: Diagrams & Tables
Table 2.01-1: Responsible Officials, Initial Decision-Makers & Appellate Decision-Makers...... A-1
Diagram 8.01-1: Median & Cross Access................................................................................. A-3
Diagram 8.03-1: Major Creeks - Map ....................................................................................... A-4
Diagram 8.03-2: Major Creek – Cross Section......................................................................... A-5
Diagram 8.03-3: Streets Adjacent to Major Creeks .................................................................. A-6
Diagram 8.03-4: Cul-de-Sacs Adjacent to Major Creeks.......................................................... A-7
Diagram 8.03-5: Fencing Options for Lots Abutting Major Creeks ........................................... A-8
Table 8.06-1: Thoroughfare Screening Options................................................................... A-9
Diagram 8.06-1: Thoroughfare Screening Option 1................................................................ A-10
Diagram 8.06-2(a): Thoroughfare Screening Option 2(a) ........................................................... A-11
Diagram 8.06-2(b): Thoroughfare Screening Option 2(b) ........................................................... A-12
Diagram 8.06-2(c): Thoroughfare Screening Option 2(c)............................................................ A-13
Diagram 8.06-3: Thoroughfare Screening Option 3................................................................ A-14
Diagram 8.06-4(a): Thoroughfare Screening Option 4(a) ........................................................... A-15
Diagram 8.06-4(b): Thoroughfare Screening Option 4(b) ........................................................... A-16
Diagram 8.09-1: Flag Lots...................................................................................................... A-17
Diagram 8.09-2: Determining Lot Depth on an Irregular-Shaped Lot ..................................... A-18
Diagram 8.09-3: Lot Street Frontage – Curved Streets .......................................................... A-19
Diagram 8.09-4: Lot Street Frontage – Cul-de-Sac & Eyebrow Lots ...................................... A-20
Diagram 8.10-1: Centrally Located Amenity Center ............................................................... A-21
Diagram 8.12-1: Access & Lot Orientation to Parks and/or Open Space ............................... A-22
Table 9.01-1: Minor Waivers – Initial Decision-Makers & Appellate Decision-Makers ....... A-23
Engineering Standards ................................................................................................................ A-24
TOC Page iii

Subdivision Ordinance
(This page intentionally left blank.)

Subdivision Ordinance
Section 1 Page 1-1
SECTION 1: GENERAL SUBDIVISION AUTHORITY OF THE CITY
SECTION 1.01 AUTHORITY, PURPOSE & APPLICABILITY
(a) Authority. The regulations of this Subdivision Ordinance are authorized under the authority of
Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 212 (including Subchapter B) and the City's charter. The
provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance expressly extend to all areas inside the City limits and
throughout the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ), as either may be adjusted in the future, and
as provided in the City’s interlocal agreements with Collin and Denton Counties in accordance with
Chapter 242 of the Texas Local Government Code.
(b) Purpose.
(1) The development and subdivision of land, as they affect a community's quality of life, are
activities for which regulation is a valid function of municipal government. The regulations
contained within this Subdivision Ordinance are intended to protect the interests of the
public and of private parties by granting certain rights and privileges. The requirements in
this Ordinance are also intended to establish a fair and rational procedure for developing
and subdividing land such that land will be developed in accordance with existing physical,
social, economic and environmental conditions.
(2) The provisions of this Ordinance are intended to implement standards and requirements
provided for herein, and shall be requirements for the platting and developing of
subdivisions within the City and its ETJ.
(3) The provisions of this Ordinance are intended to implement the following objectives:
a. Promote the development and the utilization of land in a manner that provides an
attractive and high-quality community environment in accordance with the
Comprehensive Plan and the Zoning Ordinance of the City;
b. Guide and assist property owners and applicants in the correct procedures to be
followed, and to inform them of the required standards;
c. Protect the public interest by having standards for, but not limited to, the location,
design, class and type of streets, sidewalks, trails, alleys, utilities and essential
public services;
d. Assist orderly, efficient and coordinated development within the City's limits and its
ETJ;
e. Integrate the development of various tracts of land into the community, and
coordinate the future development of adjoining tracts;
h. Promote the most efficient and beneficial provision of public facilities and services
for each tract being subdivided;
i. Provide for compatible relationships between land uses and buildings;
Section 1 Page 1-2
Subdivision Ordinance
j. Provide for efficient traffic circulation throughout the municipality;
k. Provide for pedestrian circulation that is appropriate for the various uses of land and
buildings;
l. Minimize pollution of the air, streams, bodies of water, and aquifers; promote the
adequacy of storm drainage facilities; minimize erosion; safeguard both surface and
groundwater supplies, as well as natural resources and endangered or threatened
plant and animal life; and encourage the wise use and management of natural
resources throughout the municipality in order to preserve the integrity, stability and
beauty of the community and the value of the land;
m. Preserve the natural beauty and topography of public and private properties by
encouraging where possible that natural features and land forms are incorporated
into developments as amenities;
n. Establish adequate and accurate records of land subdivision;
o. Provide for public or private facilities that are available and will have sufficient
capacity to serve proposed and future developments and citizens within the City and
its ETJ;
p. Provide for adequate light, air and privacy; secure safety from fire, flood and other
dangers; and prevent overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of population;
q. Encourage the development of residential areas that incorporate a range of housing
and lifestyle choices.
(c) Applicability.
(1) The provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance apply to any non-exempt (see Section 4.01(c))
division of land, combination of separate land parcels, and/or development of land within the
corporate boundaries of the City and within its ETJ.
(2) No permit shall be issued for any building or structure on a property until a plat has been
approved and filed for record unless specifically exempted herein (see Sections 4.01(c) and
5.02).
(d) Subdivision Rules. The provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance, the standards governing
constructed facilities applicable to plats in other portions of the Municipal Code of Ordinances, and
the technical standards contained in the Engineering Standards, constitute the subdivision rules of
the City, which apply to applications for plat approval inside City limits and within the City’s ETJ.
(e) Engineering Standards. The City Council hereby delegates all future authority to draft, amend,
approve and/or adopt any and all Engineering Standards to the City Manager, or his/her designee,
subsequent to the adoption of the Engineering Standards in Ordinance No. 12-06-42.
The Engineering Standards may be drafted, amended, approved and/or adopted, from time to time,
at the discretion and determination of the City Manager, or his/her designee. As Engineering
Standards are drafted, amended, approved and/or adopted by the City Manager, or his/her
designee, said standards shall be included and substituted for the existing Engineering Standards,
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 1 Page 1-3
and shall thereafter have the same force of law and effect as if originally adopted hereby. Prior to
the adoption of any new or amended provision within the Engineering Standards, such new or
amended provision shall be posted on the Department of Engineering Services web site for a
minimum of thirty (30) calendar days. The Department of Engineering Services shall also provide
notice of any new or amended provision within the Engineering Standards on the City’s website for
a minimum of thirty (30) calendar days prior to the enforcement of such new or amended
provisions. Any individual may request to receive written notice of any new or amended provision
to the Engineering Standards by providing said request in writing to the Director of Engineering. A
copy of the current Engineering Standards shall be kept on file and available for review with the
Department of Engineering office and on the Department of Engineering website.
(f) Compliance with City Plans and Ordinances Required. Compliance with all City ordinances
pertaining to the subdivision and development of land, and the Comprehensive Plan (where
applicable), shall be required prior to approval of any application pursuant to this Ordinance. All
such ordinances and the Comprehensive Plan shall be construed to mean those documents as they
exist or may be amended. It is the property owner’s responsibility to be familiar with, and to comply
with, City ordinances, the Comprehensive Plan, and the provisions of this Ordinance. Applicable
City ordinances and plans with which all applications must comply include, but are not limited to, the
following:
1. Comprehensive Plan (including all associated maps and plans);
2. Zoning Ordinance;
3. Building Codes;
4. Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance (Ord. No. 12-06-42);
5. International Fire Code;
6. Other Applicable portions of the Municipal Code of Ordinances;
7. Impact Fee Ordinance;
8. Park Dedication Ordinance;
9. Engineering Documents including:
• Engineering Standards, and
• Other development-related engineering standards.
10. Federal, State and Local Environmental Regulations.
Section 1 Page 1-4
Subdivision Ordinance
(This page intentionally left blank.)
Section 2 Page 2-1
Subdivision Ordinance
SECTION 2: AUTHORITY OF DECISION-MAKERS
SECTION 2.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
(a) Source of Authority. Authority under this Subdivision Ordinance shall be vested in and delegated
to the officials and decision-makers designated in this Section 2 and under the City's charter, the
constitution and laws of the State of Texas, and the Municipal Code. This authority shall be
deemed supplemental to any other authority lawfully conferred upon the officials and decisionmakers.
The omission of a citation in this Subdivision Ordinance to any authority conferred upon
the officials and decision-makers under the City's charter, the constitution or laws of the State of
Texas, or the Municipal Code, or the failure to identify in this article authority conferred by other
provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance, shall not be construed as limiting the actions of such
officials and decision-makers taken in accordance with and in reliance upon such authority.
(b) Implied Authority. The officials and decision-makers shall have all implied authority necessary to
carry out the duties and responsibilities expressly delegated by Chapter 212 of the Texas Local
Government Code and this Subdivision Ordinance, to the extent that the implied authority is not in
conflict with the expressly delegated authority.
(c) Limitation on Authority.
(1) City Policy. It is the policy of the City that the standards and procedures applicable to
development of property within the City limits and within the City's ETJ are as stated in this
Subdivision Ordinance, notwithstanding any representation by any City official summarizing,
paraphrasing or otherwise interpreting such standards to the contrary, whether generally or
as applied to development of specific property.
(2) Representations. The applicant shall not rely on any representation made by an employee
of the City, a member of an appointed board or commission, or a member of the City
Council concerning the likelihood of an outcome of that official's decision or the decision of
an appointed board or commission or the City Council, on any application that has yet to be
filed or is pending before the City. An official may, however, convey information concerning
that official's position on a pending application in accordance with his/her role as the
responsible official (Section 2.02) for such application or as the City staff contact person.
(3) Effect of Comprehensive Plan, Ordinance or Development Standard on Liability Claims.
The City's approval of an application under the standards and procedures of this Subdivision
Ordinance does not guarantee or ensure that development of the property in accordance
with the standards will prevent, minimize or mitigate harm to adjoining property. A person
who undertakes development activities shall not rely on the City's approval of an application
as ensuring that the development activities will not result in harm to adjoining property. The
regulations contained in this Subdivision Ordinance constitute an exercise of the City's
governmental authority, and approval of an application shall not give rise to any liability on
the part of the City or its officers, agents and employees, nor will an approval release the
Section 2 Page 2-2
Subdivision Ordinance
applicant from any liability for harm arising out of development of the property under
applicable law.
(4) No Waivers. Except as expressly provided for in this Subdivision Ordinance, no official,
board or commission of the City, or the City Council, shall have authority to waive any
requirement or standard for an application. Any attempted waiver of a requirement or
standard for an application in contravention of this Section shall hereby be deemed null and
void, and, upon discovery, shall be grounds for revocation of a permit or approved
application.
(d) Conflict in Authority. If any of the provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance are in apparent
conflict, the Director of Development Services shall, after due consideration as to the purpose and
intent of each conflicting provision, make a determination as to which provision shall apply. The
Director of Development Services shall make every effort to be fair and consistent in such
interpretations, and his/her decision may be appealed to the City Manager (see Section 2.06),
unless otherwise noted within.
SECTION 2.02 RESPONSIBLE OFFICIAL ASSIGNED
(a) Responsible Official. The responsible official shall be the Director of a designated City
department who is assigned responsibility under this Subdivision Ordinance for taking the following
actions with regard to a particular type of application authorized under this Subdivision Ordinance:
(1) Accepting the application for filing, and processing the application;
(2) Reviewing and making recommendations concerning the application;
(3) Seeking advice of other City departments, and coordinating any recommendations from
such departments concerning the application;
(4) Determining a request for exemption;
(5) Preparing reports to and advising any board, commission or the City Council that has
responsibility for making recommendations on or deciding the application;
(6) Promulgating additional or modified policies, standards and administrative rules for adoption
by the City Council that apply to the application;
(7) Initiating enforcement actions concerning compliance with the standards applicable to the
application and the conditions imposed thereon; and
(8) Taking all other actions necessary for administration of the provisions of this Subdivision
Ordinance with respect to the application or petition.
(b) Delegation. The responsible official may delegate the official’s authority under this Subdivision
Ordinance to subordinate officials, who shall thereupon be deemed the responsible official for
purposes of carrying out the delegated duties.
Section 2 Page 2-3
Subdivision Ordinance
SECTION 2.03 DIRECTOR OF DEVELOPMENT SERVICES
(a) Responsible Official. The Director of Development Services is the responsible official for the
following types of applications, waivers and petitions:
(1) Review and approval for any type of plat;
(2) Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action;
(3) Extension of a plat approval;
(4) Major and Minor Waivers related to an application;
(5) Appeal of a decision on any application for which the Director of Development Services is
the responsible official;
(6) Appeal of a decision on any application for which the Commission is the initial decisionmaking
body; and
(7) Vested rights petition for any application when the Director of Development Services is the
responsible official.
(b) Initial Decision-Maker. The Director of Development Services is the initial decision-maker for the
following types of applications (subject to any appeal):
(1) Minor Plat, as outlined in Section 4.05;
(2) Amending Plat, as outlined in Section 4.08;
(3) Extension for a Preliminary Plat approval, as outlined in Section 4.02(j);
(4) Certain types of Minor Waivers, as outlined in Section 9.01;
(5) Vested rights petition for an application for which the Director of Development Services is
the initial decision-maker;
(6) Building Permit; and
(7) Certificate of Occupancy.
SECTION 2.04 DIRECTOR OF ENGINEERING SERVICES
(a) Responsible Official. The Director of Engineering Services is the responsible official for the
following types of applications:
(1) Review of Construction Plans, including all engineering plans and related construction
tasks, including approval of contracts for public improvements, as outlined in Section 5.01;
(2) Extension for Construction Plans, as outlined in Section 5.01(h);
(3) Construction Release, as outlined in Section 5.01(i);
(4) Improvement Agreement, as outlined in Section 5.04;
Section 2 Page 2-4
Subdivision Ordinance
(5) Appeal related to an application for which the Director of Engineering Services is the
responsible official;
(6) Certain types of Minor Waivers (related to construction requirements), as outlined in Section
9.01;
(7) Vested rights petition for an application for which the Director of Engineering Services is the
responsible official; and
(8) Petition for a proportionality appeal, as outlined in Section 9.02.
(b) Initial Decision-Maker. The Director of Engineering Services is the initial decision-maker for the
following types of applications (subject to any appeal):
(1) Approval of Construction Plans, including all engineering plans and related construction
management tasks, including approval of contracts for public improvements;
(2) Construction Release;
(3) Extension for Construction Plans approval;
(4) Certain types of Minor Waivers (related to construction requirements), as outlined in Section
9.01; and
(5) Vested rights petition for an application for which the Director of Engineering Services is the
initial decision-maker.
SECTION 2.05 DIRECTOR OF PARKS & RECREATION
(a) Responsible Official and Initial Decision-Maker. The Director of Parks & Recreation is the
responsible official for the review and recommendation to the Parks & Recreation Board, and for
carrying out the Parks & Recreation Board’s decisions, on the following types of applications:
(1) Acceptance of fees in lieu of parkland dedication;
(2) The portion of an application showing where park land, including trails, is to be dedicated,
and whether such dedication is acceptable;
(3) Any other portions of applications showing items required by Section 8.12.
SECTION 2.06 CITY MANAGER & OTHER OFFICIALS
(a) City Manager.
(1) Appeals.
(b) Fire Chief. No provision contained in this Subdivision Ordinance shall be deemed or interpreted as
a limitation on the Fire Chief’s exclusive authority as set forth in the International Fire Code.
The City Manager is the appellate decision-maker for any appeal for which a City
staff person is the initial decision-maker, subject to further appeal as may be provided for in
any subsequent sections of this Subdivision Ordinance.
(c) Other City Officials. The City Attorney and any other official delegated responsibilities under this
Subdivision Ordinance or other provisions of the Municipal Code are authorized to take all actions
Section 2 Page 2-5
Subdivision Ordinance
necessary to carry out their responsibilities in accordance with the requirements and limitations
prescribed herein.
SECTION 2.07 PLANNING & ZONING COMMISSION
(a) Organization, Powers & Duties. The Planning & Zoning Commission (also referred to as
Commission) shall hold meetings and have the powers and duties as provided for in the Municipal
Code of the City (Part One, Article IX. Planning & Zoning Commission), and as authorized by
Chapter 211 or 212 of the Texas Local Government Code. Such powers and duties shall include
exercising all the authority and control conferred by law relating to platting.
(b) Duties of the Director of Development Services. The Director of Development Services shall act
as the staff liaison to the Commission, and shall abide by the City’s usual record-keeping and
retention policies for boards and commissions, as amended, in maintaining records of the
Commission’s meetings and actions.
(c) Authority for Deciding Applications. The Commission shall have the authority to act on the
following types of applications:
(1) Preliminary Plat;
(2) Final Plat;
(3) All other types of plats, with the exception of Minor Plats and Amending Plats (which may be
decided by the Director of Development Services unless deferred to the Commission).
(d) Authority for Deciding Appeals. The Commission shall hear and decide the following appeals:
(1) Any Major Waiver petition on an application for a Preliminary Plat, Final Plat or Replat,
except when such Waiver is a proportionality appeal, in which case Section 9.02 of this
Subdivision Ordinance shall apply;
(2) Minor Plat or Amended Plat that is deferred by the Director of Development Services, as
outlined in Section 4.05(h) or Section 4.08(i), as applicable;
(3) A vested rights petition that is deferred by the Director of Development Services or the
Director of Engineering Services, as outlined in Section 9.03(g)(3);
(4) Any other appeal so authorized by this Ordinance.
SECTION 2.08 CITY COUNCIL
(a) Authority for Deciding Applications and Appeals. The City Council shall hear and decide
appeals from decisions made by the Commission when such appeals are authorized by this
Ordinance.
Section 2 Page 2-6
Subdivision Ordinance
(This page intentionally left blank.)
Section 3 Page 3-1
Subdivision Ordinance
SECTION 3: DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION SUBMITTAL &
PROCESSING PROCEDURES
SECTION 3.01 PRE-SUBMITTAL MEETING
(a) Option to Meet With City Staff. Prior to the official submission of an application for review and
consideration, the applicant(s) has the option to request and attend a Pre-Submittal Meeting with
City staff.
(b) Meeting Request. To schedule a Pre-Submittal Meeting, the applicant shall make a request for a
Pre-Submittal Meeting with Development Services, and such request shall describe the type of
development desired and/or the type of application that the applicant intends to submit. The
applicant shall then be notified by Development Services of the meeting time and place for the
requested meeting.
(c) Vested Rights. There shall be no vested rights based on a Pre-Submittal Meeting.
(d) Effect. Following the Pre-Submittal Meeting, the applicant may proceed with the submittal of an
application.
SECTION 3.02 GENERAL APPLICATION CONTENTS
(a) Application Contents Generally. All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by
Development Services with the required information as stated on the application form. Incomplete
applications shall not be accepted for filing and shall not be considered officially filed.
(1) Application Timing.
a. Development Services shall establish submittal deadlines for all applications decided
by the Director of Development Services and by the Commission.
b. An application must be considered complete and officially filed in accordance with
Section 3.03 of this Subdivision Ordinance prior to being processed for review and
consideration.
(2) Fees Required. Every application shall be accompanied by the prescribed fees set forth in
the City’s fee schedule, as approved by City Council and as may be amended from time to
time. The prescribed fee is not refundable.
(3) Delinquent City Taxes on Property. An application shall not be deemed complete, nor
shall it be approved, if there are delinquent City taxes on the subject property.
Section 3 Page 3-2
Subdivision Ordinance
(b) Modification of Applications Prior to Approval. The applicant may modify any complete
application following its filing and prior to the expiration of the period during which the City is
required to act on the application.
(1) Modifications Requested by the City. If the modification is for revisions requested by the
City, and the modification is received at least eleven (11) calendar days prior to the time
scheduled for decision on the application, the application shall be decided within the
original period for decision (from the original official filing date) prescribed by this
Subdivision Ordinance.
(2) Other Modifications In all other instances (e.g., when the applicant chooses to submit a
revised application on his own accord because of a change in development decisions),
submittal of a modified application shall be accompanied by a properly executed Waiver of
Right to 30-Day Action (see Section 3.03(e)) in order to allow City staff adequate time to
review the new information and modifications, and shall extend the time for deciding the
application for a period equal to the time specified in this Subdivision Ordinance to decide
the original application, commencing on the official filing date of the modified application.
SECTION 3.03 INITIATION, COMPLETE APPLICATION & EXPIRATION
(a) Initiation by Owner. An application required under this Subdivision Ordinance may be initiated
only by the owner of the land subject to the application, or by the owner's duly authorized
representative. If the applicant is a representative of the property owner, the application shall
include a written and Notarized statement from the property owner, such as a duly executed “Power
of Attorney”, authorizing the representative to file the application on the owner's behalf.
(b) Applicability. The procedures within this Section 3 shall apply to all applications that are required
by the City and submitted in accordance with this Subdivision Ordinance.
(c) Determination of Completeness. Every application shall be subject to a determination of
completeness by the responsible official for processing the application. An application must be
complete in order to be accepted for review by the City.
(1) The application shall only be accepted by the responsible official for processing when it is
accompanied by all documents required by, and prepared in accordance with, the
requirements of this Subdivision Ordinance. A typographical error shall not, by itself,
constitute an incomplete application.
(2) A determination of completeness shall not constitute a determination of compliance with the
substantive requirements of this Subdivision Ordinance.
(3) A determination of completeness of an application shall be conducted in accordance with
the following procedures:
a. The applicant shall be notified in writing within ten (10) business days if the
submitted application is incomplete. Such notice shall be served by depositing it in
the U.S. Postal Service, or by electronic mail transmission, before the tenth (10th)
business day following submission of the application.
Section 3 Page 3-3
Subdivision Ordinance
b. If the application is determined to be incomplete, the notification shall specify the
documents or other information needed to complete the application, and shall state
the date the application will expire (see Section 3.03(f)) if the documents or other
information are not provided to the City.
c. An application shall be deemed complete on the eleventh (11th) business day after
the application has been received if notice is not served in accordance with Section
3.03(c)(3)a.
d. If the application is determined to be complete, the application shall be processed as
prescribed by this Subdivision Ordinance.
(4) It is not guaranteed that an accepted, complete application will be approved, if after the
application is deemed complete it is determined that the application does not comply with
this Subdivision Ordinance.
(d) Re-Submittal After Notification of Incompleteness. If the application is re-submitted after a
notification of incompleteness, the application shall be processed upon receipt of the re-submittal.
An additional determination of completeness shall be made thereafter as described in Section
3.03(c). The statutory 30-day time frame for plat approvals shall begin when the City deems the
application is complete (see Section 3.03(g)).
(e) Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action. The Director of Development Services shall be the responsible
official for a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action.
(1) Request. An applicant may submit in writing a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action in relation
to the decision time for plats of thirty (30) days, as mandated by State law.
(2) Received. If the applicant is requesting Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action, such Waiver of
Right to 30-Day Action must be received by the Director of Development Services on or
before the seventh (7th) calendar day prior to the Planning & Zoning Commission meeting
at which action would have to be taken (based on the 30-day requirement in State law) on
the application. Waiver requests that are not received by that day shall not be considered
properly submitted, and action shall be taken on the application at such meeting as
scheduled.
(3) Requirements Maintained. Submission of a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action, and
acceptance of such Waiver by the City as part of an application, shall not be deemed in
any way a Waiver to any requirement within this Subdivision Ordinance. A Waiver from
requirements herein is a separate and distinct process (see Section 9.01).
(f) Expiration of Application.
(1) The application shall automatically expire at the close of business on the forty-fifth (45th)
calendar day after the date the application is received, and it will be returned to the applicant
together with any accompanying documents and materials, if:
a. The City provides to the applicant, not later than the tenth (10th) business day after
the date the application is filed, written notice that specifies the necessary
documents or other information, and the date the application will expire if the
documents or other information is not provided; and
Section 3 Page 3-4
Subdivision Ordinance
b. The applicant fails to provide the specified documents or other information
necessary to comply with the City’s requirements relating to the application within
the time provided in the notification.
(2) An accepted application for which there has been no action taken by an applicant for ninety
(90) calendar days shall be deemed expired and closed on the City’s initiative.
a. If the application is of a type that can be administratively approved or denied, the
responsible official shall notify the applicant in writing that the application is officially
denied due to inaction.
b. If the application is of a type that must be acted upon by the Commission, the
responsible official shall coordinate the application being placed on the agenda of the
Commission, as applicable, and the application shall then be formally denied by an
official action of the Commission, as applicable. The responsible official shall notify
the applicant in writing that the application has been officially denied by the
Commission due to inaction.
(g) Official Filing Date. The 30-day time period established by State law, and by this Subdivision
Ordinance, for processing and deciding an application shall commence on the official filing date.
The official filing date shall be defined as the date the application is deemed complete by the
responsible official in the manner prescribed by Section 3.03(c).
SECTION 3.04 APPLICATION PROCESSING, ACTION, AND NOTIFICATION FOLLOWING DECISION
(a) Action By Responsible Official. The responsible official for an application shall initiate internal
(i.e., City) review and assessment of the application following the City’s development review
procedures. The responsible official shall also, to the extent possible, work with the applicant by
advising on and communicating revisions that may be necessary to bring the application into
compliance with City regulations in preparation for consideration by the appropriate decision-maker.
(b) Decision. The decision-maker for the application shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny
the application within the time period prescribed by this Subdivision Ordinance.
(c) Conditions Attached. The decision-maker may attach such conditions to the approval of an
application as are reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with all applicable requirements of
this Subdivision Ordinance.
(d) Notification of Decision. The City shall send written notice within fourteen (14) calendar days
following the date of a decision on an application.
(e) Notification of Appeal. Whenever appeal is taken from a final decision on an application following
a public hearing, or whenever the City is to consider revocation of an application which was
obtained following a public hearing, personal notice of the appeal or revocation proceeding shall be
provided to the applicant.
Section 3 Page 3-5
Subdivision Ordinance
SECTION 3.05 PUBLIC HEARINGS
(a) Setting the Hearing. When the responsible official determines that an application is complete and
that a public hearing is required by this Subdivision Ordinance (see Sections 4.07(b) and 4.09(c)) or
by State law, the official shall cause notice of such hearing to be prepared and made in accordance
with State law. The time set for the hearing shall conform to the time periods required by Sections
4.07(b) and 4.09(c) in this Subdivision Ordinance and by State law.
(b) Conduct of the Hearing. The public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with State law.
Any person may appear at the public hearing and submit evidence, either individually or as a
representative of an organization. Each person who appears at a public hearing shall state his or
her name and address, and if appearing on behalf of an organization, state the name of the
organization for the record.
(c) Record of Proceedings. The board/commission conducting the hearing shall record the
proceedings using standard municipal record-keeping procedures.
SECTION 3.06 AMENDMENTS & EXPIRATION
(a) Amendments/Revisions to an Approved Application. Unless another method is expressly
provided by this Subdivision Ordinance, any request to amend or revise an approved application
shall be considered a new application, which must be decided in accordance with the procedures
governing the original application and the standards in effect at the time such new application is
filed with the City.
(b) Time of Expiration.
(1) Unless otherwise expressly provided by this Subdivision Ordinance, an approved
application shall automatically expire two (2) years following the approval date of the
application (see Section 5.01(g) for expiration of Construction Plans), and shall become
null and void, and all activities under the application thereafter shall be deemed in violation
of this Subdivision Ordinance, if:
a. The applicant fails to satisfy any condition that was imposed by this Subdivision
Ordinance or as part of the approval of the application or that was made under the
terms of any Development Agreement, within the time limits established for
satisfaction of such condition or term; or
b. The applicant fails to submit a subsequent complete application required by this
Subdivision Ordinance within the time so required; or
c. An Improvement Agreement (Section 5.04) is not approved for the development.
(2) If no time limit for satisfaction of conditions is specified in the decision on the application,
the time shall be presumed to be two (2) years following the date the application was
approved, except as provided in Section 3.07.
Section 3 Page 3-6
Subdivision Ordinance
(3) Except as provided in Section 3.07, or upon a different date being determined pursuant to
a vested rights petition, an application approved prior to the effective date of this
Subdivision Ordinance shall expire in accordance with the terms of the regulations in effect
at the time the application was filed.
(c) Effect of Expiration. Upon the expiration of an approved application, all previously approved
applications for the same land shall also expire on the expiration date if the filing of an application
was required to avoid expiration for the previously approved application(s), except as provided in
Section 3.07. Thereafter, a new application must be submitted for consideration and approval
subject to regulations in effect at the time the new application is filed.
SECTION 3.07 EXPIRATION FOR PROJECTS APPROVED PRIOR TO SEPTEMBER 1, 2005
(a) Two-Year Expiration Established. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Subdivision
Ordinance, for any approved application for which no expiration date was in effect on September 1,
2005, an expiration date of two (2) years following the date of approval of the application shall
apply, unless the applicant files a written petition before such date for a vested rights determination
pursuant to Section 9.03 alleging that progress has been made toward completion of the project for
which the application subject to expiration was filed. If a vested rights petition is timely filed and
subsequently approved, the City Council shall determine the expiration date of the application in
deciding the petition.
(b) Five-Year Expiration Established. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Subdivision
Ordinance, once an application has expired under Section 3.07(a), all previously approved
applications for the same land also shall expire no later than five (5) years following the date of filing
of the first application for the project for which the expired application was filed, unless the applicant
files a written petition before such date for a vested rights determination pursuant to Section 9.03. If
a vested rights petition is timely filed and subsequently approved, the City Council shall determine
the expiration date of the previously approved applications in deciding the petition.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 4 Page 4-1
SECTION 4: SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES
SECTION 4.01 GENERAL SUBDIVISION & PLATTING PROCEDURES
(a) Types of Plats Required. A Final Plat or a Minor Plat shall be approved prior to any land division
that is subject to these regulations and prior to commencement of any new development or
construction project.
(b) Replat. A Replat in accordance with State Law and the provisions of Sections 4.06 and 4.07 shall
be required any time a platted, recorded lot is further divided or expanded, thereby changing the
boundary and dimensions of the property. In the case of minor revisions to recorded plats or lots, a
Minor Plat or Amending Plat may also be utilized if allowed by State Law and if in accordance with
Section 4.05 and Sections 4.06 and 4.08, respectively.
(c) Exemptions. The following land divisions are exempt from the requirements of this Subdivision
Ordinance that apply to plats:
(1) Use of existing cemeteries complying with all State and local laws and regulations; and
(2) A division of land created by order of a court of competent jurisdiction, provided however,
that prior to construction of improvements, a plat meeting the requirements of this
Ordinance shall be approved and recorded prior to the issuance of permits.
(d) Zoning. Inside the City limits of the City, the following shall apply:
(1) Conformance with Existing Zoning. All applications shall be in conformance with the
existing zoning on the property (if applicable).
(2) Request to Rezone First. If an applicant seeks to amend the zoning for the property, the
request to rezone the land shall be submitted and approved prior to acceptance of an
application for filing unless as otherwise provided below.
a. The applicant may request approval from the Director of Development Services to
submit an application simultaneous with the zoning change request, in which case
the application for the zoning amendment shall be acted upon first, and provided that
the application is accompanied by a properly executed Waiver of Right to 30-Day
Action (due to the more lengthy time frame necessary to advertise and process
zoning applications).
b. In the event that the requested zoning amendment is denied, the application shall
also be rejected or denied.
(3) Site Plan Approval. Where Site Plan approval is required by the Zoning Ordinance prior to
development, no application for a Final Plat approval shall be accepted for filing until a
Preliminary Site Plan has been approved for the land subject to the proposed plat.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 4 Page 4-2
(e) General Stages of Plat Approval & Staff Review.
(1) Two-Stage Process. The platting process typically involves two approval stages:
Submission and approval of a Preliminary Plat (refer to Section 4.02), and subsequent
submission and approval of a Final Plat (refer to Section 4.03). However:
a. An applicant may proceed with a Final Plat without an approved Preliminary Plat
whenever:
1. A Minor Plat (Section 4.05) is submitted; or
2. A Preliminary Site Plan for a multi-family, single-family attached or
nonresidential development is submitted and approved in accordance with
the Zoning Ordinance.
b. An applicant may submit Construction Plans and a Final Plat simultaneously in lieu
of a Preliminary Plat if an Improvement Agreement and appropriate surety (see
Section 5.04) are submitted along with the application.
(2) Staff Review. Unless otherwise specified under the regulations for a specific type of plat:
a. The Director of Development Services shall be the responsible official for a plat, and
shall be responsible for the initial review of a plat for conformance with this
Subdivision Ordinance and any other applicable ordinances of the City.
b. The Director of Development Services, and/or other City staff at the direction of the
Director of Development Services, shall review all applications for completeness
(refer to Section 3.01) based on a checklist supplied by Development Services.
c. The Director of Development Services, and/or other City staff at the direction of the
Director of Development Services, shall then review all applications that are deemed
complete for conformance with this Subdivision Ordinance and with other applicable
City regulations.
SECTION 4.02 PRELIMINARY PLATS
(a) Purpose. The purpose of a Preliminary Plat shall be to determine the general layout of the
subdivision, the adequacy of public facilities needed to serve the intended development, and the
overall compliance of the land division with applicable requirements of this Subdivision Ordinance.
(b) Exceptions.
(1) A Preliminary Plat is not required when a Minor Plat is submitted (refer to Section 4.05).
(2) A Final Plat in accordance with Section 4.03, along with Construction Plans in accordance
with Section 5.01, may be submitted in lieu of a Preliminary Plat if an Improvement
Agreement and appropriate surety (see Section 5.04) are submitted along with the
application.
(c) Accompanying Applications.
(1) An application for a Preliminary Plat shall be accompanied by a Preliminary Drainage Plan,
a Preliminary Utility Plan, and other plans if deemed necessary for thorough review by the
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 4 Page 4-3
Director of Development Services or the Director of Engineering Services. However,
approval of each shall be separate and in accordance with this Section 4.02 for Preliminary
Plats and with Section 5.01 for Construction Plans.
(2) The applicant shall furnish with the application to the City a current title commitment issued
by a title insurance company authorized to do business in Texas, a title opinion letter from
an attorney licensed to practice in Texas, or some other acceptable proof of ownership,
identifying all persons having an ownership interest in the property subject to the
Preliminary Plat.
(d) Review by Director of Development Services. The Director of Development Services shall:
(1) Initiate review of the plat and materials submitted (including the required Preliminary
Drainage Plan and Preliminary Utility Plan).
(2) Request written comments from other City departments, such as Engineering Services,
Fire Department, Public Works, Parks and Recreation, if deemed necessary.
(3) Make available plats and reports to the Commission for review.
(4) Upon determination that the application is ready to be acted upon, schedule the
Preliminary Plat for consideration on the agenda of the next available meeting of the
Planning & Zoning Commission.
(e) Action by Planning & Zoning Commission. The Commission shall:
(1) Review the Preliminary Plat application, the findings of the Director of Development
Services, and any other information available. From all such information, the Commission
shall determine whether the Preliminary Plat conforms to the regulations of this Subdivision
Ordinance.
(2) Act within thirty (30) calendar days following the official filing date of the Preliminary Plat
application (unless the applicant submits a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action as outlined in
Section 3.03(e)). If no decision is rendered by the Commission within the thirty (30) day
period described above or such longer period as may have been agreed upon, the
Preliminary Plat, as submitted, shall be deemed to be approved.
(3) Take one of the following actions:
a. Approve the Preliminary Plat;
b. Approve the Preliminary Plat with conditions, which shall mean that the Preliminary
Plat shall be considered to have been approved once such conditions are fulfilled; or
c. Deny the Preliminary Plat.
(f) Criteria for Approval. The following criteria shall be used by the Commission to determine
whether the application for a Preliminary Plat shall be approved, approved with conditions, or
denied:
(1) The Preliminary Plat is consistent with all zoning requirements for the property, including
any applicable Planned Development zoning standards, and with any approved
Improvement Agreement if applicable;
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 4 Page 4-4
(2) The proposed provision and configuration of public improvements including, but not limited
to, roads, water, wastewater, storm drainage, park facilities, open spaces, habitat
restoration, easements and rights-of-way are adequate to serve the development, meet
applicable standards of this Subdivision Ordinance, and conform to the City’s adopted
master plans for those facilities;
(3) The Preliminary Plat is in accordance with the City’s interlocal agreements with Collin and
Denton Counties if the proposed development is located in whole or in part in the ETJ of
the City;
(4) The Preliminary Plat has been duly reviewed by applicable City staff;
(5) The Preliminary Plat conforms to design requirements and construction standards as set
forth in the Engineering Standards; and
(6) The Preliminary Plat is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan, except where application
of the Plan may conflict with State law (e.g., land use in the ETJ).
(7) The proposed development represented on the Preliminary Plat does not endanger public
health, safety or welfare.
(g) Effect of Approval. The approval of a Preliminary Plat shall allow the applicant to proceed with the
development and platting process by submitting Construction Plans (Section 5.01) and a Final Plat
(Section 4.03). Approval of the Preliminary Plat shall be deemed general approval of the
subdivision’s layout only, and shall not constitute approval or acceptance of Construction Plans or a
Final Plat.
(h) Appeal of the Decision on a Preliminary Plat Application.
(1) Initiation of an Appeal. The applicant or no less than four (4) voting members of City
Council may appeal the decision of the Commission by submitting a written notice of
appeal to the Director of Development Services within fourteen (14) calendar days
following the date of the Commission’s decision.
a. For a City Council-initiated appeal, the Council shall consider and act on whether it
will appeal the Commission’s decision at its first regular meeting (for which there is
time to include such appeal on its posted agenda, as required by State law) that
occurs after the Commission meeting at which the decision was made.
b. Written notice of the City Council’s vote to appeal shall be submitted to the Director
of Development Services within seven (7) calendar days following the City Council’s
vote to appeal the decision.
c. For an applicant-initiated appeal, a letter stating the reasons for the appeal, citing
the specific applicable section(s) of the Subdivision Ordinance, shall be submitted by
the applicant.
d. The Director of Development Services may, on his/her own initiative, appeal the
decision of the Commission by scheduling an appeal on the City Council’s next
regular meeting (for which there is time to include such appeal on its posted agenda
as required by State law) that occurs after the Commission meeting at which the
decision was made.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 4 Page 4-5
(2) Council Decision. The City Council shall consider the appeal at a public meeting no later
than thirty (30) calendar days after the date on which the notice of appeal is submitted to
the Director of Development Services. The City Council may affirm, modify or reverse the
decision of the Commission by simple majority vote. The decision of the City Council is
final.
(i) Expiration.
(1) Two-Year Validity. The approval of a Preliminary Plat shall remain in effect for a period of
two (2) years following the date of approval, during which period the applicant shall submit
and receive approval for Construction Plans and a Final Plat for the land area shown on
the Preliminary Plat. If Construction Plans and a Final Plat application have not been
approved within the two (2)-year period, the Preliminary Plat shall expire.
(2) Phased Developments - Partial Construction Plans & Final Plat. If Construction Plans and
a Final Plat for only a portion of the land area shown on the Preliminary Plat are approved
by the end of the two (2)-year period, the Preliminary Plat for the remainder of the land not
included on the Construction Plans or Final Plat shall expire on such date.
(3) Relationship to Construction Plans. A Preliminary Plat shall remain valid for the period of
time in which approved Construction Plans are valid.
(4) Action on Final Plat. Should a Final Plat application be submitted within the two (2)-year
period, but not be acted upon by the Commission within the two (2)-year period, the
Preliminary Plat shall expire unless an extension is granted as provided in Section 4.02(j).
(5) Void If Not Extended. If the Preliminary Plat is not extended as provided in Section 4.02(j),
it shall expire and shall become null and void.
(j) Extension. A Preliminary Plat may be extended for a period not to exceed one (1) year beyond the
Preliminary Plat’s expiration date. A request for extension shall be submitted to Development
Services in writing at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to expiration of the Preliminary Plat, and
shall include reasons why the Plat should be extended.
(1) Decision by the Director of Development Services.
a. The Director of Development Services will review the extension request and shall
approve it, approve it with conditions, or deny the extension request within thirty (30)
calendar days following the official filing date of the request.
b. Should the Director of Development Services fail to act on an extension request
within thirty (30) calendar days, the extension shall be deemed to be approved.
(2) Considerations. In considering an extension, the Director of Development Services shall
consider whether the following conditions exist:
a. A Final Plat has been submitted and/or approved for any portion of the property
shown on the Preliminary Plat;
b. Construction Plans have been submitted and/or approved for any portion of the
property shown on the Preliminary Plat;
c. Construction is occurring on the subject property;
d. The Preliminary Plat complies with new ordinances that impact the health, safety
and general welfare of the community; and/or
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 4 Page 4-6
e. If there is a need for a park, school or other public facility or improvement on the
property.
(3) Conditions. In granting an extension, the decision-maker may impose such conditions as
are needed to ensure that the land will be developed in a timely fashion and that the public
interest is served. Any extension may be predicated upon compliance with new
development regulations and/or the applicant waiving any vested rights.
(4) Appeal of Denial for Extension.
a. Appeal of the Director’s Decision. The denial of an extension by the Director of
Development Services may be appealed to the Commission. A written request for
such appeal shall be received by Development Services within fourteen (14)
calendar days following the denial. The Commission shall hear and consider such
an appeal within thirty (30) calendar days following Development Services’ receipt of
the appeal request.
b. Appeal of the Commission’s Decision. The denial of an extension by the
Commission may be appealed to the City Council. A written request for such appeal
shall be received by the Director of Development Services within fourteen (14)
calendar days following the denial. The City Council shall hear and consider such
an appeal within thirty (30) calendar days following Development Services’ receipt of
the appeal request. The decision of the City Council is final.
(k) Amendments to Preliminary Plat Following Approval.
(1) Minor Amendments. Minor amendments to the design of the subdivision subject to an
approved Preliminary Plat may be incorporated in an application for approval of a Final
Plat without the necessity of filing a new application for re-approval of a Preliminary Plat.
Minor amendments may only include minor adjustments in street or alley alignments,
lengths and paving details, and minor adjustments to lot lines that do not result in creation
of additional lots or any non-conforming lots (such as to Zoning standards), provided that
such amendments are consistent with applicable approved prior applications.
(2) Major Amendments. All other proposed changes to the design of the subdivision subject to
an approved Preliminary Plat shall be deemed major amendments that require submittal
and approval of a new application for approval of a Preliminary Plat (including new fees,
new reviews, new official filing date, etc.) before approval of Construction Plans and/or a
Final Plat.
(3) Determination. The Director of Development Services shall make a determination of
whether proposed amendments are deemed to be minor or major, thereby requiring new
submittal of a Preliminary Plat.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 4 Page 4-7
SECTION 4.03 FINAL PLATS
(a) Purpose. The purpose of a Final Plat is to ensure that the proposed subdivision and development
of the land is consistent with all standards of this Subdivision Ordinance pertaining to the adequacy
of public facilities, that public improvements to serve the subdivision or development have been
installed and accepted by the City or that provision for such installation has been made, that all
other requirements and conditions have been satisfied or provided for to allow the Final Plat to be
recorded.
(b) Exceptions. A Final Plat is not required when a Minor Plat is submitted (refer to Section 4.05).
(c) Ownership.
(1) The applicant shall furnish with the application to the City a current title commitment issued
by a title insurance company authorized to do business in Texas, a title opinion letter from
an attorney licensed to practice in Texas, or some other acceptable proof of ownership,
identifying all persons having an ownership interest in the property subject to the Final Plat.
(2) The Final Plat shall be signed by each owner, or by the representative of the owners
authorized to sign legal documents for the owners, effectively denoting that they are
consenting to the platting of the property and to the dedications and covenants that may be
contained in the Final Plat. Such consent shall be subject to review and approval by the
City Attorney, and the applicant shall reimburse the City for all related legal costs for
review. This reimbursement shall be paid in full prior to filing of the Final Plat.
(d) Complete Applications for Final Plats in the Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ). Where the land
to be platted lies within the ETJ of the City in a county with which the City has an interlocal
agreement under Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 242, a complete application shall be
submitted to the City.
(e) Accompanying Applications. An application for a Final Plat may be accompanied by
Construction Plans if also accompanied by an Improvement Agreement and appropriate surety in
accordance with Section 5.04. However, approval of each shall be separate and in accordance with
this Section 4.03 for Final Plats and with Section 5.01 for Construction Plans.
(f) Prior Approved Preliminary Plat. The Final Plat and all accompanying data shall conform to the
Preliminary Plat as approved by the Commission, or as the Preliminary Plat may have been
amended subsequently (Section 4.02(k)), if applicable, incorporating all conditions imposed or
required by the Commission, if applicable.
(g) Review by Director of Development Services. The Director of Development Services shall:
(1) Initiate review of the plat and materials submitted.
(2) Request written comments from other City departments, such as Engineering Services,
Fire Department, Public Works and Parks & Recreation, if deemed necessary.
(3) Make available plats and reports to the Commission for review.
(4) Upon determination that the application is ready to be acted upon, schedule the Final Plat
for consideration on the agenda of the next available meeting of the Commission.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 4 Page 4-8
(h) Action by Planning & Zoning Commission. The Commission shall:
(1) Review the Final Plat application, the findings of the Director of Development Services,
and any other information available. From all such information, the Commission shall
determine whether the Final Plat conforms with the regulations of this Subdivision
Ordinance.
(2) Act within thirty (30) calendar days following the official filing date of Final Plat (unless the
applicant submits a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action as outlined in Section 3.03(e)). If no
decision is rendered by the Commission within the thirty (30) day period described above
or such longer period as may have been agreed upon, the Final Plat, as submitted, shall
be deemed to be approved.
(3) Take one of the following actions:
a. Approve the Final Plat;
b. Approve the Final Plat with conditions, which shall mean that the Final Plat shall be
considered to have been approved once such conditions are fulfilled; or
c. Deny the Final Plat.
(i) Criteria for Approval. The following criteria shall be used by the Commission to determine
whether the application for a Final Plat shall be approved, approved with conditions, or denied:
(1) Prior Approved Preliminary Plat.
a. The Final Plat conforms to the approved Preliminary Plat except for minor
amendments that are authorized under Section 4.02(k) and that may be approved
without the necessity of revising the approved Preliminary Plat;
b. All conditions imposed at the time of approval of the Preliminary Plat, as applicable,
have been satisfied;
c. The Construction Plans conform to the requirements of Section 5.01 and have been
approved by the Director of Engineering Services;
d. Where public improvements have been installed, the improvements conform to the
approved Construction Plans and have been approved for acceptance by the
Director of Engineering Services;
e. Where the Director of Engineering Services has authorized public improvements to
be deferred, an Improvement Agreement has been executed and submitted by the
property owner in conformity with Section 5;
f. The final layout of the subdivision or development meets all standards for adequacy
of public facilities contained in this Ordinance;
g. The Final Plat meets all applicable County standards to be applied under an
interlocal agreement between the City and the County under Texas Local
Government Code, Chapter 242, where the proposed development is located in
whole or in part in the ETJ of the City and in the applicable County;
h. The plat conforms to design requirements and construction standards as set forth in
the Engineering Standards; and
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 4 Page 4-9
i. The plat conforms to the Development Services’ subdivision application checklists.
(2) No Prior Approved Preliminary Plat.
a. The Final Plat conforms to all criteria for approval of a Preliminary Plat;
b. The Construction Plans conform to the requirements of Section 5.01 and have been
approved by the Director of Engineering Services;
c. An Improvement Agreement or surety for installation of public improvements have
been prepared and executed by the property owner in conformance with Section 5;
d. The final layout of the subdivision or development meets all standards for adequacy
of public facilities contained in this Ordinance;
e. The Final Plat meets all applicable County standards to be applied under an
interlocal agreement between the City and the County under Texas Local
Government Code, Chapter 242, where the proposed development is located in
whole or in part in the ETJ of the City and in the applicable County; and
f. The Final Plat conforms to the Development Services’ application checklist.
(j) Procedures for Recordation Upon Approval. The applicant shall supply to Development
Services the required number of signed and executed copies of the Final Plat that will be needed to
file the Plat, upon approval, at the applicable County (in the County’s required format) at least seven
(7) calendar days prior to the Planning & Zoning Commission meeting at which it will be considered
for approval.
(1) General.
a. Signatures. After approval of the Final Plat, the Director of Development Services
shall procure the appropriate City signatures on the Final Plat.
b. Recording Upon Performance. The Final Plat shall be recorded after:
1. The Final Plat is approved by the City;
2. All required public improvements have been completed and accepted by the City
(or an Improvement Agreement has been executed and appropriate surety
provided in accordance with Section 5.04);
3. All County filing requirements are met.
(2) Submittal of Final Plat Where Improvements Installed. Where all required public
improvements have been installed prior to recording of the Final Plat, the applicant shall
meet all requirements in accordance with Section 5.
(3) Submittal of Final Plat Where Improvements Have Not Been Installed. Where some of or
all required public improvements are not yet completed in connection with an approved
Final Plat, the applicant shall submit the Final Plat as approved by the Commission,
revised to reflect any conditions imposed by the Commission as part of approval.
(4) Update of Proof of Ownership. If there has been any change in ownership since the time
of the Proof of Ownership provided under Section 4.03(c), the applicant shall submit a new
consent agreement executed by each owner consenting to the platting of the property and
the dedications and covenants contained in the plat. The title commitment or title opinion
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 4 Page 4-10
letter and consent agreement shall be subject to review and approval by the City Attorney,
and the applicant shall reimburse the City for all related legal costs for review. This
reimbursement shall be paid in full prior to filing of the Final Plat.
(k) Effect of Approval. The approval of a Final Plat:
(1) Supersedes any prior approved Preliminary Plat for the same land.
(2) Authorizes the applicant to install any improvements in public rights-of-way in conformance
with approved Construction Plans and under an Improvement Agreement (refer to Section 5), if
applicable,
(3) Authorizes the applicant to seek Construction Release (refer to Section 5.01(i)) and/or
issuance of a Building Permit.
(l) Appeal of Decision of Final Plat Application. Appeal of a decision on a Final Plat application
shall be as outlined in Section 4.02(h).
(m)Revisions Following Recording/Recordation. Revisions may only be processed and approved
as a Replat or Amending Plat, as applicable.
SECTION 4.04 CONVEYANCE PLATS
(a) Purpose. The purpose of a Conveyance Plat is to subdivide land and to provide for recordation of
same, for the purpose of conveying (i.e., selling) the property without developing it. A Conveyance
Plat may be used to convey the property or interests therein; however, a Conveyance Plat does not
constitute approval for any type of development on the property. A Conveyance Plat is an interim
step in the subdivision and development of land.
(b) Applicability. A Conveyance Plat may be used in lieu of a Final Plat to record the subdivision of
property in the following instances:
(1) To record the remainder of a tract that is larger than five (5) acres, and that is created by
the final platting of a portion of the property, provided that the remainder is not intended for
immediate development.
(2) To record the subdivision of property into parcels, five (5) acres or smaller in size, that are
not intended for immediate development, provided all required public improvements exist
to the City’s current standards prior to approval and minimum frontage requirements are
met. All public rights-of-way must be dedicated and all abutting streets and utilities must
be installed and accepted by the City. Installation of on-site improvements may be delayed
if development of other tracts is not affected.
(c) Review and Consideration. Unless otherwise specified within this Section 4.04 for specific
requirements for a Conveyance Plat, a Conveyance Plat shall be processed and approved using
the same timing and procedures, including recordation, as specified for a Final Plat; refer to Section
4.03. Procedures to appeal a decision on a Conveyance Plat shall also be processed and
considered the same as a Final Plat (Section 4.03).
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 4 Page 4-11
(d) Subsequent Filing of a Final Plat. No Final Plat processed and approved in association with a
Conveyance Plat shall be filed without the concurrent or prior filing of the associated approved
Conveyance Plat for the remainder of the subject property.
(e) Conveyance Plat Requirements.
(1) No building or development permits shall be issued nor permanent utility service provided
for land that has only received approval as a Conveyance Plat; a Final Plat must be filed
for building and development permits and for utility service. Notwithstanding the above,
the Chief Building Official may authorize temporary building permits, temporary occupancy
permits, and temporary utility service.
(2) A Conveyance Plat may be superseded by a revised Conveyance Plat or a Final Plat in
total or in part through compliance with the procedures and requirements of this
Ordinance.
(f) Standards for Approval.
(1) Access – All lots created by a Conveyance Plat shall have frontage and access to an
existing or proposed public street, defined on the Major Thoroughfare Plan, or an existing
standard street meeting City construction standards and accessing the existing City street
system. All lots created by a Conveyance Plat shall provide points of access as required
by the Zoning Ordinance and/or by this Ordinance.
(2) Dedication of Rights-of-Way – Dedication of rights-of-way shall be required in accordance
with the Engineering Standards.
(g) Effect of Approval. The approval of a Conveyance Plat authorizes conveyance of the lot(s)
created thereon, but does not authorize any type of development on the property. The applicant
and future owner(s) of the property remain obligated to comply with all provisions in this Ordinance
upon future development of the property including, but not limited to, all requirements for platting,
required public improvements, utility extensions, street improvements or assessments, right-of-way
and easement dedications, and all other requirements in this Ordinance.
SECTION 4.05 MINOR PLATS
(a) Purpose. The purpose of a Minor Plat is to simplify divisions of land under certain circumstances
outlined in State law.
(b) Applicability. An application for approval of a Minor Plat may be filed only in accordance with
State law, when all of the following circumstances apply:
(1) The proposed division results in four (4) or fewer lots;
(2) All lots in the proposed subdivision front onto an existing public street and the construction or
extension of a street or alley is not required to meet the requirements of this Subdivision
Ordinance; and
(3) Except for right-of-way widening and easements, the plat does not require the extension of any
municipal facilities to serve any lot within the subdivision.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 4 Page 4-12
(c) Application Requirements. The requirements for the submittal of a Minor Plat shall be the same
as the requirements for a Final Plat, as outlined in Section 4.03.
(d) Review by Director of Development Services. The Director of Development Services shall:
(1) Initiate review of the plat and materials submitted.
(2) Request written comments from other City departments, such as Engineering Services,
Fire Department, Public Works and Parks & Recreation, if deemed necessary.
(e) Action by Director of Development Services. The Director of Development Services shall:
(1) Determine whether the Minor Plat meets the regulations of this Subdivision Ordinance.
(2) Act within thirty (30) calendar days following the official filing date of a completed
application for a Minor Plat (unless the applicant submits a Waiver of Right to 30-Day
Action as outlined in Section 3.03(e)). If no decision is rendered by the Director of
Development Services, or if the Director has not deferred the application to the Planning &
Zoning Commission for decision, within the thirty (30) day period described above or such
longer period as may have been agreed upon, the Minor Plat, as submitted, shall be
deemed to be approved.
(3) Take one of the following actions:
a. Approve the Minor Plat;
b. Approve the Minor Plat with conditions, which shall mean that the Minor Plat shall be
considered to have been approved once such conditions are fulfilled; or
c. Defer the Minor Plat to the Commission for consideration prior to expiration of the
required 30-day approval period unless a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action is
submitted in accordance with Section 3.03(e).
(f) Criteria for Approval. The following criteria shall be used by the Director of Development Services
to determine whether the application for a Minor Plat shall be approved, approved with conditions,
or denied:
(1) The Minor Plat is consistent with all zoning requirements for the property (if applicable),
any approved Improvement Agreement (if applicable), and all other requirements of this
Subdivision Ordinance that apply to the plat;
(2) All lots to be created by the plat already are adequately served by improved public street
access and by all required City utilities and services and by alleys, if applicable;
(3) The ownership, maintenance and allowed uses of all designated easements have been
stated on the Minor Plat; and
(4) Except for right-of-way widening and easements, the plat does not require the extension of
any municipal facilities to serve any lot within the subdivision.
(g) Procedures for Recordation Following Approval. The procedures for recordation of a Minor Plat
shall be the same as the procedures for recordation of a Final Plat, as outlined in Section 4.03.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 4 Page 4-13
(h) Appeal of Decision on Minor Plat Application.
(1) Commission Decision. If the Director of Development Services defers the Minor Plat
application to the Planning & Zoning Commission, the Commission shall consider the
application at a regular meeting no later than thirty (30) calendar days after the date on
which the Director of Development Services deferred the application to the Commission.
The Commission shall, upon simple majority vote, take one of the following actions:
a. Approve the Minor Plat;
b. Approve the Minor Plat with conditions, which shall mean that the Minor Plat shall be
considered to have been approved once such conditions are fulfilled; or
c. Deny the Minor Plat.
(2) Appeal. The decision of the Commission may be appealed to the City Council in
accordance with the procedures for an appeal on a Final Plat decision, which are outlined
in Section 4.03. The City Council decision is final.
(i) Revisions Following Approval. Revisions may only be processed and approved as a Replat or
Amending Plat, as applicable.
SECTION 4.06 REPLATS AND AMENDING PLATS – GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
(a) Applicability and Terminology.
(1) The procedures outlined in this Section and in subsequent Sections 4.07, 4.08 and 4.09
shall apply only if a property owner seeks to change any portion of a plat that has been
filed of record with the appropriate County.
(2) The term “Replat” includes changes to a recorded final plat, whether the change is effected
by replatting without vacation (Section 4.07), replatting by vacating the recorded plat and
approving a new application (Section 4.09), or approving an Amending Plat (Section 4.08).
(b) City Action Required. Unless otherwise specified, any change to a recorded plat shall be subject
to approval by the Commission.
(c) Construction Management. If the subdivision as replatted requires construction of additional
improvements, the provisions of Section 5 shall apply. If the subdivision as replatted does not
require any appreciable alteration or improvement of utility installations, streets, alleys, building
setback lines, etc., then no Construction Plans shall be required.
(d) Application and Approval Procedures. Unless otherwise specified, application and all related
procedures and approvals, including recordation, for a Replat or Amending Plat shall be the same
as specified for a Final Plat, as outlined in Section 4.03.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 4 Page 4-14
SECTION 4.07 REPLATS
(a) Purpose & Applicability. A Replat of all or a portion of a recorded plat may be approved in
accordance with State law without vacation of the recorded plat, if the Replat:
(1) Is signed and acknowledged by only the owners of the property being replatted;
(2) Is approved after a public hearing; and
(3) Does not propose to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions previously
incorporated in the recorded plat.
(b) General Notice and Hearing Requirements. Published notice of the public hearing on the Replat
application shall be given in accordance with Section 3.05 and State law, if applicable (also see
specific notice and hearing requirements for special replats in Section 4.07(d)(3)). The public
hearing shall be conducted by the Commission.
(c) Partial Replat Application. If a Replat is submitted for only a portion of a previously platted
subdivision, the Replat must reference the previous subdivision name and recording information,
and must state on the Replat the specific lots which are being changed along with a detailed
“Purpose for Replat” statement.
(d) Special Replat Requirements.
(1) Applicability. A Replat without vacation of the preceding plat, in accordance with State law,
must conform to the requirements of this Section 4.07(d) if:
a. During the preceding five (5) years, any of the area to be replatted was limited by an
interim or permanent zoning classification to residential use for not more than two (2)
residential units per lot; or
b. Any lot in the preceding plat was limited by deed restrictions to residential use for not
more than two (2) residential units per lot.
(2) Exception. The requirements of this Section 4.07(d) shall not apply to any approval of a
Replat application for a portion of a recorded plat if all of the proposed area sought to be
replatted was designated or reserved for usage other than for single- or duplex-family
residential usage. Such designation must be noted on the recorded plat or in the legally
recorded restriction applicable to such plat.
(3) Notice and Hearing. Notice of the required public hearing shall be given before the
fifteenth (15th) calendar day before the date of the hearing by:
a. Publication in an official newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in the
applicable City or unincorporated area (as applicable) in which the proposed replat
property is located; and
b. By written notice, with a copy of Section 212.015(c) of the Texas Local Government
Code (as amended) attached, forwarded by the City to the owners of lots that are in
the original subdivision and that are within two hundred feet (200’) of the lots to be
replatted, as indicated on the most recently approved municipal tax roll or in the
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 4 Page 4-15
case of a subdivision within the ETJ, the most recently approved applicable county
tax roll of the property upon which the replat is requested. The written notice may
be delivered by depositing the notice, properly addressed with postage prepaid, in a
post office or postal depository within the boundaries of the City.
(4) Protest. If the Replat application is accompanied by a Waiver petition (per Section 9.01)
and is protested in accordance with this Section 4.07(d)(4), approval of the Replat shall
require the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths of the voting members of the
Commission present at the meeting. For a legal protest, written instruments signed by the
owners of at least twenty percent (20%) of the area of the lots or land immediately
adjoining the area covered by the Replat application and extending two hundred feet (200’)
from that area, but within the original subdivision, must be filed with the Commission prior
to the close of the public hearing. The area of streets and alleys shall be included in the
area computations.
(e) Review and Consideration. The review and approval processes for a Replat shall be the same as
the review and approval processes for a Final Plat (except for the public hearing and notice
requirements described in Section 4.07(d)(3)), which are outlined in Section 4.03. The Director of
Development Services shall be the responsible official and the Commission shall be the initial
decision-maker for a Replat application. Procedures to appeal a decision on a Replat shall also be
processed and considered the same as a Final Plat (Section 4.03).
(f) Effect. Upon approval and recording of the Replat, it is controlling over the previously recorded plat
for the portion replatted.
SECTION 4.08 AMENDING PLATS
(a) Purpose. The purpose of an Amending Plat shall be to provide an expeditious means of making
minor revisions to a recorded plat consistent with provisions of State law.
(b) Applicability. The procedures for an Amending Plat shall apply only if the sole purpose of the
Amending Plat is to achieve one or more of the following:
(1) Correct an error in a course or distance shown on the preceding plat;
(2) Add a course or distance that was omitted on the preceding plat;
(3) Correct an error in a real property description shown on the preceding plat;
(4) Indicate monuments set after the death, disability or retirement from practice of the
engineer or surveyor responsible for setting monuments;
(5) Show the location or character of a monument that has been changed in location or
character or that is shown incorrectly as to location or character on the preceding plat;
(6) Correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or omission previously approved by the
municipal authority responsible for approving plats, including lot numbers, acreage, street
names, and identification of adjacent recorded plats;
(7) Correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between two adjacent lots if:
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 4 Page 4-16
a. Both lot owners join in the application for amending the plat;
b. Neither lot is abolished;
c. The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions;
and
d. The amendment does not have a material adverse effect on the property rights of
the other owners in the plat;
(8) Relocate a lot line to eliminate an inadvertent encroachment of a building or other
improvement on a lot line or easement;
(9) Relocate one or more lot lines between one or more adjacent lots if:
a. The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat;
b. The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions;
and
c. The amendment does not increase the number of lots;
(10) Make necessary changes to the preceding plat to create six (6) or fewer lots in the
subdivision or a part of the subdivision covered by the preceding plat if:
a. The changes do not affect applicable zoning and other regulations of the
municipality;
b. The changes do not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions; and
c. The area covered by the changes is located in an area that the municipal planning
commission or other appropriate governing body of the municipality has approved,
after a public hearing, as a residential improvement area; or
(11) Replat one or more lots fronting on an existing street if:
a. The owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat;
b. The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions;
c. The amendment does not increase the number of lots; and
d. The amendment does not create or require the creation of a new street or make
necessary the extension of municipal facilities.
(c) Certificates of Correction. Certificates of Correction are prohibited.
(d) Notice. In accordance with State law, the approval and issuance of an Amending Plat shall not
require notice, hearing or approval of other lot owners.
(e) Review by Director of Development Services. The Director of Development Services shall:
(1) Initiate review of the plat and materials submitted.
(2) Request written comments from other City departments, such as Engineering Services,
Fire Department, Public Works and Parks & Recreation, if deemed necessary.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 4 Page 4-17
(f) Action by Director of Development Services. The Director of Development Services shall:
(1) Determine whether the Amending Plat meets the regulations of this Subdivision Ordinance.
(2) Act within thirty (30) calendar days after the application is deemed complete per Section
3.03(g)
(3) Take one of the following actions:
a. Approve the Amending Plat;
b. Approve the Amending Plat with conditions, which shall mean that the Amending
Plat shall be considered to have been approved once such conditions are fulfilled; or
c. Defer the Amending Plat to the Commission for consideration prior to expiration of
the required 30-day approval period unless a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action is
submitted in accordance with Section 3.03(e).
(g) Procedures for Recordation Following Approval. The procedures for recordation of an
Amending Plat shall be the same as the procedures for recordation of a Final Plat, as outlined in
Section 4.03.
(h) Effect. Upon approval, an Amending Plat shall be recorded and is controlling over the previously
recorded plat without vacation of that plat.
(i) Appeal of Decision on Amending Plat Application.
(1) Commission Decision. If the Director of Development Services defers the Amending Plat
application to the Planning & Zoning Commission, the Commission shall consider the
application at a regular meeting no later than thirty (30) calendar days after the date on
which the Director of Development Services deferred the application to the Commission.
The Commission shall, upon simple majority vote, take one of the following actions:
a. Approve the Amending Plat;
b. Approve the Amending Plat with conditions, which shall mean that the Amending
Plat shall be considered to have been approved once such conditions are fulfilled; or
c. Deny the Amending Plat.
(2) Appeal. The decision of the Commission may be appealed to the City Council in
accordance with the procedures for an appeal on a Final Plat decision, which are outlined
in Section 4.03. The City Council decision is final.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 4 Page 4-18
SECTION 4.09 PLAT VACATION
(a) Purpose. The purpose of a Plat Vacation is to provide an expeditious means of vacating a
recorded plat in its entirety, consistent with provisions of State law.
(b) Initiation of a Plat Vacation.
(1) By Property Owner. The property owner of the tract covered by a plat may submit an
application to vacate the plat at any time before any lot in the plat is sold.
(2) By All Lot Owners. If lots in the plat have been sold, an application to vacate the plat must
be submitted by all the owners of lots in the plat.
(3) City Council. If the City Council, on its own motion, determines that the plat should be
vacated in the interest of and to protect the public’s health, safety and welfare; and:
a. No lots within the approved plat have been sold within five (5) years following the
date that the Final Plat was approved by the City; or
b. The property owner has breached an Improvement Agreement, and the City is
unable to obtain funds with which to complete construction of public improvements,
except that the vacation shall apply only to lots owned by the property owner or its
successor; or
c. The plat has been of record for more than five (5) years, and the City Council
determines that the further sale of lots within the subdivision or addition presents a
threat to public health, safety and welfare, except that the vacation shall apply only
to lots owned by the property owner or its successors.
(c) Notice. Published notice of the public hearing on the Plat Vacation application shall be given in
accordance with Section 3.05 and State law. The hearing shall be conducted by the City Council.
(d) Review by Director of Development Services. The Director of Development Services shall:
(1) Initiate review of the Plat Vacation application and materials submitted.
(2) Request written comments from other City departments, such as Engineering Services,
Fire Department, Public Works and Parks & Recreation, if deemed necessary.
(e) Action by the City Council. The City Council shall:
(1) Review the Plat Vacation application, the findings of the Director of Development Services,
and any other information available. From all such information, the City Council shall make
a finding as to whether or not the plat should be vacated. The City Council’s decision on a
Plat Vacation shall be final.
(2) Take one of the following actions:
a. Approve the Plat Vacation;
b. Approve the Plat Vacation with conditions, which shall mean that the Plat Vacation
shall be considered to have been approved once such conditions are fulfilled; or
c. Deny the Plat Vacation.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 4 Page 4-19
(f) Procedures for Recordation Following Approval. If the City Council adopts a resolution vacating
a plat in whole, it shall record a copy of the resolution in the County Clerk's Office. If the City
Council adopts a resolution vacating a plat in part, it shall cause a revised Final Plat to be recorded
along with the resolution which shows that portion of the original plat that has been vacated and
that portion that has not been vacated.
(g) Effect.
(1) On the execution and recording of the vacating instrument, the previously filed plat shall
have no effect. Regardless of the City Council's action on the petition, the property
owner(s) or developer will have no right to a refund of any monies, fees or charges paid to
the City nor to the return of any property or consideration dedicated or delivered to the City
except as may have previously been agreed to by the City Council.
(2) The plat is vacated when a signed, acknowledged instrument declaring the plat vacated is
approved and recorded in the manner prescribed for the original plat.
(3) The City Council, at its discretion, shall have the right to retain all or specific portions of
road rights-of-way or easements shown on the plat being considered for vacation.
However, the City Council shall consider plat vacation upon satisfactory conveyance of
easements and/or rights-of-way in a separate legal document using forms provided by the
City Attorney’s office.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 4 Page 4-20
(This page intentionally left blank.)
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 5 Page 5-1
SECTION 5: CONSTRUCTION PLANS & PROCEDURES
SECTION 5.01 CONSTRUCTION PLANS
(a) Purpose. To require that required public improvements be installed to serve a development in
accordance with all the Subdivision Ordinance standards.
(b) Submitting Plans. Plans shall be submitted in accordance with Engineering Services
requirements, as provided in the Development Application Handbook. Incomplete plans shall not
be accepted and such plans shall be returned to the applicant.
(c) Responsible Official and Decision. The Director of Engineering Services shall be the responsible
official for review and approval of Construction Plans. The Director of Engineering Services shall
also be the initial decision-maker for Construction Plans. In this capacity, therefore, the Director of
Engineering Services shall approve, approve subject to modifications, or deny the Construction
Plans.
(d) Approval Required & Timing of Construction. Construction Plans must be approved in
accordance with this Section prior to the approval and/or recordation of the Final Plat, unless
otherwise stated within the Subdivision Ordinance.
(e) Criteria for Approval. The Director of Engineering Services shall approve Construction Plans if:
(1) The plans are consistent with the approved Preliminary Plat, or the proposed Final Plat;
and
(2) The plans conform to the subject property’s zoning and Planned Development standards
(including zoning design standards), and to the standards for adequate public facilities,
contained in this Subdivision Ordinance and all other applicable municipal codes.
(f) Effect. Approval of Construction Plans authorizes the applicant to schedule a Pre-Construction
Meeting in accordance with Section 5.02 and apply for Construction Release in accordance with
Section 5.01(i).
(g) Expiration. The approval of Construction Plans shall remain in effect for a period of one (1) year
from the date of approval, or for the duration of construction of the project, provided that progress
toward completion of the project continues to be demonstrated, unless the Plans are extended in
accordance with Section 5.01(h).
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 5 Page 5-2
(h) Extension. Construction Plans may be extended for a period of six (6) additional months beyond
the expiration date. A request must be made in writing to Engineering Services for such extension
prior to expiration of the plans, and shall include reasons why the plans should be extended.
(1) Decision by the Director of Engineering Services.
a. The Director of Engineering Services will review the extension request, and shall
approve, approve with conditions, or deny the extension request within thirty (30)
calendar days following the official filing date.
b. Should the Director of Engineering Services fail to act on an extension request within
thirty (30) calendar days, the extension shall be deemed to be approved.
(2) Consideration. The Director of Engineering Services shall extend Construction Plans
approval for a period of six (6) additional months beyond the Plans’ expiration date if:
a. A Final Plat has been submitted, approved or filed of record for any portion of the
property shown on the Construction Plans;
b. The Construction Plans comply with new ordinances that impact the health, safety
and general welfare of the community;
c. Demonstrable forward progress has been made to proceed with construction or
required improvements; and
d. An Improvement Agreement (Section 5.04), if applicable, is still valid and in full
effect.
(3) Conditions. In granting an extension, the Director of Engineering Services may impose
such conditions as are needed to ensure that the land will be developed in a timely fashion
and that the public interest is served. Any extension may be predicated upon compliance
with new development regulations and/or the applicant waiving any vested rights.
(4) Total Extension. A second, six (6) month extension may be requested using the same
process outlined above.
(i) Construction Release. Upon approval of the Preliminary Plat and the Construction Plans, receipt
of all documentation (e.g., insurance information, bonds, etc.) and fees required by Engineering
Services, and after the Pre-Construction Meeting with City staff (Section 5.02), the Director of
Engineering Services shall release the plans for construction if all City requirements pertaining to
construction have been met. The Construction Release shall remain in effect for a period of one (1)
year from the date of issuance, or for the duration of construction of the project, provided that
progress toward completion of the project continues to be demonstrated. Expiration, and possible
extension, of the Construction Release shall be the same as for the Construction Plans (see
Sections 5.01(g) and 5.01(h)).
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 5 Page 5-3
SECTION 5.02 PRE-CONSTRUCTION MEETING
(a) Requirement. The applicant(s) shall attend a Pre-Construction Meeting with Engineering Services
following the approval of Construction Plans and prior to commencement of any construction on the
property.
(b) Purpose. The purpose of the Pre-Construction Meeting is to discuss administrative,
communication, and operating procedures for project construction prior to Construction Release
(refer to Section 5.01(i)) or issuance of a Building Permit. A list of typical inspection items,
procedures and acceptance criteria for items in public right-of-way and easements will also be
furnished to the applicant.
(c) Notice. The applicant shall receive written notice from the Director of Engineering Services that
Construction Plans have been approved and that the project is eligible for a Pre-Construction
Meeting.
(d) Effect. Following the Pre-Construction Meeting and upon approval of the Construction Plans and
full compliance with all pre-construction requirements, the Director of Engineering Services shall
authorize Construction Release (see Section 5.01(i)), allowing the applicant to commence with
construction of the project. The applicant may also be issued a Building Permit, if appropriate,
provided that a Building Permit application has been submitted and approved and all other Building
Permit requirements have also been met.
SECTION 5.03 TIMING OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
(a) Completion Prior to Final Plat Approval & Recordation. Completion of all required public
improvements, in accordance with the approved Preliminary Plat and the approved Construction
Plans, shall occur prior to Final Plat approval and recordation. A Final Plat shall not be accepted for
filing, nor shall it be considered for approval, prior to completion of such improvements except as
provided in Section 5.03(b).
(b) Completion After Final Plat Approval & Recordation. The Director of Engineering Services,
upon written request by the applicant, may allow construction of public improvements after Final
Plat approval and recordation. Such postponement shall be conditioned on execution of an
Improvement Agreement and provision of security, in accordance with Section 5.04. It shall be at
the Director’s discretion to determine whether postponing construction of public improvements until
after Final Plat approval and recordation is appropriate, and therefore, whether financial guarantee
is acceptable through an Improvement Agreement.
(c) Deferral of Obligation. The Director of Engineering Services may defer the developer’s obligation
to dedicate rights-of-way for, or to construct, public improvements to serve a new development
upon execution of an Improvement Agreement and upon provision of adequate security (see
Section 5.04).
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 5 Page 5-4
(d) Phased Development. If the development is being platted and constructed in phases,
improvements shall be completed as platted areas are approved and phases are constructed. Also
refer to Section 4.02(i) for details regarding phased development and Preliminary Plat validity.
(e) Easements for Utility Providers. The applicant is responsible for contacting all utility providers
prior to beginning construction, and for securing all necessary easements for same prior to Final
Plat approval and recordation. The applicant’s engineer shall provide the Director of Engineering
Services with written certification that all necessary easements are secured for the various utility
providers, and such easements shall be shown on the Final Plat with the recording information for
each.
(f) Off-Site Easements. All necessary off-site easements required for installation of required off-site
public improvements to serve the development shall be acquired by the applicant prior to the Pre-
Construction Meeting (see Section 5.02), or prior to approval and recordation of the Final Plat,
whichever occurs first. Off-site easements shall be conveyed and recorded at the County by an
instrument approved by the City. If the property on which the off-site easement is required has
been platted, a replat is required to dedicate the easement.
SECTION 5.04 IMPROVEMENT AGREEMENTS AND SECURITY FOR COMPLETION
(a) Improvement Agreement and Security for Completion. When any of the required public
improvements will be postponed and constructed after Final Plat approval and recordation, the Final
Plat shall not be accepted for filing, nor shall it be approved, unless and until the applicant enters
into an Improvement Agreement by which the applicant:
(1) Will complete the improvements;
(2) Warrants the improvements for a period of two (2) years following final acceptance by the
City;
(3) Provide a maintenance bond in the amount of one hundred and ten percent (110%) of the
costs of the improvements for such period;
(4) Provides provisions for securing the obligations of the agreement consistent with Section
5.04(e); and
(5) Outlines other terms and conditions as are agreed to by the applicant and the City, or as
may be required by this Subdivision Ordinance.
(b) Agreement to Run with the Land. The Improvement Agreement shall provide that the covenants
and other items of agreement contained therein shall run with the land and shall bind all
successors, heirs and assignees of the applicant. All existing owners shall be required to execute
the agreement or provide written consent to the covenants and other items contained in the
agreement.
(c) Decision by the Director of Engineering Services. The Director of Engineering Services shall
review the Improvement Agreement, and shall approve it, approve it with conditions, or deny it. The
agreement shall also be subject to review by the City Attorney prior to any approval by the Director
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 5 Page 5-5
of Engineering Services, and the applicant shall reimburse the City for all related legal costs for
review. This reimbursement shall be paid in full prior to filing of the Final Plat.
(d) Appeal of Decision. The applicant may appeal the Director of Engineering Services’ decision on
the Improvement Agreement to the City Council by submitting written notice of appeal to the
Director of Engineering Services within fourteen (14) calendar days following the date of such
decision. The City Council shall hear and decide the appeal within thirty (30) calendar days
following receipt of the notice of appeal. The City Council may only overturn the Director of
Engineering Services’ decision upon a favorable vote of at least four (4) of the Council’s voting
members, and the Council’s decision shall be final.
(e) Security for Completion of Improvements.
(1) Type of Security. When any of the required public improvements will be constructed after
approval and recordation of the Final Plat, the applicant shall guarantee proper
construction of such postponed improvements, in accordance with the City’s design
standards and with this Subdivision Ordinance, by a bond executed by a surety company
holding a license to do business in the State of Texas, and acceptable to the City, on the
form provided by the City. The performance bond shall be approved as to form by the City
Attorney;
(2) Estimated Cost & Security Approval. Security shall be issued in the amount of one
hundred and ten percent (110%) of the cost to construct and complete all required public
improvements to the City’s standards as estimated by the applicant’s professional
engineer, and as approved by the Director of Engineering Services. Security shall be
subject to the review and approval of the City Attorney. The applicant shall reimburse the
City for all related legal costs for review (this reimbursement shall be paid in full prior to
filing of the Final Plat).
(3) Security for Construction in Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ). Where all or some portion of
the proposed development is located in the City’s ETJ, the security shall be in a form and
shall contain such terms as are consistent with the City’s interlocal agreements with Collin
and Denton Counties (as applicable) under Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 242.
In cases where the requirements governing the form and terms of the security are defined
in such an agreement, they will supersede any conflicting provisions within this Subdivision
Ordinance.
(f) Escrow Policies and Procedures.
(1) Request for Escrow. The City may require or the developer may petition the City to defer
required improvements in exchange for a deposit of escrow. An example may include a
timing issue due to pending street improvements by another agency such as TxDOT. The
Director of Engineering Services may require studies and other information to support the
developer’s request to escrow.
(2) Escrow Deposit With the City. When the Director of Engineering Services requires or
agrees to accept escrow deposits, the developer shall deposit in escrow with the City an
amount equal to one hundred and ten percent (110%) of the total “turnkey” costs including,
but not limited to, the design, permitting, acceptance and inflation costs related to the
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 5 Page 5-6
improvement(s). The Director of Engineering Services shall review and approve the
amount, which shall be approved and paid prior to recordation of the Final Plat.
(3) City Usage of Escrowed Funds. The City may also use the escrowed funds in participation
with another entity (such as TxDOT, Collin or Denton County, etc.) to jointly construct the
public improvement(s).
(4) Termination of Escrow. Escrows, or portions of escrowed amounts, which remain unused
after a period of ten (10) years following the date of such payment shall, upon written
request, be returned to the developer. Such return of escrowed funds does not remove
any obligations of the developer for construction of the required improvement(s).
(5) Refund. If all or a portion of a street or other type of public improvement for which escrow
is deposited is constructed by a party other than the City, the remaining unused escrowed
funds, upon written request, be refunded to the developer after completion and City
acceptance of the street or public improvement.
(6) Interest on Escrowed Funds. When escrowed funds are returned or refunded to the
escrowing developer, the City shall retain all of the interest accrued by the funds.
(7) Escrow Fee Agreement. The Director of Engineering Services, at his/her discretion, may
require an escrow fee agreement be executed.
SECTION 5.05 INSPECTION, MAINTENANCE & ACCEPTANCE OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS
(a) Inspections.
(1) The Director of Engineering Services shall inspect the construction of improvements while
in progress, as well as upon completion. The applicant, or his contractor, shall maintain
contact with the Director of Engineering Services during construction of improvements.
(2) Construction shall be in accordance with the approved Construction Plans. Any significant
change in design required during construction shall be made by the applicant's engineer,
and shall be subject to approval by the Director of Engineering Services.
(3) If the Director of Engineering Services finds, upon inspection, that any of the required
public improvements have not been constructed properly and in accordance with the
approved Construction Plans, the applicant shall be responsible for completing and/or
correcting the public improvements to bring such into compliance.
(b) Maintenance During Construction. The applicant shall maintain all required public improvements
during construction of the development.
(c) Submission of Record Drawings. The City shall accept required public improvements when the
applicant's engineer has certified to the Director of Engineering Services, through submission of
detailed “record” drawings of the project and filed copies of any off-site easements, unless
otherwise noted within the Subdivision Ordinance, that the public improvements have been built in
accordance with the approved Construction Plans. The City shall not accept improvements until the
Final Plat is approved by the City and recorded at the County. Each record drawing sheet shall
show all changes made in the plans during construction, and on each sheet, there shall be a
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 5 Page 5-7
“record” stamp bearing the signature of the engineer and date. Detailed requirements for such
drawings are available in Engineering Services.
(d) Acceptance or Rejection of Improvements by Director of Engineering Services.
(1) Responsible Official. The Director of Engineering Services shall be responsible for
inspecting all required public improvements shown in the Construction Plans, and for
accepting completed subdivision improvements intended for dedication to the City.
(2) Final Inspection. After completion of all improvements, franchise utilities, grading, and
erosion control, the Director of Engineering Services, the Director of Public Works, the
Director of Parks & Recreation, and other designated representatives (as applicable) will
perform a final inspection before recommending acceptance of the improvements.
(3) Letter of Final Acceptance. If all improvements are completed, inspected, tested (if
applicable), and determined by the City to be in conformance with this Subdivision
Ordinance and with the City’s design standards, then the Director of Engineering Services
shall issue a Letter of Final Acceptance to the applicant, thereby notifying the applicant of
the City’s acceptance.
(4) Meaning of Acceptance. Acceptance of the improvements shall mean that the applicant
has transferred all rights to all the public improvements to the City for title, use and
maintenance.
(5) Rejection. The Director of Engineering Services shall reject those improvements that fail
to comply with the City’s standards and specifications. The City shall enforce the
guarantee provided by agreement(s).
(e) Disclaimer. Approval of a Preliminary Plat or Final Plat by the Commission, or Construction Plans
by the Director of Engineering Services, shall not constitute acceptance of any of the public
improvements required to serve the subdivision or development. No public improvements shall be
accepted for dedication by the City except in accordance with this Section.
(f) Acceptance of Improvements for Land in Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ). Where the
improvements to be constructed under an Improvement Agreement are located within the City's
ETJ and are to be dedicated to a County, the Director of Engineering Services shall inform the
County that the public improvements have been constructed in accordance with approved
Construction Plans, and are ready for acceptance by the County.
(g) Maintenance Bond Following Acceptance. The applicant shall furnish to the Director of
Engineering Services a sufficient maintenance bond with a reputable and solvent corporate surety
registered with the State of Texas, in favor of the City, to indemnify the City against any repairs.
The bond shall be in effect for two (2) years from the date of final acceptance of the entire project.
The bond, which is a part of the requirements for final acceptance, shall be a minimum of one
hundred and ten percent (110%) of the value of the work constructed. Final acceptance shall be
withheld until said maintenance bond is furnished to the City in a form acceptable by the City
Attorney. Once the maintenance bond has been examined and approved by the City Attorney, the
City Attorney shall certify the bond is valid and enforceable as provided by law prior to
recommending acceptance by the Director of Engineering Services. The applicant shall reimburse
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 5 Page 5-8
the City for all related legal costs for review (this reimbursement shall be paid in full prior to filing of
the Final Plat).
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 6 Page 6-1
SECTION 6
(Reserved for future use…)
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 6 Page 6-2
(This page intentionally left blank.)
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 7 Page 7-1
SECTION 7: SPECIAL EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION POLICIES
& REGULATIONS
SECTION 7.01 GENERAL POLICIES IN THE EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION (ETJ)
(a) Application of Requirements. Unless otherwise stated within this Subdivision Ordinance, all
standards, specifications and regulations shall apply to development within the City’s extra-territorial
jurisdiction (ETJ).
(b) Extension of Services. Given that land proposed for development in the City’s ETJ must be
served adequately by essential public facilities and services, including those related to adequate
water distribution, wastewater collection and treatment, streets, pedestrian circulation, storm
drainage conveyance, and park and recreational facilities, the following policies for the provision of
infrastructure services into the City’s ETJ shall apply:
(1) It is in the City’s best interest to encourage development in areas adjacent to compatible
development already receiving City services, and particularly where those services have
excess capacity.
(2) It is in the City’s best interest to discourage development in remote areas as well as those
areas that exhibit environmental hazards.
(3) It is in the City’s best interest to annex areas that:
a. Need to be protected in order to prevent or reduce flood damage in existing urban
areas;
b. Possess unique physical characteristics;
c. Have requested City services; or
d. Minimize the City’s fiscal liability.
(4) It is in the City’s best interest to withhold all water and sewer extensions outside the City’s
limits except in instances where the extension will serve a large-volume user(s) who has
agreed in writing to annexation at a predetermined date, and who has demonstrated that a
significant community benefit will accrue to the City if it provides such service outside the
City’s limits, and where no significant fiscal liabilities will be incurred by the City.
(5) It is in the City’s best interest to provide services, other than water and wastewater service,
to individual users beyond the City’s limits:
a. Upon request and under contracts or cost-sharing arrangements that minimize future
City fiscal liability;
b. Upon request and under contracts or cost-sharing arrangements that encourage
compact development;
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 7 Page 7-2
c. Upon request and under contracts or cost-sharing arrangements that ensure
compliance with City subdivision, building, electrical, plumbing and fire codes; and
d. When it is not in the City’s best interest to annex the areas to be served.
(6) The City shall therefore provide for extension of public facilities and services only under the
following circumstances:
a. Such extension is part of an annexation agreement that provides for development
consistent with established City objectives and policies, such as the Comprehensive
Plan;
b. Such extension allows the City to retain its right under State law to annex the
property in the future;
c. The quality of the development that is occurring is consistent with City standards (if
applicable);
d. The use or development offers significant public benefits to the City; and
e. The proposed development and land uses comply with City Building and Fire Codes
(as agreed to in an annexation agreement with the City).
(c) Design and Construction Standards for Public Improvements in the City’s Extraterritorial
Jurisdiction (ETJ). All public improvements constructed in conjunction with a new development in
the City’s ETJ shall be designed, engineered and constructed in accordance with the City’s
standards as set forth in the Engineering Standards, and all other applicable City master plans (e.g.,
water and wastewater master plans, master storm drainage plans, the Comprehensive Plan, etc.).
SECTION 7.02 COLLIN & DENTON COUNTY REGULATIONS
(a) Interlocal Agreements. The City has executed separate interlocal cooperation agreements as
authorized under Chapter 242 of the Texas Local Government Code with both Collin County and
Denton County.
(1) Collin County has assigned to the City its authority to approve plats in the City’s ETJ. The
agreement also provides for the City to enforce its subdivision regulations, together with
specified regulations of Collin County, within the City’s ETJ. (For specific responsibilities,
see the separate interlocal agreement, Resolution No. 06-02-28R.)
(2) Denton County has assigned to the City its authority to approve plats in the City’s ETJ. The
agreement also provides for the City to enforce its subdivision regulations, together with
specified regulations of Denton County, within the City’s ETJ. (For specific responsibilities,
see the separate interlocal agreement, Resolution No. 02-03-66R.)
(b) Conflict of Regulations. In the event that the subdivision rules and regulations of the applicable
County provide a more stringent standard than the City’s, then the more stringent County standard
shall apply.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 7 Page 7-3
SECTION 7.03 CITY PARTICIPATION IN IMPROVEMENTS IN THE EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION
(ETJ)
(a) Improvements. The City shall not be required to participate in the cost of any improvements where
such improvements required by this Ordinance are outside the corporate limits of the City (i.e., they
are within the City’s ETJ area).
(b) Certificates of Occupancy/Utility Connections.
(1) A Certificate of Occupancy for non-residential and multifamily projects within the City’s ETJ
shall not be issued until a Letter of Final Acceptance (refer to Section 5.05(d)) has been
issued by the City, and a copy of such Letter has been submitted to the Building Official by
the developer, unless otherwise authorized by the City Manager or designee.
(2) Utility connections for all developments in the City’s ETJ shall not be issued until a Letter of
Final Acceptance (refer to Section 5.05(d)) has been issued by the City, and a copy of such
Letter has been submitted to the Building Official by the developer, unless otherwise
authorized by the City Manager.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 7 Page 7-4
(This page intentionally left blank.)
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-1
SECTION 8: SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 8.01 GENERAL POLICIES
(a) Conformance to Plans.
(1) Public Improvements.
(2) All Plats within the City and its ETJ, and corresponding Construction Plans, shall provide for
thoroughfares as shown in the Comprehensive Plan. The alignment and right-of-way width
of all proposed thoroughfares shall be in general conformance with the Comprehensive
Plan. Minor adjustments to thoroughfare alignments may be allowed without amending the
Comprehensive Plan if the Director of Development Services believes the new alignment
meets the spirit and intent of the Comprehensive Plan and will not compromise public safety
or traffic efficiency. The design and construction of all proposed thoroughfares shall be in
conformance with the City’s Engineering Standards, and shall be subject to approval by the
Director of Engineering Services. Such approvals shall be required prior to any Plat
approval.
Proposed public improvements serving new development shall
conform to and be properly related to the public facilities elements of the Comprehensive
Plan, other adopted master plans for public facilities and services, and applicable capital
improvements plans, and shall at a minimum meet the service levels specified in such
plans.
Comprehensive Plan Amendment.
(3)
If a significantly different roadway alignment or type
(from what is shown on the Comprehensive Plan) is proposed, then the Comprehensive
Plan shall be amended prior to any Plat approval. Submission of a Traffic Impact Analysis
(TIA) of the proposed amendment by the developer may be required if the Director of
Development Services and the Director of Engineering Services determine that such an
analysis is necessary to fully assess the impact of the proposal upon the City’s overall
thoroughfare network.
Water and Wastewater Plans.
(4)
The design and construction of the water system and
wastewater system to serve the development shall be in conformance with the City's master
plans for water and wastewater facilities, and with the Engineering Standards, and shall be
subject to approval by the Director of Engineering Services prior to approval of the
Construction Plans and the Final Plat.
Storm Drainage Standards. The design and construction of the storm drainage system to
serve the development shall be in conformance with but not limited to the City's master
plans for storm water drainage, with the City’s Storm Drainage Ordinance, and with the
Engineering Standards, and shall be subject to approval by the Director of Engineering
Services prior to approval of the Construction Plans and the Final Plat.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-2
(b) Adequate Public Facilities.
(1) Adequate Services for Areas Proposed for Development.
a.
Land proposed for development
in the City and in the City's ETJ shall be served adequately by essential public facilities and
services, including but not limited to water distribution, wastewater collection and treatment,
roadways, pedestrian circulation, storm drainage conveyance, and park and recreational
facilities. Land shall not be approved for platting or development until adequate public
facilities necessary to serve the development exist or provisions have been made for the
facilities, whether the facilities are to be located within the property being developed or
offsite.
Street Access.
1. A Plat will not be approved unless all of the proposed lots have direct access
to an improved public street (or a public street that will be improved during
construction of the proposed development) to the City’s minimum design and
paving standards, or to an approved public way that is connected to an
improved public street.
A Plat will not be approved unless all of the proposed lots have safe
and reliable street access for daily use and emergency purposes.
2. Except for lots which are provided access from an approved cul-de-sac, all lots
within a development shall have at least two (2) means of access or approach.
Where development phasing or constraints of the land prevent the provision of
a second, separate means of access, the City may accept a temporary street
connection provided that a second permanent access point can be reasonably
anticipated with future development of adjacent properties.
3. For properties situated adjacent to an existing or planned median-divided
thoroughfare, at least one (1) of the required access points shall occur at, or
through access easement connection to, a median opening. (See Diagram
8.01-1)
b. Water.
1. Except for lots along an approved cul-de-sac, all lots shall be provided service
connections from a looped water main providing water flow from two (2)
directions or sources.
A Plat will not be approved unless all of the proposed lots are connected to a
public water system which is capable of providing adequate water for health and
emergency purposes.
2. Water service shall be sufficient to meet the fire flow requirements of the
proposed development, except where a suitable alternative means of fire
protection is approved by the Fire Chief.
3. The City may require the phasing of development and/or improvements to the
water system to ensure adequate fire protection.
c. Wastewater.
1. The projected wastewater discharge of a proposed development shall not
exceed the proposed capacity of the wastewater system.
A Plat will not be approved unless all of the proposed lots are served by
an approved means of wastewater collection and treatment.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-3
2. The City may require the phasing of development and/or improvements to the
sanitary sewer system so as to maintain adequate wastewater capacity.
d. Storm Drainage.
(2)
Increased storm water runoff attributable to new development shall
not cause impacts to adjoining, upstream or downstream properties. Impacts are
defined as an increase in runoff between pre and post development. Where the
projected runoff from a new development exceeds runoff from pre development
conditions, the City may require the phasing of development, the use of control
methods such as retention or detention, obtaining off-site drainage easements, and/or
the construction of off-site drainage improvements as means of mitigation.
Property Owner’s Responsibilities.
a. Dedication and Construction of Improvements. The property owner shall dedicate
all rights-of-way and easements for, and shall construct and extend, all necessary
on-site and off-site public improvements for water distribution, wastewater collection
and treatment, streets, storm drainage conveyance, and other improvements that
are necessary to adequately serve each phase of a proposed development at
service levels that are consistent with the City’s applicable master facilities plans and
construction design standards.
The property owner shall be responsible for, but not
limited to, the following:
b. Abutting Substandard Streets. Where a substandard street abuts or traverses a
proposed development, the City may require the property owner to dedicate
additional right-of-way and to improve the street to the City’s current design and
construction standards as set forth in the Engineering Standards, and in the
Comprehensive Plan. Such requirements to improve the substandard street to the
City’s current standards shall only be imposed following careful review of factors
including, but not limited to:
1. The impact of the new development on the street;
2. The timing of the development in relation to need for the street; and
3. The likelihood that adjoining property will develop in a timely manner.
In the case of frontage or service roads for state or federally designated highways,
the entire abutting right-of-way shall be dedicated and improved to that agency’s
applicable construction design standards if such improvement is approved by the
agency. (Also refer to Section 8.04 of this Ordinance, and the City’s Impact Fee
Ordinance.)
c. Facilities Impact Studies. The City may require that a developer prepare a
comprehensive Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA), flood or drainage study or downstream
assessment, or other facilities impact study(ies) in order to assist the City in
determining whether a proposed development will be supported with adequate levels
of public facilities and services concurrent with the demand for the facilities created
by the development. The study(ies) shall identify, at a minimum:
1. The adequacy and capacities of existing facilities;
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-4
2. The nature and extent of any current deficiencies; and
3. The public improvements that will be needed to meet adequate levels of
service assuming development at the intensity proposed in the application.
The study(ies) shall be subject to approval by the Director of Engineering Services
prior to approval of the Preliminary Plat and the Construction Plans. The City also
may require, at the time of approval of a subsequent application (e.g., Final Plat), an
update of a facilities impact study(ies) approved in connection with a prior
application (e.g., Preliminary Plat).
d. Future Extension of Public Facilities
e.
. The property owner shall make provisions for
future expansion of the public facilities as needed to serve future developments,
subject to the City’s oversize participation policies, if applicable;
Operations and Maintenance of the Public Facilities
f.
. The property owner shall
provide for all operations and maintenance of the public facilities, or shall provide
proof that a separate entity will be responsible for the operations and maintenance of
the facilities;
Fiscal Security
g.
. The property owner shall provide all fiscal security required for the
construction of the public facilities;
Approvals from Utility Providers
h.
. The property owner shall obtain all necessary
approvals from the applicable utility providers other than the City, and shall submit
written verification of such approvals to the City with the Construction Plans; and
Compliance with Utility Providers
(3)
. The property owner shall comply with all
requirements of the utility providers, including the City and applicable drainage
districts.
Rough Proportionality; Fair Share. There is a direct correlation between the increased
demand on public facilities and systems that is created by a new development, and the
City’s requirements to dedicate rights-of-way and easements and to construct a fair and
proportional share of public improvements that are necessary to offset such impacts such
that new development does not negatively affect the City as a whole. The City desires that
a new development project contribute its fair and proportional share of such costs.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-5
SECTION 8.02 WATER & WASTEWATER REQUIREMENTS
(a) Water and Wastewater Basic Policy.
(1) Construction Requirements.
a. All public water and wastewater mains shall be located in the frontage of the
property along streets, or in easements adjacent to the development in order to
provide service to adjacent property.
b. Public water and/or wastewater mains shall not be located within a private street,
drive or access easement unless a public utility easement is provided.
c. The minimum easement width for water or wastewater mains shall be fifteen (15)
feet, or as determined by the Director of Engineering Services. Where it is
necessary for water and wastewater facilities to be located within the same
easement, the easement shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet in width, or as
determined by the Director of Engineering Services.
d. No portion of a structure (including, but not limited to, walls, foundations,
porches/patios and porch/patio covers, canopies, roof extensions/overhangs,
chimneys, fire flues, etc.) shall encroach over or into any easement, except that wallattached
window awnings, “bay” style windows, and roof eaves shall be allowed to
encroach into an easement a maximum of twenty-four inches (24”) upon approval of
the Director of Engineering Services.
e. A water or wastewater easement between two lots must fall entirely on a single lot.
f. Easements shall be dedicated for exclusive use for water and wastewater facilities
and shall be shown on the Final Plat for the specific purpose intended. When it is
necessary for additional utilities to be placed within an easement, additional width
shall be provided and the easement shall be labeled for its intended purpose on the
Final Plat.
g. When it is necessary to relocate or replace an existing water or sewer facility to
accommodate a proposed subdivision, the developer is responsible for all costs
associated with the relocation, except as agreed to by City Council for oversize
participation.
(2) Construction Plans. Plans for construction of all water and wastewater facilities required by
these regulations shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements and specifications
contained in the Engineering Standards, the regulations of the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality (TCEQ), National Sanitation Foundations (NSF), Texas Department
of Insurance, Insurance Services Office, and the City's current adopted Fire Code, which
are incorporated by reference and made a part hereof. Plans for the improvements must
be prepared by a licensed engineer and accepted by the Director of Engineering Services.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-6
(3) Acquisition of Easements. The developer shall be responsible for the acquisition of all
required off-site easements. If the developer is unable to acquire the necessary off-site
easement, the City shall be provided with easement or right-of way survey documents and
exhibits, documentation, including evidence of a reasonable offer made to the affected
property owner. Upon receiving a written request for assistance, the City may, at its option,
acquire these easements either through negotiations or through condemnation in
appropriate situations. The developer shall reimburse the City for the costs of acquiring the
necessary easements including but not limited to attorney fees, expert fees and title
searches.
(b) Preliminary Utility Plan.
(1) Concurrent with the submission of a preliminary plat, replat or minor plat, the developer
shall submit a map or plan showing the location and size of water and wastewater mains,
which will be required to provide adequate service and fire protection to the lots specified
in the proposed plat. Plans and specifications for fire hydrant systems shall be submitted to
the Fire Marshal for review prior to construction.
(2) Plan Document. The plan shall be prepared as noted in the City’s Development
Application Handbook.
(3) Coordination with other Utility Providers
a. Preliminary Plat. When the subdivision is located in an area served by a utility
provider other than the City, the developer must provide a water system analysis.
b. Minor Plat, Replat. When a subdivision is located in an area served by a utility
provider other than the City, the developer must provided a letter from the utility
provider stating that facilities existing in the area to provide adequate domestic
service and fire protection. If the City has reason to believe that there may be water
supply or pressure concerns, a water system analysis may be required.
c. Final Plat. The final plat will not be filed with the County until a letter has been
provided from the utility provider stating that they have accepted the plans for
construction.
(c) Miscellaneous Requirements.
(1) No building shall be constructed over an existing wastewater, lateral, water main or storm
drain unless approved in writing by the Director of Engineering Services and approved by
the City Council. (Ord. No. 12-06-42)
(2) Ownership and maintenance of water and wastewater mains and service connections shall
be regulated as follows.
a. The title to all wastewater lines constructed, including wastewater service
connections located in a right-of-way or dedicated easement, shall be vested in the
City or the applicable utility provider.
b. The developer, or single customer, shall be responsible for all maintenance of the
wastewater service connection, unless replacement of the service is required under
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-7
the roadway or pavement. When replacement is determined to be necessary by the
Director of Engineering Services, the City shall assume the responsibility for
replacement of that portion under the pavement.
c. The title to all water mains and water meters constructed, and installed, including the
title to service connections, shall be vested in the City or the applicable utility
provider.
(3) The City makes no guarantee that water supply or wastewater capacity will be available at
any particular time or place.
(4) Water or wastewater service lines shall not cross any adjacent lot. The public main shall
be extended so as not to require the service to extend across another lot. Water and
wastewater service lines shall be maintained by the property owner.
(5) Public water and wastewater mains adjacent to federal, state, or county roadways shall be
constructed outside the right-of-way in a separate easement unless otherwise agreed by
those agencies and the City.
(d) Water.
(1) Design & Construction.
a. Installation of Water Facilities. Where water is to be provided through the City
system, the property owner shall install adequate water facilities, including fire
hydrants, in accordance with the City’s Engineering Standards, the adopted Fire
Code, the current Rules and Regulations for Public Water Systems of the Texas
Commission of Environmental Quality (TCEQ), and the firefighting standards of the
Texas Board of Insurance. If any such requirements conflict, the most stringent
requirement shall apply.
b. Facilities for Health and Safety Emergencies; Alternative Water Sources. All water
facilities connected to the City’s water system shall be capable of providing water for
health and emergency purposes, including fire protection and suppression. Water
supply facilities shall be in accordance with the Engineering Standards. The design
and construction of water system improvements and alternative water sources shall
also comply with the following standards:
1. Design and construction of a water source on the site shall be in accordance
with applicable regulations of the Texas Commission of Environmental
Quality (TCEQ).
2. Design and construction of water service from the City shall be in
accordance with the standards in the City’s Engineering Standards.
3. Design and construction of a fire protection and suppression system shall be
in accordance with the standards in the Engineering Standards, and in
accordance with the City’s Fire Department and adopted Fire Code.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-8
(2) Location.
a. Shown on Construction Plans.
b.
The location and design of all fire hydrants, all water
supply improvements and the boundary lines of special districts, private systems and
certified water service areas, indicating all improvements proposed to be served,
shall be shown on the Construction Plans.
Extension of Lines.
c.
Extension of water lines shall be made along the entire frontage
of the development adjacent to a street. If the subdivision is not adjacent to a street,
the extension of water lines shall be accomplished in such a manner as to allow
convenient future connections to said lines by new subdivisions.
Waiver for Requirement.
(3)
If new subdivisions will never be constructed beyond a
developing subdivision due to physical constraints, the Director of Engineering
Services may approve a Minor Waiver for this requirement in accordance with
Section 9.01 of this Ordinance prior to action on the Construction Plans or prior to
action on any Plat.
Cost of Installation
(4)
. The cost of installing all water supply improvements to be made by the
developer, including off-site improvements, shall be included in the performance guarantees
and Improvement Agreement, if applicable (refer to Section 5.04).
Cost of Extension
(5) Alternative Water Systems. Developments may be approved with alternative water facilities
according to the following criteria:
. Where the City's water distribution system is not planned to be extended
in time to serve a proposed new development, all necessary water facilities to serve such
development shall be provided by and at the expense of the developer. If oversizing of a
water facility is deemed necessary by the Director of Engineering Services for future
developments, then the City may participate in such oversizing costs as part of a
Development Agreement.
a. Water well operation and quality shall meet the minimum requirements of the Texas
Commission on Environmental Quality, Collin and Denton Counties, City health
ordinances, and all other regulatory agencies, if applicable.
b. Water wells may not be used for commercial sale of water.
c. The cost to tie onto the public water system must exceed the certified initial capital
cost of a well by twenty-five percent (25%). All costs and engineering designs shall
be submitted by a licensed professional engineer. All costs and engineering designs
shall be subject to approval by the Director of Engineering Services. If a residence
is located within one thousand feet (1,000’) of a domestic water supply, that
residence must hook up to that service.
(6) Individual Wells
a.
.
Within the City’s Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ). Individual wells within the City’s
ETJ shall be subject to approval by the applicable County health official, and this
approval shall be documented by the health official's signature on the water system
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-9
statement on the Preliminary and Final Plat. The property owner must submit with
the Preliminary and Final Plat applications a certificate from a professional engineer
who is registered, or a geoscientist who is licensed, to practice in the State of Texas
verifying the adequacy of the proposed well water supply and potability prior to
Preliminary Plat and Construction Plans approvals.
b. Compliance with Other Regulations.
(e) Wastewater.
Installation, operations and maintenance of
individual wells shall comply with City standards, regulations of the Texas
Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), and any other applicable County or
State rules and regulations. In the event of conflict among these regulations,
whichever is the most stringent shall apply.
(1) Extension of and Connection to the City’s Wastewater Collection System. Extension of, and
connection to, the City's sanitary sewer system shall be required for all new developments
within the City’s limits. Extension of, and connection to, the municipal sewer system shall
also be required for new developments within the City’s ETJ for any proposed development,
lot, tract or parcel that is less than one (1) acre in size. The City is not in any way obligated
to allow extension of municipal sewers outside the City’s limits. The required extension of,
and connection to, the municipal sewer system may be waived as a Minor Waiver, in
accordance with Section 9.01, by the Director of Engineering Services if the Director of
Engineering Services determines that such extension would require unreasonable
expenditures and that an on-site wastewater disposal system (see Section 8.02(e)(5)) will
function properly and safely.
(2) Design & Construction. It is the policy of the City to require all wastewater collection lines to
have gravity flow. The use of lift stations and force mains is prohibited unless a gravity
design is impractical, as determined by the Director of Engineering Services. The location,
design and sizing of all wastewater improvements shall be shown on the Construction Plans
and are subject to approval by the Director of Engineering Services.
(3) Cost of Installation
(4)
. The cost of installing all wastewater improvements to be made by the
developer, including off-site improvements, shall be included in the performance guarantees
and Improvement Agreement, if applicable (refer to Section 5.04).
Extension
a.
.
Cost.
b.
Where the City's wastewater system is not planned to be extended in time to
serve a proposed new development, all necessary wastewater facilities to serve
such development shall be provided by and at the expense of the developer. If
oversizing of a wastewater facility is deemed necessary by the Director of
Engineering Services for future developments, then the City may participate in such
oversizing costs as part of a Development Agreement.
Future Extensions. Pipe stub-outs shall be located in manholes to facilitate the
future extension of wastewater lines. The Director of Engineering Services will
determine the location and size of the stub-outs.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-10
(5) On-Site Wastewater Disposal Systems.
a. In cases where the Director of Engineering Services determines that extension of,
and connection to, the City’s sewer system is impractical or not feasible, and where
the Director of Engineering Services approves the use of an on-site wastewater
disposal system(s), such on-site system(s) shall provide adequate sewage disposal
for all lots, tracts, parcels and structures in the development that cannot be
connected to the City’s sewer system.
b. All on-site wastewater disposal systems shall be designed, permitted, constructed,
operated and maintained in compliance with all applicable local, County and State
regulations, and a permit for such system shall be acquired prior to Preliminary Plat
and Construction Plans approvals.
c. On-site wastewater disposal facilities requiring soil absorption systems may be
prohibited where such systems will not function properly due to high ground water,
flooding, unsuitable soil characteristics, or other topographical or environmental
issue.
d. Each lot, tract, parcel and structure that utilizes an on-site wastewater disposal
system shall have a minimum land area of at least one (1) acre.
e. No portion of any on-site wastewater disposal system shall be constructed within a
minimum one hundred and fifty foot (150’) radius around any water well either onsite
or on other properties.
f. All properties and structures that are allowed to utilize an on-site wastewater system
shall, at the owner’s expense or using funds escrowed by the developer (see below),
tie onto the City’s sanitary sewer system when such municipal system is extended to
the service area as determined by the Director of Engineering Services. Such
connection to the City’s system shall occur within one (1) year after the system is
made available to the area. The developer of any new subdivision shall provide
escrow funds, the amount of which shall be subject to approval by the Director of
Engineering Services, for this future connection to the City’s sanitary sewer system.
g. In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, an existing on-site
wastewater disposal system shall be upgraded, or reconstructed if necessary, to
comply with the City’s standards by the owner, at the owner’s expense, if the
operation of the facility does not comply with government regulations or if it causes
objectionable odors, unsanitary conditions, pollution, etc.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-11
SECTION 8.03 DRAINAGE AND ENVIRONMENTAL STANDARDS
(a) Drainage and Storm Water Management Policies.
(1) Easements. Drainage easements shall be dedicated for public drainage features in
accordance with requirements of this ordinance. Drainage easements and features shall be
included as a portion of buildable (habitable structure) lot(s) and not as a lot by itself unless
specifically authorized by the Director of Engineering Services. If a large development
related feature is authorized on a separate lot, a home owner's association is required.
Storm drainage easements shall be located along side property lines, and such easements
shall be contained fully on one lot or tract, and shall not be split across the property line
between two (2) lots or tracts.
(2) Storm Water Quality. Designs for new development shall manage storm water in a manner
that protects water quality by addressing the development’s potential to cause erosion,
pollution, siltation, and sedimentation in the MS4 and natural Major Creeks. The goal is to
maintain after development, to the maximum extent practicable, the predevelopment
characteristics in the Major Creek, which ultimately receives storm water runoff from the
development. It is the developer's responsibility to ensure that designs for new
development meet the storm water management requirements in the General Permit for
Storm Water Discharges from Construction Activities issued by the TCEQ and its successor
agencies. This permit includes the requirement for measures that will be installed during
construction to control pollutants in storm water discharges after construction operations
have been completed.
(3) Storm Water Runoff. Storm water runoff shall be calculated anticipating a fully developed
watershed. The Comprehensive Plan, existing land use, and zoning maps shall be used to
determine fully developed conditions. The Director of Engineering Services reserves the
right to review the determination of fully developed conditions and may require revisions.
(4) Minimum Finish Floor Elevations. The Director of Engineering Services may require
minimum finish floor elevations (MFF) to provide flood protection on certain lots contained
within the subdivision. The MFFs shall be shown on the plat. These elevations shall
incorporate the most current floodplain management criteria or other criteria as necessary to
avoid damages. The minimum finish floor elevation shall be two feet above the fully
developed 100-year water surface elevation where the MFF is associated with a natural
Major Creek or open channel. When the MFF is necessitated by situations other than a
natural Major Creek or open channel, the MFF shall be set by the developer's engineer and
agreed upon by the City.
The following note or an amended version appropriate to the specific plat shall be added to
any plat upon which the Director of Engineering Services requires the establishment of
minimum finish floor elevations:
“The City reserves the right to require minimum finish floor elevations on any lot contained
within this addition. The minimum elevations shown are based on the most current
information available at the time the plat is filed and are subject to change.”
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-12
(5) Off-site Drainage.
a. When any proposed development requires off-site grading where storm water runoff
has been collected or concentrated, it shall not be permitted to drain onto adjacent
property except in existing Major Creeks, channels, storm sewers or streets unless
one of the following is provided:
1. Notarized Letter of Permission. The letter shall state that the permission shall
bind the owner of the affected property and be a covenant running with the
land. It shall also refer to the plans for the improvements creating the need
for the permission. The letter shall be filed with the applicable County.
2. Drainage Easement. A drainage easement shall be dedicated for Major
Creeks, ditches, or drainage channels and shall be of a width sufficient to
comply with the criteria outlined in the Engineering Standards.
b. In the event the developer cannot obtain a notarized Letter of Permission or a
drainage easement, the developer shall provide the City with documentation of all
efforts, including evidence of a reasonable offer made to the affected property
owner, and one of the following:
1. Written Request for Assistance. The City may pursue acquisition of these
easements through negotiations. If the negotiations are unsuccessful, the
request may, at the developer's option, be submitted to City Council for
consideration of acquisition through eminent domain. Any expenses,
including attorney’s fees, incurred by the City to acquire or attempt to acquire
an easement shall be paid by the developer.
2. Notarized Letter. With the concurrence of the Director of Engineering
Services, the developer may execute a notarized letter stating the developer
shall save and hold harmless the City from any and all claims or suits for
damage arising from storm water runoff. The letter shall be in a form
approved by the City Attorney.
(b) Preliminary Storm Water Management Plan.
(1) A preliminary storm water management plan (SWMP) shall be prepared for all
developments in accordance with the requirements set forth in the City’s Development
Application Handbook. The purpose of the SWMP is to identify permanent water quality
feature opportunities for the development.
(2) The preliminary SWMP shall be prepared in coordination with the preliminary drainage plan
on all projects where both are required. The preliminary SWMP and the preliminary
drainage plan may be shown on the same sheet. When a preliminary drainage plan is not
required, the preliminary SWMP shall indicate the existing drainage patterns and runoff
coefficients and the proposed changes to these items.
(3) The preliminary SWMP must comply with the standards and criteria outlined in this
ordinance, the Engineering Standards, and the Erosion Siltation Control Ordinance. The
plan may satisfy the storm water management portion of the Storm Water Pollution
Prevention Plan (SWPPP) that is required for construction activities; however, the SWMP is
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-13
not a substitution for the SWPPP. The City’s review of the preliminary SWMP does not
constitute acceptance of the final SWMP or the final development plans.
(4) The developer shall provide a preliminary SWMP for the area proposed for development.
For amended plats or plats with a previously accepted preliminary SWMP, the accepted
preliminary SWMP shall be enforced unless a revised preliminary SWMP is required.
(5) Three (3) paper copies of the preliminary SWMP plan shall be submitted with the submittal
of a preliminary plat, replat, or minor plat for review and acceptance. The plan shall be
labeled as “Preliminary.” Upon acceptance of the plan, the plan shall be signed, sealed,
and dated by the engineer, or shall contain a statement showing the engineer’s name and
license number and affirming the plan was prepared under the direction of the engineer and
that the plan is preliminary.
(c) Preliminary Drainage Plan.
(1) This plan shall show the watershed affecting the development and how the runoff from the
fully-developed watershed will be conveyed to, through, and from the development. It must
comply with the standards outlined in this Ordinance and the drainage design criteria found
in the Engineering Standards. The preliminary drainage plan is a guide for the detailed
drainage design. The review of the preliminary drainage plan does not constitute final
drainage plan approval or authorize a waiver to this Subdivision Ordinance.
(2) For any property involved in the development process, a preliminary drainage plan shall be
provided, at the developer's expense, for the area proposed for development. For property
with a previously accepted preliminary drainage plan, the accepted preliminary drainage
plan may be submitted and enforced unless a revised preliminary drainage plan is required
by the City due to lot reconfiguration or other conditions created by the new plat. The
Director of Engineering Services may waive the requirement for a preliminary drainage plan
if the submitted plat is not anticipated to cause any significant change in runoff
characteristics from a previously accepted drainage study or for single residential properties
where no drainage problems are anticipated. If the applicant requests a waiver in writing, a
copy of any previous drainage plan shall be provided.
(3) Three (3) paper copies of the preliminary drainage plan shall be submitted with the submittal
of a preliminary plat, replat, or minor plat for review and acceptance. The plan shall be
labeled as “Preliminary.” The plan shall be stamped by and dated by the engineer.
(d) Floodplain Development Requirements.
(1) All development proposed adjacent to or within the 100-year floodplain shall be in
accordance with the City’s Flood Hazard Prevention Ordinance and this Ordinance.
(e) Major Creeks.
(1) 100-Year Floodplain Restrictions. For the health, safety and welfare of the City’s residents and
for the conservation of water, storm drainage and sanitary sewer facilities, the City prohibits
development of any portion of a property that lies within the 100-year floodplain of any Major
Creek. Major Creeks shall be protected from destruction or damage resulting from clearing,
grading, and dumping of earth, waste or other foreign materials. Clearing, grading, excavation
or filling of any area within the 100-year floodplain or within any Major Creek shall be prohibited
unless authorized in writing by the City.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-14
(2) Major Creek Restrictions. All Major Creeks (See Diagram 8.03-1) shall be maintained in an
open natural condition. Each Major Creek is subject to the following requirements for all types
of development:
a. The 100-year floodplain and Erosion Hazard Setback shall be dedicated on the Final
Plat to the City as a single lot or may be owned and maintained by an HOA, pursuant to
Section 8.11 of this Ordinance. At no time shall any portion of the 100-year floodplain
exist or be within any single-family or two-family residential lot. Erosion Hazard
Setback requirements are located in the Engineering Standards.
b. The Commission may waive any of these dedication requirements for a Replat that was
originally platted prior to the adoption of this requirement (i.e., the adoption date of the
City’s Major Creek Ordinance No. 99-09-25, which was on September 21, 1999).
(3) Access. Access shall be dedicated for maintenance purposes as required by the Director of
Engineering Services (See Diagrams 8.03-2 and 8.03-3).
(4) Retaining Wall(s). A retaining wall(s) may be allowed between a house and the Major
Creek as approved by the Director of Engineering Services.
(5) Adjacent Street(s) Widths. The size of streets adjacent to a Major Creek shall have a minimum
right-of-way width of fifty feet (50’). The City shall participate in fifty percent (50%) of the paving
costs when the City determines that a collector-size street, sixty feet (60’) of right-of-way width,
is necessary for traffic safety, public access, and/or public on-street parking.
(6) Adjacent Street(s) Types (see Diagram 8.03-3).
a. Phases. Street requirements shall be reviewed per development phase.
b. Parallel Streets. A minimum 60% of the linear frontage of the Major Creek shall be
adjacent to a parallel street.
c. Cul-de-sac Streets. No more than one cul-de-sacs in a row. Cul-de-sacs shall
comply with the following criteria (See Diagram 8.03-4):
1. A minimum 50% of an adjacent cul-de-sac bulb shall be open to the Major
Creek and no residential lot shall encroach within the area between this line
and the Major Creek.
2. An entry monument(s) or feature(s) as well as landscaping shall be provided
at the end of the cul-de-sac and a pathway of a minimum 12 feet in width
shall be provided to the Major Creek as approved by the Director of
Development Services.
(7) Setbacks. Any side lot line adjacent to a Major Creek shall provide a twenty-five foot (25’)
building setback (See Diagram 8.03-2).
(8) Fences. Fences adjacent to a Major Creek shall comply with the following criteria (See
Diagram 8.03-5):
a. Have a maximum fifty percent (50%) opacity;
b. Have a height of six (6) feet to eight (8) feet as measured from grade at that location;
c. Ornamental metal fences, with either masonry columns or a masonry base of a
maximum three (3) feet in height shall be located along the rear and side of the lots, are
subject to City review and approval by the Director of Development Services; and
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-15
d. The lot owner is responsible for the maintenance of the fence.
(9) Exceptions for Planned Development. For properties which have an approved Concept Plan
that is part of a Planned Development Ordinance adopted prior to the effective date of the
Major Creek Ordinance (Ordinance No. 99-09-25), Section 8.03(e)(6) shall not apply; provided,
however, said properties are subject to the following conditions:
a. Any lot that backs to the 100-year floodplain shall have a minimum rear yard setback of
twenty-five feet (25’);
b. Any lot that sides to the 100-year floodplain shall have a minimum side yard setback of
fifteen feet (15’).
c. Alternating cul-de-sacs and looped streets shall be provided at intervals not to exceed
twelve-hundred feet (1,200’) for access to the 100-year floodplain; and
d. The 100-year floodplain shall be available to public access from the end of a cul-desac.
(10) Additional Studies. At the request of the City, the property owner shall submit additional
studies, including but not limited to the following, as deemed appropriate and necessary by
the City, as part of the Preliminary Plat submittal requirements. These studies shall be
considered during review and approval of the Preliminary Plat.
a. Wetland Delineation Study;
b. Habitat Study;
c. Vegetative Study;
d. Erosion Hazard Setback Study;
e. Storm Drainage Study;
f. Riparian (i.e., Tributary) Study;
g. Flood Study; and
h. Downstream Assessment Study.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-16
SECTION 8.04 STREET REQUIREMENTS
(a) Streets Basic Policy.
(1) Street Improvements. In platting a new development, the property owner shall provide
additional right-of-way needed for existing or future streets as required by the Engineering
Standards and as shown on the Comprehensive Plan.
(2) Improvement of Existing Substandard Streets.
a. When a proposed residential or nonresidential development abuts one or both sides
of an existing substandard street, the developer shall be required to improve the
substandard street and its appurtenances (such as curbs and gutters, sidewalks,
barrier-free ramps, street trees, etc.) to bring the same to City standards, or to
replace it with a standard City street, at no cost to the City other than as may be
provided in the City’s cost-sharing policies, including the City’s Impact Fee
Ordinance that are in effect at the time of Final Plat approval.
b. If the proposed development is located along only one side of a substandard street,
and if the City makes a determination that it is not feasible to improve the full width
of said substandard street at that time the City may require the developer to pay into
escrow, in accordance with Section 5.04, funds for the future improvement of the
street as a condition of Final Plat approval for the development.
c. The developer may request a Major Waiver (see Section 9.01) or may file a
proportionality appeal (see Section 9.02) if the requirements for improving an
existing substandard street imposed by this Section 8.04(a)(2) would result in
unnecessary hardship or would be disproportional to the impacts generated by the
development on the City’s street system.
(3) New Perimeter Streets.
a. When a proposed residential or nonresidential development is developed abutting
an existing or planned major thoroughfare, minor thoroughfare or collector street (as
shown on the Comprehensive Plan), the developer shall construct a portion of the
abutting street and its appurtenances (such as curbs and gutters, sidewalks, barrierfree
ramps, street trees, etc.) to the City’s design standards for that type of street
(per the Engineering Standards). If the Director of Engineering Services makes a
determination that it is not feasible to construct the abutting street and its
appurtenances at that time, the City may require the developer to pay into escrow, in
accordance with Section 5.04, funds for the future construction of the street as a
condition of Final Plat approval for the development.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-17
(4) New Internal Streets.
a. All new streets and their appurtenances internal to a proposed residential or
nonresidential development shall, at a minimum, be built to a width and design which
will adequately serve that development, and shall conform to the City’s design
standards in the Engineering Standards. If oversizing of an internal street is deemed
necessary by the Director of Engineering Services for traffic safety or efficiency
(such as adjacent to a school or park site), then the City and/or the applicable
Independent School District may participate in such oversizing costs as part of a
Development Agreement with the developer.
b. Streets which temporarily dead end at power lines, railroads or similar rights-of-way
shall be constructed for at least one-half the distance across these rights-of-way, or
provision shall be made to place the construction cost for said improvements in
escrow with the City in accordance with Section 5.04.
c. When, in the Director of Engineering Services’ judgment, it is not feasible to
construct an internal street or appurtenances to an internal street at the time of
development of the subdivision, the City may require the developer to pay into
escrow, in accordance with Section 5.04, funds for the future construction of the
street or its appurtenances as a condition of Final Plat approval for the development.
(5) Impact Fees. All fees due on the project shall be paid in accordance with the City’s Impact
Fee Ordinance and/or Development Agreement.
(b) Street Design and Appurtenances.
(1) Application of Requirements. Street design requirements are subject to the provisions
included in the Engineering Standards, and Planned Development Ordinance (if applicable
to the subject property) as well as the regulations contained within this Subdivision
Ordinance.
(2) Conformity to the Comprehensive Plan
a. Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing streets or street
stubs from or into surrounding areas – refer to street stub requirements outlined in
Section 8.04(b)(9) and connectivity requirements in Section 8.04(b)(10);
. The general location of streets shall conform to the
Comprehensive Plan. For streets that are not shown on the Comprehensive Plan, such as
local residential streets, the arrangement of such streets shall:
b. Conform to any plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the City to
address a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make
continuance or conformity to existing streets impractical; and
c. Not conflict with existing or proposed streets or driveway openings, including those
on the opposite side of an existing or planned thoroughfare, as described within the
Engineering Standards. New streets shall align with opposite streets and driveway
openings such that median openings can be shared.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-18
(3) Relation to Adjoining Street System. The proposed street system shall extend all existing
major streets and such existing secondary and local streets as may be necessary for
convenience of traffic circulation and emergency ingress and egress.
(4) Street Widths & Rights-of-Way. Street(s) widths and related rights-of-way shall be designed
in accordance with the City’s:
a. Comprehensive Plan;
b. Engineering Standards; and
c. Planned Development Ordinance (if applicable to the subject property).
All streets shall be paved with a permanent type of pavement in accordance with the
Engineering Standards.
(5) Street Names, Street Name Signs, and Traffic Control Signs.
a. Street Names. New streets shall be named so as to provide name continuity with
existing streets, and so as to prevent conflict or “sound-alike” confusion with similar
street names. All street names shall be approved by the Director of Development
Services prior to any Plat approval, and prior to approval of the Construction Plans.
b. Cost of Signs. The cost of street name signs and traffic control signs shall be paid
for, and the signs shall be installed, by the developer.
c. City Standards. All street name signs and traffic control signs shall conform to the
City’s details for street name sign design and the latest edition of the Texas “Manual
of Uniform Traffic Control Devices”.
(6) Traffic Studies. The Director of Engineering Services may require a Traffic Impact Analysis
(TIA) or other type of engineering study from the developer prior to any approval for plats or
construction plans for technical data pertaining to the potential traffic impact of the proposed
development on the City’s street system.
(7) Street Lengths.
a. See the Engineering Standards for street length design requirements.
b. A Preliminary Plat or Final Plat approved prior to the effective date of this
Subdivision Ordinance shall be exempted from the street length requirement.
However, the City may consider, and shall be authorized to enforce, application of
these requirements if major changes to the approved Preliminary Plat or Final Plat
are sought by the applicant. Major changes include, but are not limited to:
1. Rerouting of streets; or
2. Increasing the lot count by five percent (5%) or more from the previously
approved Preliminary Plat or Final Plat.
(8) Stub Streets.
a. See the Engineering Standards for the design requirements.
b. Connections are required to adjacent vacant properties at locations as approved by
the Director of Development Services.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-19
c. A note shall be clearly placed on the Final Plat indicating that the stub street will be
extended with future development (see requirements for temporary turn-arounds in
the Engineering Standards).
d. All stub streets shall have a sign prominently posted at the terminus of the street to
indicate that the street will be extended in the future.
1. The sign shall comply with standards established by the Director of
Engineering Services,
2. Installation and cost of the sign shall be the responsibility of the
developer.
(9) Street Connectivity.
a. New developments shall provide street connections to adjacent developments, as
determined by the Director of Development Services, allowing access between
developments for neighborhood traffic and to enhance pedestrian and bicycle
connectivity as recommended in the Comprehensive Plan.
b. The use of cul-de-sac streets shall be limited within new developments to the
greatest extent possible. The Fire Chief and the Director of Development Services
shall have the authority to determine whether or not the use of cul-de-sacs in a
development meets the intent of this Section during City review and consideration of
the Preliminary Plat.
(10) Street Lighting. Street lighting shall be provided along all streets and thoroughfares in
accordance with the Engineering Standards. The Director of Engineering Services shall be
the responsible official for decisions related to street lighting, and may authorize a Minor
Waiver, in accordance with Section 9.01, for a street lighting requirement if such Waiver
will not compromise public health, safety, security and convenience.
(c) Private Streets.
(1) Private Streets. Private streets within the City and/or the ETJ may be allowed in
accordance with the Zoning Ordinance. Private streets within the City’s ETJ require
Commission action and approval. Private streets shall be designed and constructed to the
City’s standards for public streets, in accordance with the Engineering Standards.
(2) City Council Action Required. Dedicated streets and rights-of-way shall not be designated
or used as private streets and such use is prohibited, except where specific approval is
given by action of the City Council for properties within the City’s extraterritorial jurisdiction
and upon approval of a Specific Use Permit for properties within the City limits. The City
Council may add any conditions as deemed appropriate as part of the approval of a Private
Street Development.
(3) Conversion of Private Streets to Public. The City may, but is in no way obligated to, accept
private streets for public access and maintenance. Requests to convert Private Streets to
Public Streets shall be subject to the following provisions:
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-20
a. The homeowners’ association (HOA) shall submit a petition signed by at least sixtyseven
percent (67%) of its members/lot owners (or a greater number of signatures, if
required by the HOA documents or Declaration).
b. All of the infrastructure shall be in a condition that is acceptable to the Director of
Engineering Services and the Director of Public Works.
c. All security stations and other structures not consistent with a public street
development shall be removed by the HOA, at its cost, prior to acceptance of the
streets and appurtenances by the City.
d. All monies in the reserve fund for private street maintenance shall be delivered to
the City. Money in the reserve fund in excess of what is needed to bring the streets
and appurtenances up to City standards will be refunded to the HOA. Private Street
developments that exist as of the adoption of this ordinance are not required to
deliver a reserve fund balance to the City.
e. The HOA shall prepare and submit a replat to Development Services for review.
Upon approval, the HOA shall file the replat to dedicate the streets and
appurtenances to the City.
f. The HOA shall modify and re-file, at its cost, the HOA documents to remove
requirements specific to Private Street developments. The City Attorney shall
review the modified HOA documents prior to their filing. The HOA shall be
responsible for the cost of review by the City Attorney.
(4) HOA Requirements. Private Street developments and the related HOA shall meet all
requirements of Section 8.11 of this Ordinance.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-21
SECTION 8.05 ALLEYS
(a) Alleys Required. Alleys shall be provided to serve all single-family and two-family residential lots.
Alleys shall be constructed according to design criteria in the Engineering Standards. The Director
of Engineering Services and Director of Development Services may authorize a Minor Waiver, in
accordance with Section 9.01, to the requirement for alleys if all of the following conditions are met:
(1) Sufficient on- and off-street parking is provided for each lot in the development;
(2) No lot-to-lot surface storm drainage will occur within the development;
(3) The subdivision design allows for an efficient solid waste collection pattern; and
(4) Adequate area is dedicated for storm drainage facilities and utilities.
(b) Dead End Alleys. Permanent dead end and “hammerhead” alleys are prohibited. All alleys shall
have adequate turnouts and street entrances such that vehicular traffic flow is continuous and
efficient. Where a temporary dead end alley situation is unavoidable (such as due to project
phasing), a temporary turn-around bulb or turnout onto a street, either of which will require a
temporary alley easement, shall be acquired and shown on the Preliminary and Final Plats. Alleys
in new subdivisions shall connect to and/or be aligned with alleys in adjacent subdivisions.
SECTION 8.06 THOROUGHFARE SCREENING
(a) Required Screening. Screening is required for all single-family detached, two-family, and
townhome lots and subdivisions as follows:
(1) Back of Lots. The rear of all lots that back to a Type D or higher class Thoroughfare;
(2) Side of Lots. The side of all lots that side to a Type D or higher class Thoroughfare, unless
a lot sides to a median-divided entry street into a subdivision; and
(3) Between Streets/Alleys. Between any street and an adjoining parallel alley.
(b) Screening Plan.
(1) Preliminary Screening Plan. A Preliminary Screening Plan shall be submitted for review and
approval with the Preliminary Plat.
(2) Final Screening Plan. A Final Screening Plan, including entry features and showing all
elevations and materials, shall be submitted with the Construction Plans. The Screening
Plan shall be reviewed and considered for approval by the Director of Development
Services prior to approval of the Construction Plans, and prior to scheduling a Pre-
Construction Meeting (refer to Section 5.02).
(3) Engineering Standards. Screening walls and fences shall be designed in accordance with
the City's Engineering Standards. Structural elements shall be sealed by a licensed
professional engineer and approved by the City.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-22
(4) Timing of Installation and Inspection. Upon installation of the required screening, the
developer shall contact the City’s Landscape Architect and the Director of Engineering
Services to request final inspections of screening elements. All required screening shall be
installed prior to City issuance of a Letter of Final Acceptance (see Section 5.05) unless
delayed in accordance with Section 8.06(b)(5).
(5) Surety Provided for Delay. The developer may delay the installation of screening by
providing surety to guarantee the installation of required screening. Such surety shall be in
an amount and format that is approved by the Director of Development Services and by the
Director of Engineering Services. Required screening shall be installed within six (6)
months following the date of issuance of the Letter of Final Acceptance (refer to Section
5.05).
(c) Landscape Plan.
(1) Landscape Plan. A Landscape Plan for landscaping that will be installed for the
development, including landscaping for common and amenity areas, entryways and
thoroughfare screening, shall be submitted with the Construction Plans and shall be
approved by the Director of Development Services prior to approval of the Construction
Plans and prior to scheduling a Pre-Construction Meeting (refer to Section 5.02).
(2) Standards. Landscape materials and installation shall be in accordance with Landscape
Requirements in the Zoning Ordinance.
(3) Timing of Installation and Inspection. Upon installation of all landscaping, including that
required for thoroughfare screening, the developer shall request a final inspection of
landscaping elements by the Director of Development Services. All required landscaping
shall be installed prior to the City’s issuance of a Letter of Final Acceptance (see Section
5.05) and Certificates of Occupancy for homes, excluding model homes which may be
released early.
(4) Surety Provided for Delay. The developer may delay the installation of landscaping by
providing surety to guarantee the installation of required landscaping. Such surety shall be
in an amount and format that is approved by the Director of Development Services and by
the Director of Engineering Services. Required landscaping shall be installed within six (6)
months following the date of issuance of the Letter of Final Acceptance (refer to Section
5.05).
(d) Screening & Landscaping Options. Screening required by Section 8.06(a) shall be installed by
the developer in accordance with the approved Screening and Landscaping Plan(s), as applicable.
The design of such screening shall conform with one of the options shown in Table 8.06-1 and
Diagrams 8.06-1, 8.06-2(a), 8.06-2(b), 8.06-2(c), 8.06-3, 8.06-4(a) and 8.06-4(b).
(1) Landscape Edge. All landscape edges provided for required screening shall be located
within a private “non-buildable” lot (shown on the Preliminary and Final Plats) that is
dedicated to, owned by, and maintained by the subdivision’s Homeowners’ Association
(HOA). Required landscape edges shall be exclusive of all required street and right-turn
rights-of-way, drainage easements, and utility easements.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-23
(2) Screening Walls & Fences. All required screening walls and fences shall be:
a. Located entirely within the required landscape edge (except for at cul-de-sac bulbs,
Option 4, where the required ornamental fence shall be located entirely upon the culde-
sac lots abutting the adjacent street);
b. Subject to the approval of the Director of Development Services;
c. Of the minimum (and maximum) heights as shown in Table 8.06-1;
d. Maintained by the HOA (or by the private lot owners if the HOA is dissolved in the
future);
e. The minimum height of required walls and fences shall be measured from the
nearest alley edge, rear lot property line (where no alley exists), or street-side
sidewalk grade, whichever is higher. The maximum height of columns, including
capstones, shall be nine feet (9’);
f. Any area between alley paving and a screening wall or fence shall be paved with
concrete unless otherwise approved by the Director of Engineering Services; and
g. A minimum five-foot (5’) wide wall maintenance easement, dedicated to the HOA,
shall be provided on all lots abutting the required screening along the full length of
the required screening wall or fence, unless separated by an alley. Such easement
shall be shown on the Preliminary and Final Plats.
(3) Trees and Shrub Screens. All required screening trees and shrubs shall be planted within
the landscape edge (except for as provided for cul-de-sac bulbs, Option 4). All trees and
other landscape materials required for screening shall be of evergreen drought-tolerant
species selected from the City’s Approved Plant List in the Zoning Ordinance, and shall be
subject to approval by the Director of Development Services. Minimum tree size shall be at
least three caliper inches (3”), and a single species of tree shall not exceed forty-five
percent (45%) of the plantings for all screening options. All trees shall be planted a
minimum of four feet (4’) from easements, curbs, utility lines, screening walls, fences,
sidewalks and alleys, as determined by the Director of Development Services.
a. Solid Shrub Screens. For solid shrub screens, evergreen shrubs from the City’s
Approved Plant List (in the Zoning Ordinance) shall be used that are lowmaintenance,
drought-tolerant, and insect- and disease-resistant. Shrubs shall be
spaced such that they will provide a solid minimum six-foot (6’) tall screen upon
planting.
(4) Cul-De-Sac Bulbs. For all cul-de-sac bulbs that abut, or “open”, onto an adjacent street
(Option 4), the following additional screening standards shall apply:
a. All required trees and other landscape materials shall be located within the side
yards of the cul-de-sac lots abutting the adjacent street unless a landscape edge,
dedicated to and maintained by the HOA, is provided.
b. Trees required for screening do not count toward the number of trees required for
residential lots in the Zoning Ordinance.
c. A minimum ten foot (10’) separation, or the required landscape edge width,
whichever is greater, shall be provided between the right-of-way for the cul-de-sac
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-24
and the right-of-way for the adjacent street. A sidewalk shall be provided to connect
the sidewalk along the adjacent street to the sidewalk along the cul-de-sac within a
twenty foot (20’) pedestrian access easement.
(5) Berms. Berms may be used in conjunction with any screening option, subject to approval
by the Director of Engineering Services and Director of Development Services. Berms shall
be placed within the landscape edge on private property (i.e., not within public right-of-way),
shall not exceed a three-to-one (3:1) slope, and shall be designed such that they do not
hinder maintenance, storm drainage, accessibility or visibility. Topographic information for
berms shall be shown on the Landscape Plan and on the Grading and Drainage Plans for
the development.
(e) Wall Elevations & Living Screens.
(1) If the top-of-wall elevation for a required screening wall is less than six feet (6’), as
measured in accordance with Section 8.06(d)(2)e, a solid, irrigated living screen shall be
used in combination with the screening wall to provide the necessary screening at the
appropriate height from grade.
(2) An irrigated living screen consisting of large trees and additional large evergreen shrubs that
are appropriate for screening purposes (selected from the City’s Approved Plant List in the
Zoning Ordinance) shall be planted within the landscape edge where the height deficiency
occurs.
(3) The species, sizes, spacing and arrangement of all trees and shrubs that are required for
screening shall be subject to the discretion and approval of the City’s Landscape Architect
and the Director of Development Services. All plant materials used for living screens shall
be insect- and disease-resistant, and shall be plant species that are well freeze-hardy, low
maintenance, well-adapted to the north central Texas area, and drought-tolerant such that
they are self-sustaining with minimal irrigation and care.
(4) When an irrigated living screen is utilized, the Landscape Plan (Section 8.06(c)) shall
demonstrate adequate visual screening at the heights required and within required time
frames, and such living screen shall be subject to the approval of the Director of
Development Services.
(5) Tree and living screen requirements on sites with topography changes are subject to the
approval of the City’s Landscape Architect and the Director of Development Services.
(f) Irrigation Requirements. An automatic, underground irrigation system shall provide one hundred
percent (100%) coverage for all living screens and plantings, and shall conform with the following:
(1) Line Placement. Irrigation lines shall be placed a minimum of two and one-half (2½) feet
from the sidewalk. Reduction of this requirement is subject to review and approval by the
Director of Development Services. The main irrigation lines, section lines and zone valves
for irrigation systems shall be placed outside of required right-of-way corner clips.
(2) Type of Irrigation. Trees and shrubs shall be irrigated by deep-watering bubbler irrigation
lines only on a separate line or zone (for targeted irrigation during periods of drought).
Other landscaping may be irrigated per the irrigation standards in the Zoning Ordinance.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-25
Separate valves shall be provided to turn off all or some irrigation lines/zones during periods
of drought, water conservation or freezing weather temperatures.
(3) Detectors. Evapotranspiration (ET) controllers are required on all irrigation systems.
(4) Water Meter. The developer is responsible for installing irrigation water meter(s). The
Director of Engineering Services shall approve all water meter sizes and placement. All
water meters shall be easily accessible from the street.
(g) HOA Responsibilities. All developments that have thoroughfare screening, entry features or
common amenity areas shall be required to have a mandatory HOA to own and maintain such
features (see Section 8.11). If an HOA fails to maintain any required screening device, the Director
of Public Works and/or the Director of Development Services, at their discretion, shall have the
authority to cause the removal and/or replacement of such required screening at the expense of the
HOA.
SECTION 8.07 SIDEWALKS
(a) Sidewalks (and any necessary sidewalk easements on private property) shall be provided according
to the standards in the Engineering Standards.
SECTION 8.08 DRIVEWAYS, FIRE LANES AND ACCESS EASEMENTS
(a) Standard Requirements. All driveway approaches, curbs, gutters, pavements and appurtenances
necessary to provide access to properties shall be provided by the developer, shall be designed,
constructed and maintained in accordance with standards in the City’s Engineering Standards,
Zoning Ordinance, and Planned Development Ordinance (if applicable to the subject property), and
shall be subject to approval by the Director of Engineering Services.
(b) Fire Lanes. Fire lanes are to be designed in accordance with the City’s adopted Fire Code and
Engineering Standards. Fire lane easements shall be shown on the Preliminary Site Plan (see
Zoning Ordinance) and on the Final Plat, and shall be maintained to the City’s standards by the
property owner. For safety and emergency accessibility reasons during construction, developments
other than single-family detached or two-family residential subdivisions shall not be allowed to
proceed with vertical structural construction above the foundation prior to:
(1) Completion and City inspection of all fire lanes and fire hydrants on the site (unless
otherwise approved by the Fire Chief); and
(2) Issuance of a Building Permit for the structure.
(c) Access Easements. Access easements shall be provided as directed by the Director of
Engineering Services and Director of Development Services.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-26
SECTION 8.09 EASEMENTS, LOT & BLOCK DESIGN, MONUMENTS, SUBDIVISION NAMES,
FRANCHISE UTILITIES
(a) Easements.
(1) The type, size and location of easements shall be determined by the Director of Engineering
Services. All existing and proposed easements shall be shown on the Preliminary and Final
Plats. All easements shall be labeled on the Final Plat and dedicated for the specific
purpose intended (e.g., “City Utility Easement”, “City Drainage Easement”, “CoServ Electric
Easement”, etc.).
(2) Off-site easements that are necessary to fulfill City requirements or are required by the City
shall be dedicated to the City by separate instrument (unless the abutting property is
platted) and shall be approved by the Director of Engineering Services. If the abutting
property is platted, then a Replat of that property shall be required to establish the off-site
easement.
(b) Zoning Compliance. All lots shall conform with the zoning district requirements, unless located in
the ETJ in which they shall comply with the agreements between the City and the Counties.
(c) Residential Lots Adjacent to Drainage Areas. Lots shall be exclusive of any portion of a natural
drainage area (i.e., Major Creek, stream, tributary, etc.), maintenance access, and/or erosion
hazard setback (see Major Creek Ordinance). Retaining walls may be allowed on lots adjacent to
natural drainage areas as approved by the Director of Engineering Services.
(d) Lot Shape. The City reserves the right to disapprove any lot which, in its opinion, will not be
suitable or desirable for the purpose intended, or which is so oddly shaped as to create a hindrance
to the logical lot layout of surrounding properties and/or create an irregular building envelope. The
following requirements shall also apply.
(1) Lots shall be generally rectangular in shape. Sharp angles between lot lines shall be
avoided. Flag lots are prohibited (See Diagram 8.09-1).
(2) Irregularly shaped lots shall have sufficient width at the building line to meet minimum lot
width and frontage requirements for the appropriate zoning district (if applicable), and shall
provide the minimum building pad required by zoning without encroachment into front, side
or rear yard setbacks or into any type of easement (See Diagram 8.09-2).
(e) Lot Lines, Buildability.
(1) Side Lot Lines. Side lot lines shall be at ninety degree (90°) angles or radial to street rightof-
way lines to the greatest extent possible (See Diagrams 8.09-3 and 8.09-4). The Director
of Development Services may grant a Minor Waiver, in accordance with Section 9.01, if
unusual circumstances exist on the subject property or on adjacent property that make it
difficult to comply with this requirement.
(2) Lot Lines and Jurisdictional Boundaries. All lot lines shall, to the greatest extent possible,
align along county, school district, and other jurisdictional boundary lines such that lots are
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-27
fully within one county, school district, or other jurisdiction. The Director of Development
Services may grant a Minor Waiver, in accordance with Section 9.01, to this requirement if a
county, school district or other jurisdictional boundary line will bisect a lot, provided that the
entire residential dwelling or main structure is constructed entirely within one county, school
district or other jurisdiction (i.e., the structure does not “straddle” school district or
jurisdictional boundary line).
(3) Lot Buildability. Any portion of a lot that is non-buildable for any reason shall be clearly
shown as such on the Preliminary and Final Plats. A “Lot Buildability” detail shall be
submitted along with the Preliminary and Final Plats, and shall verify that the buildable
portion of such a lot can accommodate a dwelling or main structure that complies with
applicable City zoning regulations (if located within the City’s limits) and building codes.
(f) Lot Orientation Restrictions.
(1) Type A and Type B Thoroughfares. No single-family, two-family, or townhome lot(s) shall
front onto or have a driveway onto Type A and Type B thoroughfares, as described within
the Engineering Standards.
(2) Type E, F or G Thoroughfares. Lots are prohibited from backing to Type E, F or G
thoroughfares, as described within the Engineering Standards.
(g) Lot Frontages.
(1) Street Frontage.
a. Adequate Frontage. Each lot shall have adequate access to a street (or an approved
public way) by having frontage on such a street that is not less than forty feet (40’) at
the street right-of-way line (See Diagram 8.09-3), or as otherwise specified in the
Zoning Ordinance or a Planned Development (PD) Ordinance, if applicable. Lots
fronting onto an eyebrow or bulb portion of a cul-de-sac shall also have a minimum
frontage of forty feet (40’) at the street right-of-way line (See Diagram 8.09-4).
b. Frontage Exception. For non-residential developments ten (10) acres or greater, the
lots may be platted to a public way instead of a dedicated street upon approval by
the Director of Development Services
(2) Double Frontage.
a. Single-Family, Two-Family and Townhome Lot(s). Double frontage lots are
prohibited, except that single-family, two-family or townhome lots may back or side
onto a Type D or larger thoroughfare, as described within the Engineering
Standards, with appropriate screening (see Section 8.06). Where lots back or side
onto a Type D or larger thoroughfare, no driveway access is allowed onto the
thoroughfare from the rear or side of the lot.
b. Multi-Family and Non-Residential Lots. Where lots have frontage on more than one
street, a front building line shall be established for each street.
(3) Lots Facing Other Lots. Whenever feasible, each residential lot shall face the front of a
similar lot, or shall face a park or open space if one exists or is planned (see Section
8.09(h)), across the street. In general, an arrangement placing adjacent lots at right angles
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-28
to each other should be avoided. The Director of Development Services may grant a Minor
Waiver, in accordance with Section 9.01, if unusual circumstances exist on the subject
property or on adjacent property that make it difficult to comply with this requirement.
(h) Lots in Relation to Parks/Open Space. All lots that are located directly across a street from a
park/open space shall face onto the park/open space. Also refer to Section 8.12(b) of this
Ordinance.
(i) Large Lots and Tracts. If the lots or tracts of land in a proposed development are large enough to
suggest possible further subdivision in the future, or if portions of the property are not subdivided or
developed immediately, then the Preliminary Plat shall show how such large tracts or remainder
portions of the property can be subdivided into conforming lots at a later time, and shall also show
how streets can be extended and how median openings can be aligned and shared in the future.
(j) Lot & Block Numbering. All lots within each phase of a development are to be numbered
consecutively within each block. Each block shall have an alpha or numeric, designation (e.g.,
“Block A”, “Block 6”, etc.).
(k) Building Lines. Building lines along all streets shall be shown on the Preliminary and Final Plats
on lots and shall conform with the minimum setbacks for front, side and rear yards as required by
the Zoning Ordinance (if within the City’s limits) on the basis of the respective districts (i.e., singlefamily,
two-family/duplex, multi-family, commercial, retail office, mobile home, industrial, etc.).
(l) Block Requirements. See the Engineering Standards.
(m)Monuments.
(1) General Placement. Monuments consisting of minimum three-eighths inch (3/8") diameter
steel rods, at least twenty-four inches (24") long, shall be placed at all:
a. Lot and block corners (wherever a lot line bearing changes);
b. Intersection points of alley and block lines; and
c. Curve and tangent points along block, lot and right-of-way lines within the subdivision.
(2) Subdivision Monumentation. At least two (2) property corners shall be marked with
monuments of three dimensional coordinates established from the City’s Monumentation
System and using the City’s Combined Scale Factor, as necessary. The corners so marked
should be at opposing ends of the property unless otherwise approved by the Director of
Engineering Services.
(n) Subdivision Names. New subdivisions shall be named so as to prevent conflict or “sound-alike”
confusion with the names of other subdivisions. Subdivisions with similar names (e.g., Stonebriar
Park Estates and Stonebriar Highlands) shall be located in proximity to each other, not in different
areas of the City. A Minor Waiver, in accordance with Section 9.01, may be approved by the
Director of Development Services upon a finding that the proposed subdivision name will not cause
confusion, especially for emergency responders.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-29
(o) Franchise Utility Policy.
(1) General Requirements. The Director of Engineering Services may require easements for
poles, wires, conduits, gas, telephone, cable TV or other utility lines if necessary or advisable
in the opinion of the Director of Engineering Services.
(2) Locations. Utility easements may be located as follows.
a. Utilities shall be located in the alley rights-of-way along the rear property lines of lots
or tracts whenever an alley is provided.
b. Utilities shall be located in easements provided adjacent to the street rights-of-way
along the front of lots or tracts whenever an alley is not provided.
(3) Ground-Mounted Equipment. Ground-mounted equipment shall not be placed in visibility,
access or maintenance easements.
a. All ground-mounted equipment within view of a public street right-of-way shall be
screened from the adjacent street by minimum five (5) gallon evergreen shrubs, or
larger, on three-foot (3’) centers on the side facing the right-of-way, as well as along
both sides of the equipment such that it will be fully screened from view from the
street.
b. Planting materials selected shall be materials that will grow at least to the height of
the equipment height, and will provide a continuous and mostly solid/opaque living
screen, within two (2) growing seasons from the date planted. The planting material
must be selected from the list of materials set forth in the City’s Zoning Ordinance.
c. The proposed planting shall be included on the Landscape Plan as required in
Section 8.06(c) of this Ordinance.
d. Public-owned ground-mounted equipment (such as City traffic controller boxes, etc.)
shall be exempt from the screening requirements in this Section.
SECTION 8.10 SUBDIVISION AMENITIES
(a) Description & Definition. The term “amenity” is described within Section 8.11(c)(1) and defined
within Section 10.02 of this Ordinance.
(b) Requirements. Where amenities are proposed in conjunction with a development, such amenities
shall be reviewed and approved in accordance with the following:
(1) Preliminary plans and illustrations, along with a written statement of such concepts, shall be
submitted for review and approval with the Preliminary Plat.
(2) Plans for amenities shall then be incorporated into the Screening Plan and/or Landscape
Plan (refer to Sections 8.06(b) and 8.06(c) of this Ordinance, respectively), as appropriate,
for submittal as part of the Construction Plans (see Section 5.01 of this Ordinance).
(3) Structural elements shall be sealed by a licensed professional engineer and shall be
considered for approval by the City.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-30
(4) A Site Plan, reviewed and approved in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance, is required
for private recreational facilities and parks;
(5) City review and approval of plans for amenities shall be required prior to issuance of a Letter
of Final Acceptance for the subdivision improvements (refer to Section 5.05).
(c) Design of Amenities. The design of amenities shall conform to the following:
(1) Entry features shall be constructed entirely on privately owned property (i.e., not within
public right-of-way), and shall not suspend over a public right-of-way, unless otherwise
approved by the Director of Public Works and the Fire Chief. Minor elements of an entry
feature may be placed within an entry street median upon Commission approval, provided
that such street median is platted as a non-buildable lot and dedicated to a mandatory HOA
for private ownership and maintenance. An entry feature having a water pond, fountain or
other water feature shall only be allowed if approved by the Director of Engineering Services
and the Fire Chief.
(2) No entry feature, other than screening walls or extensions of screening walls, may be
constructed on any portion of a single-family, two-family, or townhome lot(s). All such
features shall be constructed on lots that are platted as “non-buildable” lots and dedicated to
a mandatory HOA for private ownership and maintenance.
(3) Entry features shall not encroach into visibility easements or otherwise impair pedestrian or
vehicular visibility.
(4) The maximum height for entry features and structures shall be the maximum height of the
governing zoning district, if applicable, as measured from the nearest street or sidewalk
grade, whichever is higher.
(5) Private recreation facilities, if provided in a development, shall, to the greatest extent
possible, be centrally located within the overall development. (See Diagram 8.10-1)
SECTION 8.11 HOMEOWNERS’ ASSOCIATION (HOA) REQUIREMENTS
(a) Purpose. The purpose for the establishment of an HOA (also referred to as “Association”) for
residential developments is to create an organization that owns and is responsible for maintaining,
among other things, commonly owned properties, amenities, rights-of-way and riparian areas for the
communal good of the development’s property owners and residents.
(b) Applicability. An HOA shall be established for any development that contains any of the following:
an amenity, private street(s), a Major Creek or tributary, or thoroughfare screening. For purposes of
this section, the terms “Homeowners’ Association” and “Association” are interchangeable with the
term “Property Owners’ Association” for multi-family and non-residential developments.
(c) Descriptions of Elements Requiring a HOA. Any one (1) or more of the following elements
created as part of a development shall require formation and continued operation of a mandatory
HOA:
(1) Amenity. Where proposed in conjunction with a development, the word “amenity” shall be
as defined in Section 10.02, and shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-31
a. Amenity center (i.e., private swimming pool, club house, tennis courts, etc.);
b. Private recreational facility;
c. Entry features;
d. Open space - voluntary or as required by zoning or Development Agreement;
e. Ponds;
f. Water fountains;
g. Water features;
h. Hike-and-bike trails; and
i. Other commonly owned facilities.
(2) Major Creek. As defined in Section 10.02, and as generally regulated by Section 8.03 of
this Ordinance.
(3) Private Street. As defined in Section 10.02, and as generally regulated by Section
8.04(b)(5) of this Ordinance; this shall include all infrastructure including streets, alleys,
sidewalks and other appurtenances within designated access easements, as well as
associated structures as follows:
a. Security station structures and equipment (including gates, access card readers,
perimeter security fencing, etc.);
b. Greenbelts; and
c. Other infrastructure necessary for vehicular circulation and neighborhood security.
(4) Thoroughfare Screening. As defined in Section 10.02, and as generally regulated by
Section 8.06 of this Ordinance.
(d) Procedure. The establishment of a required HOA shall occur in conjunction with the recordation of
the subdivision Final Plat, and shall generally be established as follows:
(1) Documents Submitted for Review. The Declaration, covenants and other necessary
documents establishing the HOA shall be submitted to the City for review by the City
Attorney for conformance with this and other applicable ordinances prior to submission of
the Final Plat, and prior to issuance of a Letter of Final Acceptance for the development
(refer to Section 5.05). HOA documents shall include descriptions of any amenities, private
streets, stub streets, thoroughfare screening, Major Creek(s) or tributary(ies), and other
areas for which the Association is responsible for maintenance, and shall outline the
organization of the Association.
(2) Approval By City Attorney. All HOA documents shall be reviewed by the City Attorney prior
to recordation of the Final Plat. The applicant shall reimburse the City for all related legal
costs for review of the HOA documents. This reimbursement shall be paid in full prior to
recordation of the Final Plat.
(3) Recordation. All HOA documents shall be recorded at the County prior to the recordation of
the Final Plat. Two (2) copies of the recorded documents shall be submitted to
Development Services for distribution to the Planning Division for City records within five (5)
days following recordation.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-32
(4) Additional Phases. An additional phase to an existing subdivision is not required to
establish a separate and distinct HOA, provided that:
a. The existing, recorded Association documents are amended to incorporate the area
of the new subdivision phase and to adopt the responsibility of its amenities, private
streets, Major Creeks and tributaries, thoroughfare screening, and other areas for
which the Association is responsible for maintenance.
b. The applicant shall provide a draft of the amended covenants to the City Attorney for
review prior to the recordation of the plat.
(e) Notice to Purchasers. The developer shall be required to post notice in a prominent place at all
model homes and sales offices stating the following:
(1) That an HOA has been established for the subdivision;
(2) That membership in the HOA is mandatory for all lot owners; and
(3) That the developer is required to provide to any person, upon their request, a complete copy
of the Association documents and a five (5)-year projection (at a minimum), of Association
dues, income and expenses.
(f) General Requirements. The following shall be set forth in the HOA documents:
(1) A statement that membership in the Association is mandatory for all owners of property
within the subdivision;
(2) A listing of all required maintenance responsibilities, and where possible, the lot number(s),
legal descriptions, street name(s), etc. as shown on the approved plat for areas to be the
responsibility of the Association;
(3) By-laws related to the governance of the Association;
(4) Covenants for maintenance assessments, which shall run with the land;
(5) Responsibility for liability insurance and local taxes;
(6) Statement that the authority for enforcement of Association rules and regulations is solely
the responsibility of the Association and is not, in any way, the responsibility of the City;
(7) Authority for the Association to secure funds from its members sufficient to meet its
responsibilities. This authority shall include the ability to collect dues, to increase dues, to
charge special assessments, and to place liens against property for failing to pay dues and
assessments.
a. Dues shall be calculated based on a cost projection for the maintenance of all
amenities and based on eventual build-out of the subdivision;
b. Dues shall not be based on calculations which include monies from the developer
which will not be provided following the transfer of the Association from the
developer to the lot owners.
c. Dues shall be required to be disclosed to all lot owners at the time of property
purchase by the lot owners.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-33
(8) Provision that no amendment of the Association documents relating to maintenance of
amenities, private streets, Major Creeks and tributaries, thoroughfare screening, any other
Association-maintained area or facility, or related reserve funds (as applicable) shall occur
without prior City approval;
(9) Written release of liability for maintenance to benefit the City; written indemnification of the
City outlining that under no circumstances shall the City be liable to the Association or any
property owner or their respective heirs, executors, administrators, devisees, personal
representatives, successors or assigns for any damages, injuries (including death), and/or
liability resulting from any amenity, on the private streets, within or adjacent to any Major
Creek or tributary, associated with any thoroughfare screening or common landscaping, or
from any other Association-owned and maintained area or facility;
(10) Written assurance of funds based on an accredited cost projection analysis within a specific
reserve account of the Association for the maintenance and removal of amenities as
determined by the City; and
(11) Written consent giving the City the authority to take the actions for violations as set forth in
Section 8.11(h).
(12) Other City requirements as applicable.
(g) Supplementary Requirements. The HOA shall also comply with the following regulations, where
applicable:
(1) Association documents shall not overrule the landscaping or other provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance by penalizing or restricting water conserving landscapes, or by requiring
landscape materials that do not comply with Zoning Ordinance landscape requirements;
(2) Amenities. The following regulations shall apply to any subdivision that includes an
amenity, as described in Section 8.11(c)(1) (and defined in Section 10.02):
a. Where amenities are proposed in conjunction with a development, the applicant
shall comply with those regulations outlined in Section 8.10 of this Ordinance.
b. All developments that require the provision of common open space shall submit
covenants to maintain open space, recreational areas, and other commonly owned
facilities for review with the Final Plat application.
(3)Private Streets. Whenever a public street becomes private following recordation, an HOA is
required to be established, if not already in existence, that would be responsible for owning
and maintaining the converted streets and rights-of-way. The following regulations shall
apply to any subdivision that includes private streets, except those that exist as of the
effective date of this Ordinance.
a. The Association shall own and be responsible for the maintenance of private streets
and appurtenances (such as alleys, storm sewers, sidewalks, barrier-free ramps,
street lights and signs, etc.) and shall provide for the payment of dues and
assessments required to maintain the private streets and appurtenances.
b. The Association documents shall state that if the specific approval or the Specific
Use Permit for the Private Street Development is revoked or the private streets are
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-34
otherwise converted to public streets, the reserve fund shall become the property of
the City (see the City’s Engineering Standards for conversion process).
c. In addition to any other requirements set forth in this Section, the HOA’s documents
shall specify the following:
1. That the streets within the development are private, that they are owned and
maintained by the Association, and that the City has no obligation to
maintain, repair or reconstruct the private streets.
2. A statement that the City may, but is not obligated to, inspect private streets
and require repairs necessary to insure that the same are maintained to City
standards.
3. A statement that the Association may not be dissolved without the prior
written consent of the City Council, which consent shall not be withheld by
the City if it determines that an adequate reserve fund exists, and the streets
and alleys are in satisfactory condition as determined by the Director of
Public Works.
4. That failure to bring the subdivision into compliance with the regulations may
cause the City to revoke the specific approval or the Specific Use Permit for
the Private Street Development and take appropriate action.
d. The HOA’s documents shall note that certain City services may not be provided in
Private Street Developments. The services that may not be provided include, but
are not limited to: police enforcement of traffic and parking ordinances and
preparation of accident reports. Depending on the characteristics of the proposed
development other services may not be provided.
e. The HOA’s documents shall contain a provision that requires the Association to
provide unrestricted access to emergency vehicles, utility personnel, the U.S. Postal
Service, and governmental employees, agents or representatives in the
performance of their official duties. All access gates shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with emergency access design standards in the
Engineering Standards, and shall be equipped with an Opticom gate opening
system or with another opening system that is acceptable to the Fire Chief.
(4) Major Creeks, Tributaries, Ponds and Water Features (100-Year Floodplain). For single-family
and two-family residential developments, the 100-year floodplain may be owned and
maintained by a Homeowners’ Association subject to City approval. The Final Plat shall reflect,
and the Association’s documents shall provide:
a. City access for emergency vehicles, equipment and personnel and for the improvement
and maintenance of the 100-year floodplain in the event they are not being properly
maintained, as determined by the Director of Engineering Services; and
b. That the Association shall reimburse the City for all costs incurred by the City for
maintenance.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-35
(5) Thoroughfare Screening. All subdivisions that are required to provide thoroughfare
screening per Section 8.06 of this Ordinance shall comply with the following:
a. The Homeowners’ Association shall own and be responsible for the maintenance of
all required screening walls and fences, landscaping, landscape edges, and
landscape irrigation systems, and shall provide for the payment of dues and
assessments required to maintain such improvements.
b. The Association documents shall state that the City has no obligation to maintain or
reconstruct the screening walls and fences, landscaping, landscape edges, and
landscape irrigation systems in the event of damage to such improvements.
c. The Association documents shall state that the City may, but is not obligated to,
inspect screening walls and fences, landscaping, landscape edges, and landscape
irrigation systems, and that the City may require maintenance and repairs necessary
to ensure that such improvements are maintained to City standards.
(h) Violations, Revocations & Liens.
(1) The City will notify the Homeowners’ Association of violations of any of the regulations
specified within this Section.
(2) Failure to bring the subdivision into compliance with these regulations may cause the City to
revoke the specific approval of the Association or take other remedies as outlined in this
Section 8.11(h).
(3) The City shall have all lien, assessment and enforcement rights granted therein to the
Association, and the City shall have the ability to enforce the liens and assessments, and
avail itself of any other enforcement actions available to the City pursuant to State law
and/or City regulations.
(4) Should the Association fail to carry out its duties as specified in this Ordinance, the City
shall have the right and ability, after due notice to the Association, to perform the duties
required by this or any other Ordinance, regulation or agreement with the City in order to
bring the Association into compliance therewith. The City shall have the right and ability,
after due notice to the Association to assess the Association, for the full amount owed
and/or assess the property owners on a pro rata basis for all costs incurred by the City in
performing said duties if the Association fails to do so. Said assessment shall constitute a
lien, in favor of the City, upon the property for which the assessment is made.
SECTION 8.12 PARKS & OPEN SPACES
(a) Applicability. This section shall not apply to Major Creeks as set forth in Section 8.03 of this
Ordinance, unless otherwise noted.
(b) General Requirements. Parks shall be easy to access and open to public view so as to benefit area
developments, enhance the visual character of the City, protect public safety, and minimize conflict with
adjacent land uses. The following guidelines shall be used in designing development around or
adjacent to parks and adjacent development:
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-36
(1) Parks and Open Spaces. Parks shall be bounded by a street(s) or by other public uses unless
otherwise specified in this Ordinance, the Zoning Ordinance, or a Planned Development (PD)
ordinance (e.g. school, library, recreation center).
(2) Residential Lots.
a. Single-family and two-family residential lots shall be oriented such that they front or
side onto parks and open spaces and they do not back to them, in accordance with
Diagram 8.12-1.
b. Residential lots shall only be allowed to back onto a park or open space when the site's
physical character (e.g., shape, topography, drainage) does not reasonably
accommodate an alternative design or the layout of the subdivision complements the
use of the park or open space (e.g., lots backing to a golf course); lots backing to a
park or open space shall only be allowed upon approval from the Director of
Development Services and the Director of Parks & Recreation.
(3) Access to Parks and Open Spaces. A proposed development adjacent to a park or open
space shall not be designed to restrict public visibility or reasonable public access to the park or
open space from other area developments. Street connections to existing or future adjoining
subdivisions shall be required to provide reasonable access to parks and open space areas.
(4) Non-Residential Uses Adjacent to Parks. Where a non-residential use must directly abut a
park or open space area, the use shall be oriented such that it sides, and does not back, onto
the park or open space area if at all possible. The use shall be separated from the park or
open space by a minimum six-foot (6’) tall decorative metal fence with an irrigated living screen
(see Section 8.06) unless otherwise approved as a Minor Waiver, in accordance with Section
9.01, by the Director of Development Services and the Director of Parks & Recreation. Access
points to the park or open space area may be required by the City if a public benefit is
established.
(5) Alleys Adjacent to Parks. Alleys should not be designed to encourage their use as a means of
vehicular, bike or pedestrian travel to the park.
(6) Public Access Points Into Parks. Public access into parks and open spaces shall not be less
than fifty feet (50’) in width at the public right-of-way line, at the street curb, and at any other
public access point (such as along Major Creeks, etc.). Such access shall not be part of a
residential lot or other private property, and shall be kept open and unobstructed at all times.
(c) Streets Abutting a Park. Streets abutting a park or open space area shall be built in accordance with
the Comprehensive Plan, the standards of this Ordinance, and all other applicable construction
standards and/or ordinances. The City may, however, require any residential street built adjacent to a
park or open space to be constructed to collector-street width to provide access, to accommodate
possible on-street parking for park users, and to prevent traffic congestion.
(1) Abutting Street Oversizing. When park or open space land is acquired by the City, the City
shall require at least sixty feet (60’) of right-of-way be dedicated to provide for an abutting
collector-sized street, unless otherwise approved by the City.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-37
(d) Park Reservation and Dedication. Land for neighborhood and linear parks shall be reserved and
dedicated in accordance with the locations recommended by the Parks and Recreation Board. All
Preliminary and Final Plats shall be reviewed to determine if land dedications are necessary for
neighborhood and linear parks. If land is required to be dedicated for park sites or open spaces, the
City shall specify the proposed land requirements, configurations and locations. The Commission shall
make the final determination of park land location and configuration during its review and approval of
the Preliminary and Final Plats. Specific neighborhood and linear park sites and improvements shall be
dedicated to the City upon approval of the Final Plat and upon issuance of a Letter of Final
Acceptance (refer to Section 5.05).
(e) Site Criteria. Neighborhood and linear park sites shall be of a suitable size, dimension, topography
and general character to meet the design criteria specified in the Parks, Recreation & Open Space
Master Plan.
(f) Minimum Park Improvements. Unless waived by the Parks & Recreation Board, neighborhood and
linear parks shall be improved by the developer prior to a Letter of Final Acceptance being issued by
the City (refer to Section 5.05). Minimum park improvements, as determined by the City, shall include:
(1) Grading and clearance of unwanted vegetation, structures or improvements;
(2) Installation of storm drainage and stream erosion controls;
(3) Establishment of turf and planting of trees;
(4) Installation of perimeter streets and street lights; and
(5) Provision of water and sewer service to a location(s) on the park site as determined by the
Director of Parks & Recreation and by the Director of Engineering Services.
(g) Additional Voluntary Park Improvements. A developer may request permission to construct, at his
or her own expense, additional park improvements. The City may accept or reject voluntary
dedications of park land and/or additional park improvements. Such voluntary dedications and/or
improvements shall be considered for approval by the Parks & Recreation Board. All improvements in
public parks and open spaces shall be consistent with the design criteria and objectives of the Parks,
Recreation & Open Space Master Plan, and shall, upon installation, become the property of the City.
Prior to constructing such additional park improvements, the developer shall enter into a Development
Agreement with the City that defines, among other things, the work to be performed, construction
schedules, improvement costs, performance surety, the amount to be reimbursed by the City (if any),
and the timing of such reimbursement (if any). The City’s Parks & Recreation Board shall assess and
submit its recommendation to the City Council, and the Council shall consider and decide the proposed
Development Agreement for park improvements.
(h) Completion of Land Dedication and Improvements. Park land shall be dedicated to the City
concurrently with the filing of an approved Final Plat or Replat. All improvements specified in the
Improvement Agreement, if applicable, shall be completed prior to approval of the Final Plat or Replat,
except where future performance is provided for in the Improvement Agreement.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-38
(i) Hike-and-Bike Trail Requirements.
(1) Hike & Bicycle Trail Master Plan. Hike-and-bike trails shall be constructed in accordance
with the Hike & Bicycle Trail Master Plan.
(2) Requirements. Hike-and-bike trails, especially those providing access to and along Major
Creeks and other open spaces, shall be in accordance with the following design criteria
(unless otherwise approved by the Director of Parks & Recreation):
a. A minimum twenty-five foot (25’) wide, level ground surface shall be provided for a
twelve-foot (12’) wide public hike-and-bike trail, where required. The twenty-five foot
(25’) wide, level ground surface may be provided within and/or outside of the 100-year
floodplain (refer to Section 8.03).
b. The parkway of a public street may count towards the twenty-five-foot (25’)-wide, level
ground surface, upon approval of the Director of Parks & Recreation.
c. Low water crossings for the hike-and-bike trail may be allowed upon approval from the
Director of Engineering Services and the Director of Parks & Recreation.
d. The hike-and-bike trail shall be designed so as to minimize visibility blind spots from
public streets for public safety purposes.
e. Construction Plans for the development (refer to Section 5.01) shall include
engineered drawings of trail cross-sections in accordance with the City’s
Engineering Standards.
(3) Locations. Locations of all trails shall be consistent with the locations designated on the
Hike & Bicycle Trail Master Plan, and are subject to approval by the Director of Parks &
Recreation.
a. The Director of Parks & Recreation shall have the authority to determine the placement
of a public hike-and-bike trail at the time of Preliminary Plat review and approval.
b. The location of such trails shall be safe and economical.
c. No development shall interrupt future trail routes or otherwise hinder efficient public
access to or from an existing or future planned trail. Gated and other limited access
developments shall be designed such that they facilitate, and do not impede,
through public access, emergency ingress and egress, usage and enjoyment of
public trails.
(4) Trails Along Major Creeks and Greenways.
a. The location of trails within developments adjacent to Major Creeks or greenway
trails recognized on the Hike & Bicycle Trail Master Plan shall be coordinated with
the Parks & Recreation Department, and shall be staked in the field by the developer
and approved by the Director of Parks & Recreation prior to the submittal of a
Preliminary Plat.
b. The location of the trail shall be specified on the Preliminary Plat as the approved
location for the hike-and-bike trail, and an easement for such shall be shown on the
Preliminary and Final Plats for any portions of the trail that traverse private property.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-39
(5) Trails in Relation to Golf Courses. When a trail system is extended through a golf course,
improvements shall be made to protect and provide separation between users of the trail
system and the golfers, at the developer’s expense. Such improvements include, but are
not limited to, a series of berms and trees to help protect trail users from errant golf balls.
Upon approval of the Director of Parks & Recreation, a golf cart path may serve as a trail.
(6) Future Trails and Access for New Developments. When development is adjacent to an
undeveloped property, a pedestrian access stub-out in conjunction with a street connection
to the edge of the development (refer to Section 8.04(b)(9)) shall be required to allow for
future access between developments.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 8 Page 8-40
(This page intentionally left blank.)
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 9 Page 9-1
SECTION 9: RELIEF PROCEDURES
SECTION 9.01 PETITION FOR WAIVERS
(a) Purpose. The purpose of a petition for a Waiver to a particular standard or requirement of this
Ordinance, as such are applicable to Plats or Construction Plans for a project, is to determine
whether or not such particular standard or requirement should be applied to an application or
project.
(b) Definitions. Waivers shall be classified as “minor” or “major”, as defined in Section 10.02
(Definitions) of this Ordinance.
(c) Decision-Maker.
(1) Minor Waiver. A Minor Waiver is acted upon by the Director of Development Services or the
Director of Engineering Services, as specified in Table 9.01-1.
a. Appeal. An appeal to a decision on a Minor Waiver by the Director of Development
Services or the Director of Engineering Services (as applicable) may be considered
by the Commission. If further appeal is made, the City Council shall then act on
such an appeal. (See Section 9.01(j)).
(2)Major Waiver. A Major Waiver is acted upon by the Commission.
a. Appeal. An appeal to a decision on a Major Waiver by the Commission may be
considered by the City Council (see Section 9.01(j)).
(d) Applicability.
(1) An applicant may request a Waiver of a particular standard or requirement applicable to a
Preliminary Plat, to Construction Plans, or where no Preliminary Plat application has been
submitted for approval, to a Final Plat or a Replat. A Waiver petition shall be specific in
nature, and shall only involve relief consideration for one particular standard or requirement.
An applicant may, if desired, submit more than one Waiver petition if there are several
standards or requirements at issue.
(2) A petition for a Waiver shall not be accepted in lieu of a proportionality appeal (Section 9.02)
or a vested rights petition (Section 9.03). If there is a question as to whether a
proportionality appeal or vested rights petition is required instead of a petition for a Waiver,
such determination shall be made by the Director of Development Services.
(e) Submission Procedures.
(1) A request for a Waiver shall be submitted in writing by the applicant with the filing of a
Preliminary Plat, Construction Plans, Final Plat or Replat, as applicable. No Waiver may be
considered or granted unless the applicant has made such written request.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 9 Page 9-2
(2) The applicant’s request shall state the grounds for the Waiver request and all of the facts
relied upon by the applicant. Failure to do so, will result in denial of the application unless
the applicant submits a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action in accordance with Section
3.03(e).
(f) Criteria.
(1) A Waiver to regulations within this Ordinance may be approved only when, in the decisionmaker’s
opinion, undue hardship will result from strict compliance to the regulations.
(2) The decision-maker shall take into account the following factors:
a. The nature of the proposed land use involved and existing uses of the land in the
vicinity;
b. The number of persons who will reside or work in the proposed development; and
c. The effect such Waiver might have upon traffic conditions and upon the public
health, safety, convenience and welfare in the vicinity.
(3) No Waiver shall be granted unless the decision-maker finds:
a. That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved or
other constraints such that the strict application of the provisions of this Ordinance
would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his or her land; and
b. That the Waiver is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial
property right of the applicant, and that the granting of the Waiver will not be
detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or injurious to other property in the
area; and
c. That the granting of the Waiver will not have the effect of preventing the orderly
subdivision of other lands in the area in accordance with the provisions of this
Ordinance.
(4) A Waiver may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this
Ordinance so that the public health, safety and welfare may be secured and substantial
justice done. Financial hardship to the applicant shall not be deemed to constitute undue
hardship.
(5) No Waiver shall be granted unless it represents the minimum degree of variation of
requirements necessary to meet the needs of the applicant.
(6) The decision-maker shall not authorize a Waiver that would constitute a violation of, or
conflict with, any other valid ordinance, code, regulation, master plan or Comprehensive
Plan of the City.
(7) Any falsification of information by the applicant shall be cause for the Waiver request to be
denied. If the Waiver request is approved based upon false information, whether intentional
or not, discovery of such false information shall nullify prior approval of the Waiver, and shall
be grounds for reconsideration of the Waiver request.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 9 Page 9-3
(g) Burden of Proof. The applicant bears the burden of proof to demonstrate that the requirement for
which a Waiver is requested, if uniformly applied, imposes an undue hardship or disproportionate
burden on the applicant. The applicant shall submit the burden of proof with the original submittal.
(h) Decision. The decision-maker shall consider the Waiver petition and, based upon the criteria set
forth in Section 9.01(f), shall take one of the following actions:
(1) Deny the petition, and impose the standard or requirement as it is stated in this Subdivision
Ordinance; or
(2) Grant the petition, and waive in whole or in part the standard or requirement as it is stated in
this Ordinance.
(i) Notification of Decision on Petition. The applicant shall be notified of the decision on the Waiver
by the applicable decision-maker (e.g., the Director of Development Services, Director of
Engineering Services, Commission or City Council, as applicable), within fourteen (14) calendar
days following the decision.
(j) Appeal.
(1) Initiation of an Appeal. The applicant or four (4) voting members of the Commission may
appeal a waiver decision of any Director, as allowed within the Subdivision Ordinance.
The written request to appeal shall be submitted to the Director of Development Services
within fourteen (14) calendar days following the denial decision. (See Table 9.01-1)
(2) Appeal to Planning & Zoning Commission. The Commission shall consider the appeal at a
public meeting no later than thirty (30) calendar days after the date on which the notice of
appeal is submitted to the Director of Development Services. At this meeting, new
information may be presented and considered, if available, that might alter the previous
decision to deny the Waiver. The Commission may affirm, modify or reverse the previous
decision by simple majority vote.
(3) Appeal to City Council. The applicant, the Director of Development Services or four (4)
voting members of City Council may appeal the Commission’s decision by submitting a
written notice of appeal to the Director of Development Services within fourteen (14)
calendar days following the Commission’s decision. The City Council shall consider the
appeal at a public meeting no later than thirty (30) calendar days after the date on which
the notice of appeal is submitted to the Director of Development Services. The City
Council may affirm, modify or reverse the Commission’s decision by simple majority vote.
The decision of the City Council is final.
(k) Effect of Approval. Following the granting of a Waiver, the applicant may submit or continue the
processing of a Plat or Construction Plans, as applicable. The Waiver granted shall remain in effect
for the period the Plat or Construction Plans are in effect, and shall expire upon expiration of either
or both of those applications. Extension of those applications shall also result in extension of the
Waiver.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 9 Page 9-4
SECTION 9.02 PROPORTIONALITY APPEAL
(a) Purpose and Applicability.
(1) Purpose. The purpose of a petition for relief from a dedication or construction requirement
is to ensure that the imposition of uniform dedication and construction standards to a
proposed development does not result in a disproportionate burden on the property owner,
taking into consideration the nature and extent of the demands created by the proposed
development on the City's roadways and public facilities systems.
(2) Applicability. A petition for relief under this Section 9.02 may be filed by the applicant to
contest any requirement to dedicate land or to construct public improvements as required by
this Ordinance or attached as a condition to approval of the application. A petition under
this Section 9.02 shall not be used to waive standards on grounds applicable to any Waiver
application, as outlined in Section 9.01.
(b) Petition Requirements.
(1) Form of Petition. The petition for relief from a dedication or construction requirement shall
allege that application of the standard relating to the dedication or construction requirement
is not roughly proportional to the nature and extent of the impacts created by the proposed
development on the City's water, wastewater, storm drainage, parks or roadway system, as
the case may be, or does not reasonably benefit the proposed development.
(2) Study Required. The applicant shall provide a study in support of the petition for relief that
includes the following information:
a. Total capacity of the City's water, wastewater, storm drainage, parks or roadway
system to be utilized by the proposed development, employing standard measures
of capacity and equivalency tables relating the type of development proposed to the
quantity of system capacity to be consumed by the development. If the proposed
development is to be developed in phases, such information also shall be provided
for the entire development proposed, including any phases already developed.
b. Total capacity to be supplied to the City's water, wastewater, storm drainage, parks
or roadway system by the proposed dedication of an interest in land or construction
of public improvements. If the application is part of a phased development, the
information shall include any capacity supplied by prior dedications or construction of
public improvements.
c. Comparison of the capacity of the City's public facilities system(s) to be consumed
by the proposed development with the capacity to be supplied to such system(s) by
the proposed dedication of an interest in land or construction of public
improvements. In making this comparison, the impacts on the City's public facilities
system(s) from the entire development shall be considered.
d. The effect of any City participation in the costs of oversizing the public improvement
to be constructed in accordance with the City's requirements.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 9 Page 9-5
e. Any other information that shows the alleged disproportionality between the impacts
created by the proposed development and the dedication or construction
requirement imposed by the City.
(3) Time for Filing Petition and Study. A petition for relief from a dedication or construction
requirement shall be filed with the Director of Engineering Services within fourteen (14)
calendar days following the Commission's decision to conditionally approve or deny an
application for approval of an application. The study in support of the petition shall be filed
within sixty (60) calendar days following the initial decision, unless the applicant (petitioner
for relief) seeks an extension in writing. The Director of Engineering Services may extend
the time for submitting the study for a period not to exceed an additional thirty (30) calendar
days for good cause shown.
(4) Land in Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ). Where land or facilities to be dedicated are
located in the ETJ of the City and are to be dedicated to Collin or Denton County, a petition
for relief or study in support of the petition shall be accepted as complete for review by the
Director of Engineering Services only when such petition or study is accompanied by
verification that a copy has been delivered to and accepted by Collin or Denton County, as
applicable.
(c) Processing of Petitions and Decision.
(1) Responsible Official. The Director of Engineering Services shall be the responsible official
for a petition for relief from a dedication or construction requirement (see Section
2.04(a)(9)). Where the petition is for relief from dedication of rights-of-way or construction of
a facility in the City's ETJ that is to be dedicated to Collin or Denton County, the Director of
Engineering Services shall coordinate a recommendation with the appropriate County
official responsible for reviewing plats.
(2) Evaluation & Recommendation.
a. The Director of Engineering Services shall evaluate the petition and supporting study
and shall make a recommendation to the Commission for their consideration and
recommendation to the City Council.
b. In evaluating the petition and study, the Director of Engineering Services shall take
into account the maximum amount of any impact fees to be charged against the
development for the type of public improvement that is the subject of the petition, or
similar developments on the City's water, wastewater, roadway, storm drainage or
parks systems. The Director of Engineering Services may utilize any reasonable
methodology in evaluating the applicant's study, including impact fee methodologies.
c. In order to achieve proportionality between the demands created by a proposed
development on public facilities and the obligation to provide adequate public
facilities, the City may participate in the costs of public improvements, credit or offset
the obligations against payment of impact fees, or relieve the property owner any of
the obligations in response to a petition for relief from a dedication or construction
requirement pursuant to Section 9.02.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 9 Page 9-6
(3) Decision-Maker. The Commission shall decide the petition for relief from a dedication or
construction requirement.
(4) Public Hearing. The Commission shall conduct a public hearing within sixty (60) calendar
days after the study supporting the petition (refer to Section 9.02(b)) is filed with the Director
of Engineering Services.
(5) Burden of Proof. The applicant bears the burden of proof to demonstrate that the
application of a dedication or construction requirement that is uniformly applied imposes a
disproportionate burden on the applicant.
(6) Decision. The Commission shall consider the petition for relief from a dedication or
construction requirement based upon the following criteria:
a. The Commission shall determine whether the application of the standard or
condition is roughly proportional to the nature and extent of the impacts created by
the proposed development on the City's water, wastewater, storm drainage, parks or
roadway system, and whether the application of the standard or condition
reasonably benefits the development.
b. In making such determination, the Commission shall consider the evidence
submitted by the applicant, the report and recommendation of the Director of
Engineering Services and, where the property is located within the City's ETJ, any
recommendations from Collin or Denton County, as applicable.
(7) Action. Based on the criteria in Section 9.02(c)(6), the Commission shall take one of the
following actions:
a. Deny the petition for relief, and impose the dedication or construction requirement as
required by this Ordinance; or
b. Grant the petition for relief, and waive any dedication or construction requirement to
the extent necessary to achieve proportionality; or
c. Grant the petition for relief, and direct that the City participate in the costs of
acquiring land for or constructing the public improvement under standard
participation policies.
(8) Notification of Decision on Petition. The applicant shall be notified of the decision on the
petition for relief by the Director of Engineering Services within fourteen (14) calendar days
following the Commission’s decision.
(d) Appeal of the Decision on a Petition for Relief.
(1) Initiation of an Appeal. The applicant or no less than four (4) voting members of City
Council may appeal the decision of the Commission by submitting a written notice of
appeal to the Director of Development Services within fourteen (14) calendar days
following the date of the Commission’s decision.
a. For a City Council-initiated appeal, the Council shall consider and act on whether it
will appeal the Commission’s decision at its first regular meeting (for which there is
time to include such appeal on its posted agenda, as required by State law) that
occurs after the Commission meeting at which the decision was made.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 9 Page 9-7
b. Written notice of the City Council’s vote to appeal shall be submitted to the Director
of Development Services within seven (7) calendar days following the City Council’s
vote to appeal the decision.
c. For an applicant-initiated appeal, a letter stating the reasons for the appeal, citing
the specific applicable section(s) of the Subdivision Ordinance, shall be submitted by
the applicant.
d. The Director of Development Services may, on his/her own initiative, appeal the
decision of the Commission by scheduling an appeal on the City Council’s next
regular meeting (for which there is time to include such appeal on its posted agenda
as required by State law) that occurs after the Commission meeting at which the
decision was made.
(2) Council Decision. The City Council shall consider the appeal at a public meeting no later
than thirty (30) calendar days after the date on which the notice of appeal is submitted to
the Director of Development Services. The City Council may affirm, modify or reverse the
decision of the Commission by simple majority vote. The decision of the City Council is
final.
(e) Expiration or Failure to File Application. Where an application was denied based upon the
imposition of the standard requiring dedication of land or construction of a required public
improvement and the Commission’s decision (or decision on appeal) is to grant some level of relief,
the applicant shall resubmit the application within sixty (60) calendar days following the date the
petition for relief is granted, in whole or in part, showing conformity with the Commission’s decision
(or decision on appeal) on the petition.
(1) If such re-submittal of the application is not made within the sixty-day (60-day) period, the
relief granted by the Commission on the petition shall expire.
(2) If the re-submittal of the application is modified in any other way, a new petition for relief
may be required by the Director of Engineering Services.
(3) If the application for which relief was granted is denied on other grounds, a new petition for
relief may be required by the Director of Engineering Services.
(f) Effect of Relief.
(1) The Director of Engineering Services may require the applicant to submit a modified
application or supporting materials consistent with the relief granted by the Commission on
the petition.
(2) The relief granted on the petition shall remain in effect for the period the application is in
effect, and shall expire upon expiration of the plat or related application.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 9 Page 9-8
SECTION 9.03 VESTED RIGHTS PETITION
(a) Purpose. The purpose of a vested rights petition is to determine whether an application should be
processed under the terms of a previous ordinance, to provide a process for determination of
possible vested status, and to determine when certain permits are subject to expiration.
(b) Applicability.
(1) A vested rights petition may be submitted for any application authorized under this
Ordinance.
(2) A vested rights petition cannot be submitted by an applicant along with submission of a
request for a text amendment to this Ordinance, a Zoning Map amendment, or any other
request for a legislative decision by the City Council.
(c) Submission. A vested rights petition shall be submitted to and officially filed with the City’s
responsible official (see Section 9.03(g)) in accordance with the Texas Local Government Code,
Chapter 245 or successor statute. Submission of a vested rights petition shall be deemed as an
automatic waiver of the applicant’s right, and the City’s obligation, to process and act upon
applications as required by State law (Chapter 212 of the Texas Local Government Code), and as
provided in Section 3.03(e) of this Ordinance. Submission of such petition shall stay further
proceedings on the related application until a final decision is reached on the vested rights petition.
(d) Effect. If a properly submitted vested rights petition is approved in whole or in part, the responsible
official shall then process the original application and the decision-maker shall decide the
application in accordance with the standards specified in the relief order based on prior ordinance
requirements or development standards, or shall extend the validity of the original application that
would otherwise be subject to expiration pursuant to this Ordinance.
(e) Form of Petition. The vested rights petition shall allege in writing that the applicant has a vested
right for some or all of the land subject to the application under Texas Local Government Code,
Chapter 245 or successor statute, or pursuant to Texas Local Government Code, Section 43.002 or
successor statute, that requires the City to review and decide the application under standards that
were in effect prior to the effective date of the currently applicable standards. The petition shall
include the following information and documents:
(1) A written vested rights petition form, with a notarized original signature of the property’s
owner;
(2) A narrative description of the grounds for the petition, including a statement as to whether
the petition asserts a vested right related to a specific standard or to an entire project;
(3) A copy of each approved or pending application which is the basis for the contention that
the City may not apply current standards to the application which is the subject of the
petition;
(4) The official filing date of the application;
(5) The date the subdivision for which the application was submitted was commenced;
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 9 Page 9-9
(6) Identification of all standards otherwise applicable to the application from which relief is
sought;
(7) Identification of any current standards which applicant agrees can be applied to the
application at issue;
(8) A narrative description of how the application of current standards affect proposed
landscaping, open space or park dedication, shown on the application for which the petition
is filed;
(9) A copy of any prior vested rights determination involving the same land; and
(10) Whenever the applicant alleges that an application subject to expiration should not be
terminated, a description of the events constituting progress toward completion of the
subdivision for which the application was approved. The applicant shall reimburse the City
for all related legal costs for review of the vested rights petition. This reimbursement shall
be paid in full prior to any decision on the petition.
(f) Time for Filing Petition. A vested rights petition shall be filed with an application for which a
vested right is claimed, except that the petition may be filed before the date of expiration of any
already approved application when filed pursuant to Section 9.03(m), Dormant Projects. Where
more than one application is authorized to be filed simultaneously by this Ordinance, the petition
may be filed simultaneously for each application.
(g) Processing of and Decision on Petition.
(1) Responsible Official. The responsible official for a vested rights petition is the same as that
for processing the application with which the petition is associated, except where a petition
is submitted pursuant to Section 3.07 of this Ordinance, Expiration for Projects Approved
Prior to September 1, 2005. Where multiple applications are submitted, and there is more
than one responsible official, the decision of each responsible official shall be coordinated
with that of any other responsible official on the vested rights petition. The City Attorney
shall also be notified of the vested rights petition following its filing and acceptance for
processing. The applicant shall reimburse the City for all related legal costs for review of a
vested rights petition. This reimbursement shall be paid in full prior to filing of the Final Plat.
(2) Action and/or Decision by Responsible Official.
a. If the responsible official is the decision-maker on the original related application,
that official shall determine whether the relief requested in the vested rights petition
should be granted in whole or in part, and shall formulate a written report
summarizing the official's reasoning and recommendation.
b. The applicant shall be notified of the decision within fourteen (14) calendar days
following the date the vested rights petition was filed at the City.
c. The responsible official may defer making a decision on the vested rights petition
and instead forward the petition to the Commission for a decision, in accordance
with the process outlined in Section 9.03(g)(3).
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 9 Page 9-10
(3) Decision by Planning & Zoning Commission. If the original related application is to be
decided by the Commission, or if the responsible official defers making a decision on a
vested rights petition pursuant to Section 9.03(g)(2)c., the responsible official for that type of
application shall submit a report in the form of a recommendation on the vested rights
petition to the Commission. The Commission shall render a decision on the vested rights
petition within thirty (30) calendar days following the date the petition was filed at the City.
The Commission’s decision on a vested rights petition shall be upon a simple majority vote
of the full Commission’s voting members.
(4) Decision by City Council. Where the City Council is the final decision-maker on the related
application, or for any petition submitted pursuant to Section 9.03(m), Dormant Projects, the
responsible official for that type of application shall submit a report in the form of a
recommendation on the vested rights petition to the City Council. The Council shall render
a decision on the vested rights petition within thirty (30) calendar days following the date the
petition was filed at the City. The City Council’s decision on a vested rights petition shall be
upon a simple majority vote of the full Council’s voting members, and shall be final.
(5)Appeal of Decision on Petition. The applicant may appeal, to City Council, the responsible
official's or Commission's decision on the vested rights petition by submitting written notice
of appeal to the applicable responsible official within fourteen (14) calendar days following
the date of such decision. The City Council shall hear and decide the appeal within thirty
(30) calendar days following receipt of the notice of appeal by the City. Approval of an
appeal by the City Council shall only be upon a favorable vote of at least four (4) of the
Council’s voting members, and shall be final.
(6) Effect on Related Applications. A final decision on the vested rights petition or appeal under
this Section must be achieved prior to further processing, and prior to any consideration of,
or decision on, the related application. Upon such final resolution and decision on a vested
rights petition, the responsible official shall commence processing, review and consideration
for the related application as provided in this Ordinance.
(h) Criteria for Approval.
(1) Factors. The decision-maker shall decide the vested rights petition based upon the following
factors:
a. The nature and extent of prior applications filed for the land subject to the petition;
b. Whether any prior vested rights determinations have been made with respect to the
property subject to the petition;
c. Whether any prior approved applications for the property have expired or have been
terminated in accordance with State law or local ordinances;
d. Whether current standards adopted after commencement of the project affect
proposed use of the land, landscaping or tree preservation, open space or park
dedication, lot size, lot dimensions, lot coverage or building size based upon the
proposed application;
e. Whether any statutory exception applies to the standards in the current Subdivision
Ordinance from which the applicant seeks relief;
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 9 Page 9-11
f. Whether any prior approved applications relied upon by the applicant have expired;
g. For petitions filed pursuant to Section 3.07 of this Ordinance, Expiration for Projects
Approved Prior to September 1, 2005, whether any of the events in Section 3.07
have occurred;
h. Any other applicable provisions outlined in Chapter 245 or Section 43.002 of the
Texas Local Government Code, or successor statutes.
(2) Conditions. If the claim of vested rights is based upon a pending application, subject to
standards that have been superseded by current standards of this Ordinance, the decisionmaker
may condition any relief granted on the vested rights petition on the approval of the
pending application.
(i) Action and Record of Action on the Vested Rights Petition.
(1) Action. The decision-maker may take any of the following actions:
a. Deny the relief requested in the petition, and direct that the application shall be
reviewed and decided under currently applicable standards; or
b. Grant the relief requested in the petition, and direct that the related application be
reviewed and decided in accordance with the standards contained in identified prior
regulations; or
c. Grant the relief requested in part, and direct that certain identified current standards
be applied to the related application, while standards contained in identified prior
regulations also shall be applied; or
d. For petitions filed pursuant to Section 3.07 of this Ordinance, Expiration for Projects
Approved Prior to September 1, 2005, specify the expiration date or the conditions of
expiration for the related application(s).
(2) Record. The responsible official's report and the decision on the vested rights petition shall
be recorded in writing in an order identifying the following:
a. The nature of the relief granted, if any;
b. The related application(s) upon which relief is premised under the petition;
c. Current standards which shall apply to the related application for which relief is
sought, if applicable;
d. Prior standards which shall apply to the related application for which relief is sought,
including any procedural standards, if applicable;
e. The statutory exception or other grounds upon which relief is denied in whole or in
part on the petition;
f. To the extent feasible, subsequent related applications that are subject to the same
relief granted on the petition; and
g. For petitions filed pursuant to Section 3.07 of this Ordinance, Expiration for Projects
Approved Prior to September 1, 2005, the date of expiration of the related
application.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 9 Page 9-12
(j) Related Application Following Final Decision on the Vested Rights Petition.
(1) Following the City's final decision on the vested rights petition, the applicant shall, if
necessary, revise the related application such that it conforms to the City’s decision on the
vested rights petition.
(2) The decision-maker on the related application shall review and consider the revised
application in accordance with the procedures for deciding that type of application, as
outlined in this Ordinance, and in conformity with any relief granted.
(3) If the relief granted on the vested rights petition is consistent with the related application on
file, no revisions shall be necessary, and the related application shall be deemed officially
filed at the time of the final decision on the vested rights petition.
(k) Appeal of the Decision on a Vested Rights Petition.
(1) Initiation of an Appeal. The applicant or no less than four (4) voting members of City
Council may appeal the decision of the Commission by submitting a written notice of
appeal to the Director of Development Services within fourteen (14) calendar days
following the date of the Commission’s decision.
a. For a City Council-initiated appeal, the Council shall consider and act on whether it
will appeal the Commission’s decision at its first regular meeting (for which there is
time to include such appeal on its posted agenda, as required by State law) that
occurs after the Commission meeting at which the decision was made.
b. Written notice of the City Council’s vote to appeal shall be submitted to the Director
of Development Services within seven (7) calendar days following the City Council’s
vote to appeal the decision.
c. For an applicant-initiated appeal, a letter stating the reasons for the appeal, citing
the specific applicable section(s) of the Subdivision Ordinance, shall be submitted by
the applicant.
d. The Director of Development Services may, on his/her own initiative, appeal the
decision of the Commission by scheduling an appeal on the City Council’s next
regular meeting (for which there is time to include such appeal on its posted agenda
as required by State law) that occurs after the Commission meeting at which the
decision was made.
(2) Council Decision. The City Council shall consider the appeal at a public meeting no later
than thirty (30) calendar days after the date on which the notice of appeal is submitted to
the Director of Development Services. The City Council may affirm, modify or reverse the
decision of the Commission by simple majority vote. The decision of the City Council is
final.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 9 Page 9-13
(l) Expiration & Extension.
(1) Expiration. Relief granted on a vested rights petition shall expire on occurrence of one of
the following events:
a. The applicant fails to submit a revised application that is consistent with the relief
granted, if any, within sixty (60) calendar days following the final decision on the
vested rights petition;
b. The application for which relief was granted on the vested rights petition is denied; or
c. The application for which relief was granted on the vested rights petition expires.
(2) Extension. Extension of the date of expiration for the application for which relief was
granted on a vested rights petition shall result in extension of the relief granted on the
vested rights petition for the same time period.
(m)Dormant Projects.
(1) Definitions. For purposes of this Section 9.03(m) only:
a. Initial permit means any of the following types of approvals granted under this
Subdivision Ordinance, or any predecessor subdivision or development-related
ordinance that was in effect prior to the adoption of this Ordinance: Preliminary Plat,
Construction Plans, Construction Release, Waivers to any requirement in this
Subdivision Ordinance (per Section 9.01), or any other application that was
approved subject to a schematic drawing illustrating the location, arrangement,
orientation or design of development, lots or improvements on a site intended for
development.
b. Final permit means a Final Plat approved under this Subdivision Ordinance, or any
predecessor subdivision or development-related ordinance that was in effect prior to
the adoption of this Ordinance.
(2) Expiration of Permits. Any application for an initial permit that was approved or filed before,
but that was not subject to an expiration date, two (2) years prior to the adoption date of this
Subdivision Ordinance shall expire on the effective date of this Subdivision Ordinance.
(3) Reinstatement. The property owner of the land subject to an initial permit that expires under
Section 9.03(m)(2) may petition the Commission to reinstate such permit by filing a written
petition within sixty (60) calendar days following the effective date of this Subdivision
Ordinance. The petition shall clearly state the grounds for reinstatement, and shall be
accompanied by documentation of one of the following:
a. As of two (2) years prior to the effective date of this Subdivision Ordinance, one of
the following events had occurred:
i. A final permit to continue toward completion of the project was submitted to
the City for all or part of the land subject to the approved initial permit and
was approved by the City, or was filed and was subsequently approved by
the City;
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 9 Page 9-14
ii. An application for a final permit to continue toward completion of the project
was submitted to the City for all or part of the land subject to the expired
initial permit, but such application was rejected on grounds of
incompleteness (consistent with Texas Local Government Code, Chapter
245.005(c)(2));
iii. Costs for development of the land subject to the initial permit, including costs
associated with roadway, utility and other infrastructure facilities designed to
serve the land in whole or in part, but exclusive of land acquisition costs,
were incurred in the aggregate amount of five percent (5%) of the most
recent appraised market value of the land;
iv. Fiscal security was posted with the City to guarantee performance of
obligations required under this Subdivision Ordinance, including the
construction of required improvements associated with the proposed
development, for all or a part of the land subject to the approved initial
permit; or
v. Utility connection fees or impact fees for all or part of the land subject to the
approved initial permit were paid to the City.
b. After two (2) years prior to the adoption date of this Subdivision Ordinance, but
before the expiration date specified in Section 9.03(m)(2), one of the following
events had occurred:
i. A final permit was approved for all or part of the land subject to the approved
application, and remained in effect for such land on such expiration date; or
ii. A complete application for approval of a final permit for all or part of the land
subject to the approved initial permit was pending for decision on such
expiration date.
(4) Commission Action on Reinstatement. The Commission may take one of the following
actions:
a. Reinstate the expired initial permit without an expiration date, if it finds that the
applicant has met any one of the criteria listed in Section 9.03(m)(3)a.;
b. Reinstate the initial permit for all or part of the land subject thereto, if it finds that the
applicant has met any one of the criteria listed in Section 9.03(m)(3)b., subject to
such expiration dates or other conditions that ensure that the remaining land that is
not subject to an approved or pending final permit application will be developed in a
timely fashion. In granting relief under this provision, the Commission may require
that development of such remaining land is subject to standards enacted after
approval of the initial permit;
c. Deny the reinstatement petition, if it finds that the applicant has failed to meet any of
the criteria in Section 9.03(m)(3); or
d. Reinstate the permit for only that part of the land subject to a pending final permit
application, if it finds that the applicant has met the criteria in Section 9.03(m)(3)b.ii
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 9 Page 9-15
and the pending application subsequently was approved, and deny the
reinstatement petition for the remaining land subject to the expired initial permit.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 9 Page 9-16
(This page intentionally left blank.)
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 10 Page 10-1
SECTION 10: DEFINITIONS
SECTION 10.01 USAGE & INTERPRETATION
(a) Usage. The definitions within this Section 10 are intended to provide descriptions for words and
terms used within this Subdivision Ordinance. Absent any conflict, words and terms used in this
Subdivision Ordinance shall have the meanings ascribed thereto in this Section 10.
(b) Conflicts. When words and terms are defined herein, and are also defined in other ordinance(s) of
the City, they shall be read in harmony unless there exists an irreconcilable conflict, in which case
the definition contained in this Section 10 shall control.
(c) Present and Past Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the
singular number include the plural number, and words used in the plural number include the
singular number.
(d) Usage of Shall and May. The word shall is mandatory and not directory. The word may
(e) Words Not Defined. For any definition not listed in this Section 10, the definition found within the
latest edition of Webster’s Dictionary shall be used.
is
directory and not mandatory.
(f) Certain Terms and Words. Certain terms and words are to be used and interpreted as described
and/or defined within the sections of this Subdivision Ordinance wherein they apply to certain
regulations.
SECTION 10.02 DEFINITIONS
(a) Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to terms and words used within this Subdivision
Ordinance.
100-Year Floodplain. The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year, based upon a fully developed watershed and the City’s criteria to accommodate a
100-year storm in a Major Creek.
Abutting. Adjacent, adjoining and contiguous to. It may also mean having a lot line in common
with a right-of-way or easement, or with a physical improvement such as a street, waterline, park,
or open space.
Access. A means of approaching or entering a property, or the ability to traverse a property
(such as in the use of the phrase pedestrian access easement).
Alley. A minor right-of-way, generally dedicated to public use, which affords a secondary means
of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street, and which may
be used for utility service purposes.
Amending Plat. See Plat, Amending.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 10 Page 10-2
Amenity. Aesthetic or other physical improvements to a development that increase its quality,
desirability, and/or marketability to the public, and that are described within Section 8.11(c)(1) of
this Ordinance.
Appeal. A request for review of and relief from any decision applying a provision of this
Ordinance.
Applicant. The person or entity responsible for the submission of an application. The applicant
must be the actual owner of the property for which an application is submitted, or shall be a duly
authorized representative of the property owner. Also see Developer.
Application (also Development Application, Plat Application). The package of materials, including
but not limited to an Application Form, a Plat, completed checklist, Tax Certificate, Construction
Plans, special drawings or studies, and other informational materials, that is required by the City
to initiate City review and approval of a development project.
Application Form. The written form (as provided by and as may be amended by the City) that is
filled out and executed by the Applicant and submitted to the City along with other required
materials as a part of an application.
Application, Complete. See Complete Application.
Approval. Approval constitutes a determination by the official, board, commission or City Council
responsible for such determination that the application is in compliance with the minimum
provisions of this Ordinance. NOTE: Such approval does not constitute approval of the
engineering or surveying contained in the plans, as the design engineer or surveyor that sealed
the plans is responsible for the adequacy of such plans.
Arterial Street. See Thoroughfare, Major or Minor.
Block. A grouping of residential lots (and their alleys) that are partially or fully surrounded by one
or more streets. A block consists of one or two tiers of lots. Lots that are separated by an alley
are in the same block, but lots that are separated by a street are in different blocks.
Buffer. An area of permanent native vegetation that is adjacent to a water course and/or wetland
that is managed to maintain the integrity of the water course and/or wetland to reduce the impact
of upland sources by:
a. Trapping, filtering and converting pollutants;
b. Reducing sediment loads;
c. Reducing runoff velocity;
d. Stabilize stream banks and wetland edges;
e. Reduce water temperatures; and
f. Provide habitat for urban wildlife.
Building. Any structure intended for shelter, occupancy, housing or enclosure for persons,
animals or property. When separated by dividing walls without openings, each portion of such
structure so separated shall be deemed a separate building.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 10 Page 10-3
Building Line. A line parallel, or approximately parallel, to any front lot line at a specific distance
therefrom, marking the minimum distance from the front lot line that a building may be erected.
Building Permit. An official certificate issued by the City through the Chief Building Official that
indicates conformance with or approved conditional waiver from City regulations and authorizes
construction of buildings or other described construction on the premises for which it is issued.
Centerline, Streets or Alleys. An imaginary line erected midway between the bounding right-ofway
lines of a street or alley. Where the bounding right-of-way lines are irregular, the centerline
is to be determined by the Director of Engineering Services.
Certificate of Occupancy. An official certificate issued by the City through the Chief Building
Official that indicates conformance with or approved conditional waiver from City regulations and
authorizes legal use of the premises for which it is issued; may be referred to as an Occupancy
Permit.
Chief Building Official. The person(s) so designated by the Director of Development Services to
provide oversight for and have responsibility of the Building Inspections Division of the
Development Services Department; such official issues Building Permits and Certificates of
Occupancy and enforces the Zoning Ordinance, Building Code, and any applicable provisions of
this Subdivision Ordinance. This term shall also include any designee of the Chief Building
Official.
City. The City of Frisco, Texas, unless otherwise specified in the regulation.
City Attorney. The person(s) so designated by the City Council to provide oversight for and have
legal responsibility for the City. This term shall also include any designee of the City Attorney.
City Council. The elected body that governs the City under State law and City Charter and that is
duly authorized to operate in the manner prescribed by City ordinances and resolutions. The term
City Council as used within this Subdivision Ordinance shall mean the City Council of the City of
Frisco.
City Engineer. See Director of Engineering Services.
City Manager. The person(s) so designated by the City Council, or the City Manager’s designee.
City Planner. See Director of Development Services.
Collector Street. Those streets which carry traffic from local streets to major thoroughfares and
freeways. Such streets shall also be as described within the Comprehensive Plan and the
Engineering Standards. Also may be referred to as a Type C Thoroughfare or Type D
Thoroughfare.
Commenced/Commencement. Refers to the beginning of the development (or construction) of a
subdivision; the initial disturbance of soils associated with clearing, grading, or excavating
activities.
Commission. The Planning & Zoning Commission of the City of Frisco. See Planning & Zoning
Commission.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 10 Page 10-4
Complete Application. An application that meets the standards of this Subdivision Ordinance,
and has been deemed complete by the City in accordance with Section 3.03 of this Ordinance
and the Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 245, or successor statute.
Comprehensive Plan. The City’s officially Comprehensive Plan which includes policies, in written
and graphic form, on (but not limited to) thoroughfares, land use, parks, open space, hike and
bicycle trails, and other facets of the City’s physical form; such policies govern the future
development of the City and consist of various components governing specific geographic areas,
functions, and services of the City.
Construction. See Development.
Construction Plans. The drawings and technical specifications that conform to this Ordinance
and all other applicable ordinances of the City. Construction Plans, including bid documents,
contract conditions, and escrow agreements, where applicable, provide a graphic and written
description of the character and scope of the work to be performed in construction of a
development.
Conveyance Plat. See Plat, Conveyance.
Construction Release. Official authorization by the City, through the Director of Engineering
Services, that indicates conformance with City regulations and authorizes construction of
improvements or other described construction, in conformance with approved Construction
Plans, on the premises for which it is given.
Corner Lot. See Lot, Corner.
Cul-De-Sac. Cul-de-sac shall mean a Local Street (see definition) having only one vehicular
access to another street and terminated by a vehicular turn-around.
Day, Business. Shall be defined as Monday through Friday, excluding City-recognized holidays.
Day, Calendar. Each day of a particular calendar year.
Dead End Street. Dead end street shall mean a street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one
outlet.
Deed Restriction. A limitation on the use of land set forth or referred to in the title deed of such
land. Such limitations run with the land and are binding upon present and subsequent owners of
the land. Deed restrictions are not enforced by the City.
Developer. A person or entity, limited to the property owner or duly authorized representative
thereof, who proposes to undertake or undertakes the division or improvement of land and/or
other activities covered by this Subdivision Ordinance so as to constitute a subdivision, including
the preparation of a plat showing the layout of the land and the public improvements involved
therein. The word developer is intended to include the terms subdivider, property owner, and,
when submitting platting documents, applicant.
Development. Any activities related to the platting or physical subdivision of land including the
construction, reconstruction, conversion, or enlargement of buildings or structures; the
construction of impervious surfaces (e.g., parking lots); the installation of utilities, roadways,
drainage facilities or other infrastructure; or any disturbance of the surface or subsurface of the
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 10 Page 10-5
land in preparation for such construction activities, including grading, drainage, storage, paving,
clearing, filling, and/or removal of vegetation or soil, and any mining, dredging, excavation or
drilling operations.
Development Agreement. An agreement authorized and in accordance with Section 212.172 of
the Texas Local Government Code between the City and a property owner within the City or in
the ETJ.
Development Application. An application for any type of plat or construction plan/drawing
authorized or addressed by this Subdivision Ordinance. Also may be referred to as a permit
within the Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 245.
Development Plat. See Plat, Development.
Director of Engineering Services. The person(s) so designated by the City Manager to provide
oversight for and have responsibility of the Engineering Services Department; as used for
responsibility and review purposes within this Subdivision Ordinance, this term shall also include
any designee of the Director of Engineering Services.
Director of Parks & Recreation. The person(s) so designated by the City Manager to provide
oversight for and have responsibility of the Parks & Recreation Department; as used for
responsibility and review purposes within this Subdivision Ordinance, this term shall also include
any designee of the Director of Parks & Recreation.
Director of Development Services. The person(s) so designated by the City Manager to provide
oversight for and have responsibility of the Development Services Department; as used for
responsibility and review purposes within this Subdivision Ordinance, this term shall also include
any designee of the Director of Development Services.
Director of Public Works. The person(s) so designated by the City Manager to provide oversight
for and have responsibility of the Public Works Department; as used for responsibility and review
purposes within this Subdivision Ordinance, this term shall also include any designee of the
Director of Public Works.
Double-Frontage Lot. See Lot, Double Frontage.
Driveway. A paved entranceway serving primarily vehicles that allows for access to a lot or
facility, and is intended for vehicular movements between the roadway and any portion outside
the street right-of-way.
Easement. A right granted to the City, to the public generally, and/or to a private entity for the
purpose of limited public or semi-public use across, over, or under private land.
Engineer. A person who has been duly licensed by the Texas Board of Professional Engineers to
engage in the practice of engineering in the State of Texas. (Also known as Professional
Engineer, Registered Engineer, Registered Professional Engineer, or Licensed Engineer.)
Engineering Standards. A document adopted by City Council by resolution or ordinance, which is
intended to establish standards for the design and construction of public facilities.
ETJ. See Extraterritorial Jurisdiction.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 10 Page 10-6
Exemption. A specified reason why a particular development is not subject to the requirements
to plat or to a specific provision of this Ordinance.
Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ). The unincorporated area, not a part of any other municipality,
which is contiguous to the corporate limits of the City, the outer limits of which are measured from
the extremities of the corporate limits of the City outward for the distance as stipulated in Chapter
42 of the Texas Local Government Code, according to the population of the City, and in which
area the City may regulate subdivisions and enjoin violation of provisions of this Subdivision
Ordinance.
Facility(s). Infrastructure and other structures that support a development including, but not limited
to, water distribution lines, sanitary sewer collection lines, storm sewer lines and other storm water
management devices, thoroughfares, sidewalks, private utilities, etc.
Fence, Ornamental Metal. A decorative metal (such as “wrought iron”) fence that shall be
constructed of solid stock materials or tubular steel with minimum 16-guage pickets, 11-guage
posts, and masonry support columns at maximum thirty feet (30’) on center. Shall not include
“chain link” type fencing.
File/Filed/Filing. See Official Filing Date and Submission.
Final Plat. See Plat, Final.
Fire Chief. The person(s) so designated by the City Manager to provide oversight for and have
responsibility of the Fire Department; as used for responsibility and review purposes within this
Subdivision Ordinance, this term shall also include any designee of the Fire Chief.
Fire Lane. See definition in the City’s adopted Fire Code.
Flag Lot. See Lot, Flag.
Front Lot Line. See Lot Line, Front.
Habitat Study. A study in which the main purpose is the identification and protection of declared,
critical habitat for threatened or endangered species and habitat used for nesting by birds listed
in the Migratory Bird Treaty Act (MBTA).
Hike & Bicycle Trail Master Plan. The City’s officially adopted Plan which includes policies in
graphic and text form; such policies govern the future development of the City’s hike-and-bike
trail system.
Homeowners’ Association (HOA). A community association which is organized within a
development in which individual owners share common interests and responsibilities for open
space, landscaping, amenities or facilities, and which operates under recorded land agreements.
This term also includes Property Owners’ Associations (POAs) and Property Management
Corporations (PMCs) which are more typically formed for multi-family and nonresidential
developments.
Improvement. Any man-made fixed item which becomes part of or placed upon real property.
Improvement Agreement. A legally binding document that is required by this Ordinance under
Section 5.04 whenever public improvements to serve a development are deferred until after Final
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 10 Page 10-7
Plat approval and recordation. Such document outlines the developer’s acknowledged
responsibility to complete and warranty improvements and to provide financial security for such
improvements.
Improvement, Public. Any improvement, facility or service together with its associated public site,
right-of-way or easement necessary to provide transportation, storm drainage, public or private
utilities, parks or recreational, energy or similar essential public services and facilities, for which
the City ultimately assumes the responsibility, upon a Letter of Final Acceptance being issued, for
maintenance, operation and/or ownership.
Interior Lot. See Lot, Interior.
iSWM. The acronym for integrated Storm Water Management, which is a guide for the
construction and design of developments. This guide is intended to help mitigate the impact of
developments on storm water runoff by considering such runoff during early site planning and
design phases. This guide was created by the North Central Texas Council of Governments
(NCTCOG).
Key Lot. See Lot, Key.
Local Street. A street that is intended to provide a high level of access to adjacent developments
and, generally, a low level of mobility. Such streets shall also be as described within the
Comprehensive Plan and Engineering Standards.
Lot. An undivided tract or parcel of land that is or may be offered for sale, conveyance, or
improvement and is occupied or intended to be occupied by a building or group of buildings. A
lot has its principal frontage on a public street or officially approved private street, as shown on a
plat of record or described by metes and bounds.
Lot, Corner. A lot which has at least two adjacent sides abutting for their full lengths on a street,
provided that the interior angle at the intersection of such two (2) sides is less than one hundred
thirty-five degrees (135°).
Lot Depth. The horizontal distance measured perpendicularly between two points on the front lot
line and two points on the rear lot line which creates an area that meets (or exceeds) the zoning
district’s minimum width and depth requirements. Lot depth shall not include easements which
are located behind the front building line that impair the use of the lot surface as a yard.
Lot, Double Frontage. A lot having a frontage on two (2) non-intersecting streets, as distinguished
from a corner lot.
Lot, Flag. A lot having access to a street by means of a parcel of land having a depth greater
than its frontage, and having a width less than the minimum required lot width. May also be
referred to as a Panhandle Lot. (See Diagram 8.09-1)
Lot, Interior. A lot other than a corner lot.
Lot, Key. A corner lot that is designed such that the lots located directly behind it face the side
street of the corner lot and are not separated by an alley.
Lot Frontage. That dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a street, excluding the side
dimension of a corner lot.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 10 Page 10-8
Lot Line, Front. The narrower side of the lot abutting a street. Where two (2) lot lines abutting
streets are of equal length, the owner shall have a choice in designating which shall be
designated as the Front Lot Line, and therefore the lot frontage. For a lot which has a boundary
line which does not abut the front street line, is not a rear lot line and lies along the same general
directional orientation as the front and rear lot lines, said line shall be considered a front lot line in
establishing minimum setback lines. (see Zoning Ordinance, Article VI, Appendix 1, Illustration
#10).
Lot Line, Rear. The lot line farthest from and most parallel to the front lot line. For triangular lots,
the point opposite the front lot line shall be considered the rear lot line and have a value of zero.
(see Zoning Ordinance, Article VI, Appendix 1, Illustration #12)
Lot Line, Side. Any lot line not the front or rear lot line.
Lot Lines. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein. May also be referred to as a Property Line.
Lot of Record. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the
office of the County Clerk of Collin or Denton County or a lot subdivided by metes and bounds
description prior to February 1984.
Lot Width. The horizontal distance measured between side lot lines parallel to the front lot line,
and measured from the point on the building line that is closest to the front lot line. (see Zoning
Ordinance, Article VI, Appendix 1, Illustration #10)
Major Creek. The term Major Creek shall include the primary channel and all headwaters (i.e.,
tributaries as defined by the City’s Riparian and Wetland Assessment, as it exists or may be
amended) of those creeks commonly known as Cottonwood Creek, Panther Creek, Parvin Branch,
Rowlett Creek, White Rock Creek, and Stewart Creek (See Diagram 8.03-1).
Major Thoroughfare. See Thoroughfare, Major.
Maximum. For the purposes of this Ordinance, “the maximum” is the amount that is required by
this ordinance of a developer but a developer may choose to construct or provide less than the
maximum, unless otherwise specified.
Metes and Bounds. A method of describing the boundaries of land by directions and distances
from a known point of reference.
Minimum. For the purposes of this Ordinance, “the minimum” is the amount that is required of a
developer but a developer may choose to construct or provide additionally above the minimum
required, unless otherwise specified.
Minor Plat. See Plat, Minor.
Minor Thoroughfare. See Thoroughfare, Minor.
MS4. The acronym for the City’s Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System.
Off-Site. Any premises not located within the area of the property to be subdivided, whether or
not in common ownership with the applicant submitting an application.
Official Filing Date. The date an application is deemed complete by the responsible official in the
manner prescribed by Section 3.03 of this Subdivision Ordinance.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 10 Page 10-9
Open Space. Any land parcel or natural area that is set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved
for public use and enjoyment, or for private use and enjoyment of owners and occupants of the
land adjoining or neighboring such open space area. Open Space shall have no dimension less
than fifty feet (50’) in any direction, and shall not include remnant property unless it is noted for
thoroughfare screening or natural areas where the topography is not impacted, in which case it
may be less than fifty feet (50’) in width.
Ordinance (also referred to as “this Ordinance”). Refers to this Subdivision Ordinance of the City,
as may be amended in the future.
Park or Playground. An area developed for active or passive play and recreation that includes
open space, sports courts or fields, play equipment, and trails.
Parks, Recreation & Open Space Master Plan. The City’s officially adopted Plan which includes
policies in graphic and text form; such policies govern the future development of the City’s parks,
recreation and open space system.
Pedestrian Access. A specifically designated place, path, means, or way by which pedestrians
shall be provided safe, adequate, and usable circulation through the interior of a property or
development.
Permit. A license, certificate, approval, registration, consent, permit, contract or other agreement
for the construction or provision of service from a utility owned, operated, or controlled by the
City, or other form of authorization required by law, rule, regulation, order, or ordinance, which
has been approved by the City, that a person or entity must obtain to perform an action or initiate,
continue, or complete a project for which the permit is sought, and for which the application for
the permit or information required to be submitted for consideration provides notice of the project
to the City.
Planning & Zoning Commission. A decision-making body appointed by the City Council which is
responsible for subdivision approval, as permitted by State law, and which has any other
authority conferred upon it by the City Charter, this Ordinance, or other regulation of the City.
Plat. A plan which shows the exact layout and proposed construction of a proposed development
into one or more lots, blocks, streets, parks, school sites, easements, alleys and/or any other
elements as required by this Ordinance, including any engineering or construction standards for
related improvements, and which conforms to all requirements of this Ordinance and any other
applicable City ordinance, and which is subject to approval by the Planning & Zoning
Commission, unless otherwise specified.
Plat, Amending. A plat with minor changes to a recorded subdivision as itemized and authorized
in Section 4.08 of this Ordinance.
Plat, Conveyance. A plat which conforms to Section 4.04 of this Subdivision Ordinance and is
used solely for the purpose of subdividing land and the recording of same, or recording a single
existing lot or parcel created by other means. Such plat is used to convey the property or
interests therein and is for property intended for immediate development. A Conveyance Plat is
an interim step in the subdivision and development of land.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 10 Page 10-10
Plat, Final. A plat which conforms to Section 4.03 of this Subdivision Ordinance and is submitted to
the City for consideration for final approval by the Planning & Zoning Commission. The plat
illustrates that the subdivision of land is consistent with all standards of this Subdivision
Ordinance pertaining to the adequacy of public facilities and the installation of or provision for
public improvements. Once approved, such plat is submitted to the County Clerk of Collin or
Denton County, as applicable, for recording.
Plat, Minor. A plat dividing land into no more than four (4) lots that meets the submission and
approval requirements of Section 4.05 of this Ordinance. Such plat may be approved by the
Director of Development Services. Such plat is also considered a Final Plat.
Plat, Preliminary. A plat which conforms to Section 4.02 of this Subdivision Ordinance and is
submitted to the City for consideration for initial approval by the Planning & Zoning Commission.
Such plat is not to be recorded, but illustrates the general layout of a proposed subdivision, the
adequacy of public facilities needed to serve the proposed subdivision, and the overall
compliance of the applicable requirements of this Ordinance. Such plat is reviewed and decided
prior to approval of a Final Plat.
Private Street. See Street, Private.
Private Utility. See Utility, Private.
Progress (Towards Completion). Shall have the same meaning set forth in Section 245.005(c) of
the Texas Local Government Code, as it exists or may be amended, unless another meaning is
specified.
Project. An endeavor over which the City exerts its jurisdiction and for which more than one
permit is required to initiate, continue, or complete the endeavor.
Property Owner. The legally recognized proprietor of the land for which an application is being
submitted. Also see Developer.
Proportionality/Proportional Share. The developer’s portion of the costs of an exaction or public
improvement as determined and in accordance with Texas Local Government Code 212.904 and
considered to be the “roughly proportional share” of such exaction or public improvement that is
created by a proposed development or subdivision.
Public Improvement. See Improvement, Public.
Public Way. An officially approved, privately maintained street, constructed to City street
standards, open to unrestricted and irrevocable public access, serving two (2) or more lots that
provides the primary means of access and providing fire lane and utility easements.
Rear Lot Line. See Lot Line, Rear.
Record Drawings. A group of drawings or plans that depicts the final configuration of the
installed or constructed improvements of a development, improvements which have been verified
by the contractor as their installation or construction occurs during development. The record
drawings shall reflect the construction plans (or working drawings) used, corrected, and/or
clarified in the field.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 10 Page 10-11
Replat. The re-subdivision of any or part or all of any block or blocks of a previously platted
subdivision, addition, lot or tract, that is beyond the definition of an Amending Plat and which does
not require the vacation of the entire preceding plat. Such plat also conforms to Section 4.07 of
this Subdivision Ordinance. A Replat can function as a Final Plat for a property.
Responsible Official. The City staff person who has been designated by the City Manager to
perform one (1) or more of the following tasks (this term also includes designees):
(a) Accept an application for filing;
(b) Review and make recommendations concerning such application;
(c) Where authorized, to initially decide such applications;
(d) Initiate enforcement actions;
(e) Take all other actions necessary for administration of the provisions of this Subdivision
Ordinance with respect to such application.
Right-of-Way. A use of land dedicated by plat or metes and bounds to and for use by the public,
which is separate and distinct from the lots and parcel abutting it, and which is not included within
the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. Generally describes an area used for the
provision of streets and utilities. Unless otherwise specified, the term right-of-way shall refer to a
public right-of-way.
Riparian Study. An ecologically based study that addresses the three major components of a
stream (channel, floodplain and transitional upland fringe).
Road, or Roadway. See Street.
Screening. A barrier intended to separate and limit visibility between that which is on either side
of the barrier, for example, a thoroughfare and adjacent land uses.
Side Lot Line. See Lot Line, Side.
Street. An access way for vehicular traffic and other public uses, whether designated a street,
highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place or however
otherwise designated. An alley is not considered a street.
Street, Improved. A street that has been constructed or reconstructed to meet the City’s minimum
standards regarding right-of-way width, pavement width, and/or pavement type, as defined in the
Engineering Standards.
Street, Private. A privately owned street within a subdivision for which the private owners assume
full responsibility for maintenance and control and which has not been dedicated to the use of the
public. This term is inclusive of related alleys.
Street, Stub. A street that has been designed to allow for the future extension of the street
through subsequent subdivisions.
Street, Substandard. An existing street that does not meet the current minimum street standards
of the City.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 10 Page 10-12
Street, Unimproved. A street that does not meet the City’s minimum standards regarding right-ofway
width, pavement width, and/or pavement type, as defined in the Engineering Standards. Most
unimproved streets are former country roads that were built before an area was annexed into the
City limits and/or before the City implemented thoroughfare design standards.
Subdivide.
(a) Is the following when done for the purpose of sale, conveyance, or development:
i. The division of any tract of land into two (2) or more tracts or lots; or
ii. The assembly of two (2) or more tracts of land into one tract or lot.
(b) Is the following with regard to changes to a recorded subdivision plat:
i. A resubdivision of all or part of the subdivision;
ii. Any change of lot size or lot lines; or
iii. The relocation of any street.
Subdivider. See Developer.
Subdivision. The division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more parts or lots for the
purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development or transfer of ownership
with the exception of transfer to heirs of an estate, and shall include re-subdivision.
Submission. The date an applicant delivers an application or petition under this Ordinance to the
Director of the applicable City Department, or the date on which an applicant deposits an
application or petition with the United States Postal Service by certified mail addressed to the
Director of the applicable City Department, along with all required fees and documents.
Substandard. A condition of a road or other public improvement that does not meet the City’s
current right-of-way, design, capacity or construction standard(s).
Surety. A bond, letter of credit, or letter of financial guarantee from a financial institution.
TCEQ. The acronym for the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.
Thoroughfare. A general term for a street (see Street), which has a more specific meaning when
used in conjunction with a class distinction, such as Major, Minor, Type A, Type B, etc. Each
class provides a certain degree of continuity, capacity and accessibility to adjacent land uses.
Thoroughfare, Major. An arterial street designed to accommodate cross-City traffic movement,
distributing traffic to and from minor thoroughfares and collector streets. Major Thoroughfares
are divided roadways that typically have an ultimate width of six lanes. Such streets shall also be
as described within the Engineering Standards, and as shown on the Thoroughfare Plan Map.
Also is referred to as a Type A Thoroughfare.
Thoroughfare, Minor. An arterial street designed to accommodate neighborhood-toneighborhood
(intra-City) traffic movement, distributing traffic to and from collector streets. Minor
Thoroughfares are divided roadways that typically have an ultimate width of four lanes. Such
streets shall also be as described within the Engineering Standards, and as shown on the
Thoroughfare Plan Map. Also is referred to as a Type B Thoroughfare.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 10 Page 10-13
Thoroughfare Plan Map. A component of the Comprehensive Plan that generally represents the
proposed grid-system of major and minor thoroughfares that will support the Future Land Use
Plan. The exact locations of future roadways cannot be determined without engineering and
environmental analysis, but the Map should be used as a guide as development occurs in terms
of how connections should be made and by what type of thoroughfare. The Thoroughfare Plan
Map also shows existing railroads and proposed transit rail stations.
Thoroughfare Screening. Screening (see definition), both landscaping and screening
walls/fences, between lots/subdivisions and major thoroughfares as required by Section 8.06 of
this Ordinance.
Tributary. A riparian branch that feeds (i.e., flows into) a Major Creek, as identified and defined in
the City’s Riparian Study, as amended.
TxDOT: The acronym for the Texas Department of Transportation.
Type A Thoroughfare. See Thoroughfare, Major.
Type B Thoroughfare. See Thoroughfare, Minor.
Type C Thoroughfare. See Collector Street.
Type D Thoroughfare. See Collector Street.
Type E Thoroughfare. See Local Street.
Type F Thoroughfare. See Local Street.
Type G Thoroughfare. See Local Street.
Utility, Private. Services, and any related facilities (e.g., distribution lines), not customarily
provided by the City or public entities; such services generally include electricity, natural gas, and
telecommunications.
Utility, Public. Services, and any related facilities (e.g., distribution lines), typically provided by
the City, County, or publicly owned entity; such services include potable water distribution,
wastewater collection, and storm water management.
Variance. As defined in the Zoning Ordinance.
Vegetative Study. A study in which the main purpose is identification and consideration of unique
vegetative communities that are important for conserving biotic diversity and are rare due to
conversion to other land uses.
Vested Right. A right of an applicant in accordance with Chapter 245 of the Texas Local
Government Code, as amended, requiring the City to review and decide the application under
standards in effect prior to the effective date of the standards of this Chapter and/or of any
subsequent amendments.
Vested Rights Petition. A request for relief from any standard or requirement of this Subdivision
Ordinance based on an assertion that the applicant (petitioner for relief) has acquired a vested
right. Such petition is regulated under Section 9.03 of this Ordinance.
Violation. Any failure to fully comply with this Subdivision Ordinance.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 10 Page 10-14
Waiver, Major (Major Waiver). A significant change to both the standards and intent of this
Subdivision Ordinance, which involves Planning & Zoning Commission approval. A Major Waiver
includes any type of waiver that is not specifically listed in Table 9.01-1.
Waiver, Minor (Minor Waiver). A minor change to the standards, but not the intent, of this
Subdivision Ordinance, which involves Director of Development Services or Director of
Engineering Services (as applicable) approval unless otherwise noted. An exclusive list of Minor
Waivers is shown in Table 9.01-1.
Wetland. An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions.
Wetland Delineation Study. A study in which the main purposes are to determine jurisdictional
wetlands and to ensure compliance with Section 404 of the Clean Water Act and other applicable
regulations of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
Zoning Ordinance. The City of Frisco Zoning Ordinance.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 11 Page 11-1
SECTION 11: AMENDMENTS; FEES; VIOLATIONS; CONFLICTS
SECTION 11.01 AMENDMENTS
The Commission or City Council by majority vote may initiate changes to the Subdivision Ordinance
through a call for public hearing. The case to consider amending the Subdivision Ordinance is
considered in a public hearing by the Commission which will make a recommendation to City Council.
City Council will consider the Commission’s recommendation at a public hearing, upon which the City
Council will make a decision whether to direct staff to prepare an Ordinance amending the Subdivision
Ordinance.
SECTION 11.02 FILING FEES & CHARGES
(a) General. Fees shall be paid to the City when any application authorized by this Ordinance is
submitted to Development Services. Each of the fees, as provided in Section 11.02(b), shall be paid
in advance, and no action of the Commission, the City Council, or any other City board or commission
shall be valid until all required fees have been paid. Fees paid for the review and consideration of
plats and applications under this Ordinance are non-refundable.
(b) Calculations & Charges. Fees and charges shall be calculated in accordance with the following.
(1) All fees shall be as established by City ordinance.
(2) These fees shall be charged on all plats and applications authorized by this Ordinance,
regardless of the action taken by the decision-making authority and of whether the application
is approved, denied or closed.
Subdivision Ordinance
Section 11 Page 11-2
(This page intentionally left blank.)
Subdivision Ordinance
Appendix
Appendix – Diagrams & Tables
Subdivision Ordinance
Appendix
(This page intentionally left blank.)
Subdivision Ordinance
Appendix Page A-1
Table 2.01-1: Responsible Officials, Initial Decision-Makers & Appellate Decision-Makers
Type of Application or Petition Responsible City
Official Initial Decision-Maker Appellate
Decision-Maker
Further
Appeal
Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action
Section 3.03(e)
Director of
Development Services n/a n/a n/a
Extension of Plat Approval
Section 4.02(j)
Director of
Development Services
Director of
Development Services
Planning &
Zoning
Commission
City
Council
Preliminary Plat
Section 4.02
Director of
Development Services
Planning & Zoning
Commission City Council n/a
Final Plat
Section 4.03
Director of
Development Services
Planning & Zoning
Commission City Council n/a
Conveyance Plat
Section 4.04
Director of
Development Services
Planning & Zoning
Commission City Council n/a
Minor Plat
Section 4.05
Director of
Development Services
Director of
Development Services
Planning &
Zoning
Commission
City
Council
Replat
Section 4.07
Director of
Development Services
Planning & Zoning
Commission City Council n/a
Amending Plat
Section 4.08
Director of
Development Services
Director of
Development Services
Planning &
Zoning
Commission
City
Council
Plat Vacation
Section 4.09
Director of
Development Services City Council n/a n/a
Construction Plans
Section 5.01
Director of
Engineering Services
Director of
Engineering Services n/a n/a
Extension of Construction Plans
Approval
Section 5.01(h)
Director of
Engineering Services
Director of
Engineering Services n/a n/a
Construction Release
Section 5.01(i)
Director of
Engineering Services
Director of
Engineering Services n/a n/a
Improvement Agreement
Section 5.04
Director of
Engineering Services
Director of
Engineering Services City Council n/a
Subdivision Ordinance
Appendix Page A-2
Type of Application or Petition Responsible City
Official Initial Decision-Maker Appellate
Decision-Maker
Further
Appeal
Minor Waiver
Section 9.01
Director of
Development Services
--or--
Director of
Engineering Services
(as applicable)
Director of
Development Services
--or--
Director of
Engineering Services
(as applicable – see Table
9.01-1)
Planning &
Zoning
Commission
(requires 4 votes to
overrule initial
decision)
City
Council
(requires 4
votes to
overrule
initial appeal
decision)
Major Waiver
Section 9.01
Director of
Development Services
--or--
Director of
Engineering Services
(as applicable)
Planning & Zoning
Commission
--or--
City Council
(as applicable)
Planning &
Zoning
Commission
--or--
City Council
(as applicable;
requires 4 votes to
overrule initial
decision)
City
Council
(requires 4
votes to
overrule
initial appeal
decision)
Proportionality Appeal
Section 9.02
Director of
Engineering Services
City Council
(with recommendation from
Planning & Zoning
Commission)
City Council
(requires 4 votes to
overrule initial
decision)
n/a
Vested Rights Petition
Section 9.03
Director of
Development Services
--or--
Director of
Engineering Services
(as applicable)
Director of
Development Services
--or--
Director of
Engineering Services
--or--
Planning & Zoning
Commission
(as applicable)
City Council n/a
Subdivision Ordinance
Appendix Page A-3
Diagram 8.01-1: Median & Cross Access
Subdivision Ordinance
Appendix Page A-4
Diagram 8.03-1: Major Creeks – Map
Subdivision Ordinance
Appendix Page A-5
Diagram 8.03-2: Major Creek – Cross Section
Subdivision Ordinance
Appendix Page A-6
Diagram 8.03-3: Streets Adjacent to Major Creeks
Subdivision Ordinance
Appendix Page A-7
Diagram 8.03-4: Cul-de-Sacs Adjacent to Major Creeks
Subdivision Ordinance
Appendix Page A-8
Diagram 8.03-5: Fencing Options for Lots Abutting Major Creeks
Subdivision Ordinance
Appendix Page A-9
Table 8.06-1: Thoroughfare Screening Options
Thoroughfare
Screening Option
Landscape Edge
(minimum width)
Screening Wall/Fence
Type
Trees/
Frontage
(3” cal. min.)
Shrub
Screen Berms
Option 1
(Lots that back or side
to the Thoroughfare)
Diagram 8.06-1
Type A or B
Thoroughfare: 10’
Type C or D
Thoroughfare: 15’
Continuous min. 6’ ht. solid
masonry wall (max. 8’ ht.)
(can be “staggered” or offset
with landscape plantings)
One 3” cal.
tree per 30’
frontage
Not required
Not
required
(max.
slope 3:1
if used)
Option 2
(Lots that are
separated from the
Thoroughfare by an
alley)
Diagram 8.06-2(a),
8.06-2(b),
8.06-2(c)
Type A or B
Thoroughfare: 10’
Type C or D
Thoroughfare: 15’
(a) Continuous min. 4’ ht. (max.
8’ ht.) solid masonry wall with
min. 6’ ht. solid evergreen shrub
screen, or
(b) Continuous min. 4’ ht. (max.
8’ ht.) ornamental metal fence
with min. 6’ ht. solid evergreen
shrub screen, or
(c) Continuous min. 6’ ht. (max.
8’ ht.) solid masonry wall (no
shrub screen required)
One 3” cal.
tree per 30’
frontage
Min. 6’ ht.
solid
evergreen
shrub screen
at time of
planting
(not required
if 6’-8’ solid
masonry wall
is used)
Not
required
(max.
slope 3:1
if used)
Option 3
(Lots that back or side
to or are separated by
an alley from the
Thoroughfare)
Diagram 8.06-3
Type A, B, C or D
Thoroughfare: 25’
Min. 4’ ht. (max. 6’ ht.)
ornamental metal fence
One 3” cal.
tree per 30’
frontage
Min. 6’ ht.
solid
evergreen
shrub screen
at time of
planting
Not
required
(max.
slope 3:1
if used)
Option 4
(Required to be used at
the bulb portion of a
cul-de-sac where the
cul-de-sac lots side
onto an adjacent street)
Diagram 8.06-4(a),
8.06-4(b)
Type A or B
Thoroughfare: 10’
Type C or D
Thoroughfare: 15’
Type E, F or G
Thoroughfare:
Not required (10’
separation between
rights-of-way is
required)
All Types of Thoroughfares:
A sidewalk centered on the
common property line connecting
the cul-de-sac sidewalk and
adjacent street sidewalk through
an opening in the fence/wall
Type A, B, C & D Thoroughfares:
See Screening for Options 1, 2,
or 3
Type E, F, or G Thoroughfares:
Continuous 4’-8’ ht. ornamental
metal fence (cannot exceed ht. of
adjacent/connecting walls or
fences).
Six (6) 3”
cal. trees
evenly
spaced
within 150’
centered on
the common
property
line.
Min. 3’ ht.
evergreen
shrub screen
at time of
planting,
planted at
approximately
5’ on center
within a
distance of
150’ centered
on the
common
property line.
Not
required
(max.
slope 3:1
if used)
Subdivision Ordinance
Appendix Page A-10
Diagram 8.06-1: Thoroughfare Screening Option 1
Subdivision Ordinance
Appendix Page A-11
Diagram 8.06-2(a): Thoroughfare Screening Option 2(a)
Subdivision Ordinance
Appendix Page A-12
Diagram 8.06-2(b): Thoroughfare Screening Option 2(b)
Subdivision Ordinance
Appendix Page A-13
Diagram 8.06-2(c): Thoroughfare Screening Option 2(c)
Subdivision Ordinance
Appendix Page A-14
Diagram 8.06-3: Thoroughfare Screening Option 3
Subdivision Ordinance
Appendix Page A-15
Diagram 8.06-4(a): Thoroughfare Screening Option 4(a)
Subdivision Ordinance
Appendix Page A-16
Diagram 8.06-4(b): Thoroughfare Screening Option 4(b)
Subdivision Ordinance
Appendix Page A-17
Diagram 8.09-1: Flag Lots
Subdivision Ordinance
Appendix Page A-18
Diagram 8.09-2: Determining Lot Depth on an Irregular-Shaped Lot
Subdivision Ordinance
Appendix Page A-19
Diagram 8.09-3: Lot Street Frontage – Curved Streets
Subdivision Ordinance
Appendix Page A-20
Diagram 8.09-4: Lot Street Frontage – Cul-de-Sac & Eyebrow Lots
Subdivision Ordinance
Appendix Page A-21
Diagram 8.10-1: Centrally Located Amenity Center
Subdivision Ordinance
Appendix Page A-22
Diagram 8.12-1: Access & Lot Orientation to Parks and/or Open Space
Subdivision Ordinance
Appendix Page A-23
Table 9.01-1: Minor Waivers – Initial Decision-Makers & Appellate Decision-Makers
Type of Minor Waiver Initial Decision-
Maker
Appellate
Decision-
Maker
Further
Appeal
Water Line Extension to Boundary of Development
Section 8.02(d)(2)c.
Director of
Engineering Services
Planning &
Zoning
Commission
City Council
Connection Onto City Sanitary Sewer System
Section 8.02(e)(1)
Director of
Engineering Services
Planning &
Zoning
Commission
City Council
Street Lighting
Section 8.04(b)(11)
Director of
Engineering Services
Planning &
Zoning
Commission
City Council
Requirement for Alleys
Section 8.05
Director of
Engineering Services
--and--
Director of
Development Services
Planning &
Zoning
Commission
City Council
Side Lot Lines 90°/Radial to Street
Section 8.09(e)(1)
Director of
Development Services
Planning &
Zoning
Commission
City Council
Lot Lines not Aligning with County, School District
or Other Jurisdictional Boundary
Section 8.09(e)(2)
Director of
Development Services
Planning &
Zoning
Commission
City Council
Residential Lots Facing Similar Lots
Section 8.09(g)(3)
Director of
Development Services
Planning &
Zoning
Commission
City Council
Subdivision Naming
Section 8.09(n)
Director of
Development Services
Planning &
Zoning
Commission
City Council
Non-Residential Screening Adjacent to Park or Open
Space
Section 8.12(b)(4)
Director of
Development Services
--and--
Director of Parks &
Recreation
Planning &
Zoning
Commission
City Council
Subdivision Ordinance
Appendix Page A-24
Engineering Standards
The Engineering Standards, as it exists or may be amended, is adopted into this ordinance as if fully set
forth herein.
The City of Frisco, Texas
Engineering Standards
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
RL – Revision Log
Record of Revisions
6-19-12 Engineering Standards adopted by Council as Appendix to Subdivision Ordinance
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Table of Contents TC-1
Table of Contents
SECTION 1 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 1-1
Part A – Design Standards Page
1.01 Short Title .................................................................................................................. 1-2
1.02 Interpretation ............................................................................................................. 1-2
1.03 Enforcement .............................................................................................................. 1-3
1.04 Amendment ............................................................................................................... 1-3
1.05 Deviation Requests .................................................................................................... 1-3
1.06 Applicability .............................................................................................................. 1-3
1.07 Other Local, State and Federal Environmental Regulations ..................................... 1-3
1.08 Texas Accessibility Standards (TAS) ........................................................................ 1-4
1.09 Engineering Design Criteria – Section Description .................................................. 1-4
1.10 Submittal Requirements for Construction Plans ....................................................... 1-6
1.11 Easements .................................................................................................................. 1-8
1.12 Fees.......................................................................................................................... 1-10
SECTION 2 THOROUGHFARE DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 2-1
2.01 General ...................................................................................................................... 2-2
2.02 Street Design ............................................................................................................. 2-2
2.03 Median, Left-Turn Lane, Right-Turn Lane, Deceleration Lane,
and Island Design .................................................................................................... 2-20
2.04 Alley Design ............................................................................................................ 2-28
2.05 Driveway Design ..................................................................................................... 2-32
2.06 Sidewalk Location and Design ................................................................................ 2-41
2.07 Public Right-of-Way Visibility Requirements ........................................................ 2-45
2.08 Frontage Road Design ............................................................................................. 2-49
2.09 Traffic Signal Installation ........................................................................................ 2-50
2.10 Street Lighting ......................................................................................................... 2-50
2.11 Street Name Signs ................................................................................................... 2-53
2.12 Traffic Impact Analysis and Mitigation .................................................................. 2-54
SECTION 3 SUBGRADE AND PAVEMENT DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 3-1
3.01 General ...................................................................................................................... 3-2
3.02 Subgrade and Pavement Design Report .................................................................... 3-2
3.03 Subgrade Design Requirements ................................................................................ 3-2
3.04 Pavement Design Requirements ................................................................................ 3-5
SECTION 4 DRAINAGE DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 4-1
4.01 General ...................................................................................................................... 4-2
4.02 Determining Design Discharge ................................................................................. 4-2
4.03 Downstream Assessment ........................................................................................... 4-7
4.04 Street Capacity .......................................................................................................... 4-9
4.05 Alley Capacity ......................................................................................................... 4-10
4.06 Valley Gutters ......................................................................................................... 4-10
4.07 Inlet Location and Capacity .................................................................................... 4-10
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Table of Contents TC-2
4.08 Design of Enclosed Storm Sewer System ............................................................... 4-19
4.09 Detention/Retention Facility Design ....................................................................... 4-25
4.10 Miscellaneous Drainage Requirements ................................................................... 4-28
4.11 Open Channel Design .............................................................................................. 4-29
4.12 Hydraulic Design of Culverts .................................................................................. 4-34
4.13 Bridge Design Hydraulics ....................................................................................... 4-35
4.14 Energy Dissipators .................................................................................................. 4-35
4.15 Floodplain Alterations ............................................................................................. 4-36
4.16 Erosion and Sedimentation Control ........................................................................ 4-38
4.17 Drainage Easements ................................................................................................ 4-38
4.18 Sustainable Development ........................................................................................ 4-38
SECTION 5 UTILITY DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 5-1
5.1 Water System-General .............................................................................................. 5-2
5.1.1 Water Main Location................................................................................................. 5-2
5.1.2 Horizontal and Vertical Alignment ........................................................................... 5-2
5.1.3 Separation Distance between Water and Wastewater ............................................... 5-3
5.1.4 Average Daily Water Demands ................................................................................. 5-3
5.1.5 Water Main Sizing .................................................................................................... 5-4
5.1.6 Water Main Materials ................................................................................................ 5-4
5.1.7 Water Services ........................................................................................................... 5-5
5.1.8 Valves ........................................................................................................................ 5-5
5.1.9 Fire Hydrants ............................................................................................................. 5-6
5.1.10 Connections to Existing Water Mains ....................................................................... 5-7
5.1.11 Backflow Prevention ................................................................................................. 5-8
5.1.12 Automatic Flushing Valve......................................................................................... 5-8
5.2 Wastewater System-General ..................................................................................... 5-9
5.2.1 Wastewater Main Location ....................................................................................... 5-9
5.2.2 Horizontal and Vertical Alignment ........................................................................... 5-9
5.2.3 Separation Distance between Wastewater and Water Mains .................................. 5-10
5.2.4 Wastewater Flows ................................................................................................... 5-11
5.2.5 Wastewater Main Sizing ......................................................................................... 5-11
5.2.6 Wastewater Main Materials ..................................................................................... 5-12
5.2.7 Wastewater Service Laterals ................................................................................... 5-12
5.2.8 Manholes and Cleanouts ......................................................................................... 5-13
5.2.9 Inverted Siphons ...................................................................................................... 5-14
5.2.10 Wastewater Lift Stations ......................................................................................... 5-14
5.2.11 Force Mains ............................................................................................................. 5-15
5.2.12 Dumpster Enclosure Drains ..................................................................................... 5-15
5.3 Reclaimed Water System-General .......................................................................... 5-16
5.3.1 Reclaimed Water Main Location ............................................................................ 5-16
5.3.2 Horizontal and Vertical Alignment ......................................................................... 5-16
5.3.3 Separation Distance between Reclaimed Water and Other Systems ....................... 5-16
5.3.4 Reclaimed Water System Materials ........................................................................ 5-16
5.4 Easements ................................................................................................................ 5-17
5.5 Thrust Restraint ....................................................................................................... 5-17
5.6 Pavement Cut and Repair ........................................................................................ 5-18
5.7 Trenchless Construction .......................................................................................... 5-18
5.8 Crossings ................................................................................................................. 5-19
5.9 Corrosion Protection................................................................................................ 5-20
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Table of Contents TC-3
SECTION 6 LANDSCAPING DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 6-1
6.01 General ...................................................................................................................... 6-2
6.02 Landscape Requirements within the Median ............................................................ 6-2
6.03 Approved Plant Materials .......................................................................................... 6-4
SECTION 7 IRRIGATION DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 7-1
7.01 General ...................................................................................................................... 7-2
7.02 Roadway Irrigation Requirements ............................................................................ 7-2
7.03 Additional Irrigation Design Requirements within Roadway ................................... 7-3
SECTION 8 ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS 8-1
8.01 General ...................................................................................................................... 8-2
8.02 Storm Water Management Plan (SWMP) – Permanent Controls ............................ 8-2
8.03 Texas Construction General Permit (CGP) ............................................................... 8-3
8.04 Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWP3) ....................................................... 8-3
SECTION 9 STRUCTURAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 9-1
9.01 General ...................................................................................................................... 9-2
9.02 Code Requirements ................................................................................................... 9-2
9.03 Geotechnical Performance Specifications ................................................................. 9-3
9.04 Bridge Design ............................................................................................................ 9-5
9.05 Retaining Wall Design .............................................................................................. 9-6
9.06 Slope Stability Design Criteria .................................................................................. 9-8
9.07 Screening Wall Design Criteria ................................................................................. 9-9
9.08 Excavation Support ................................................................................................... 9-9
9.09 Construction Plans ..................................................................................................... 9-9
9.10 Construction Inspection and Certification ............................................................... 9-13
SECTION 10 SURVEY REQUIREMENTS 10-1
10.01 General .................................................................................................................... 10-2
10.02 Survey Markers and Monumentation ...................................................................... 10-2
10.03 Final Plat Acceptance .............................................................................................. 10-3
Part B – Construction Standards
GN - General Notes
TS - Technical Specifications
AM - Approved Materials List
SD - Standard Details
Appendix A - Definitions and Abbreviations
Appendix B - Plan Checklists
Appendix C - Revision Log
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
DS – Design Standards May 2012
DS
DESIGN STANDARDS
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 1 – General Requirements May 2012 Page 1-1
SECTION 1 – GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 1 – General Requirements May 2012 Page 1-2
Section 1 – General Requirements
1.01 Short Title
These are hereby adopted as a part of the “Engineering Standards”, Sections 1 – 10 and Appendices,
including Technical Specifications and Standard Construction Details which shall be in full force and
effect from and after the effective date of adoption of the Engineering Standards.
1.02 Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of the provisions of these regulations, it is the intention of the City
Council that the principles, standards and requirements provided for herein shall be minimum
requirements for the design of both subdivisions and municipal capital projects in the City, and, where
other City ordinances or regulations of the City are more restrictive in their requirements, such other
ordinances or regulations shall govern.
The City has adopted various ordinances and master plans, which address various requirements not
explicitly included in the Engineering Standards, including, but not limited to the following. The Engineer
is responsible for understanding and complying with the City’s various ordinances and master plans.
A. Building Code
B. Water Capital Improvement Plan 2008 Update
C. Wastewater Capital Improvement Plan 2008 Update
D. Reclaimed Water Capital Improvement Plan 2006
E. Comprehensive Plan;
F. Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance
G. Hike and Bike Master Plan
H. Impact Fee Ordinance
I. International Fire Code (Including Oil and Gas Drilling)
J. Parks, Recreation & Open Space Master Plan;
K. Preston Corridor Access Management Plan;
L. Right-of-Way Management Ordinance;
M. Subdivision Ordinance;
N. Tributary Study;
O. Zoning Ordinance;
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 1 – General Requirements May 2012 Page 1-3
1.03 Enforcement
The City’s Engineering Standards are issued by the Engineering Services and Public Works Departments,
and are hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of these Engineering Standards. The standards and
any updates will be available on the City’s website.
These Engineering Standards shall be in full force and effect immediately upon adoption by the City
Council. Projects will be required to comply with all requirements. The standards include the various
design criteria, technical specifications, and standard construction details which are considered minimum
requirements for the design and construction of adequate public facilities within the City. The Engineer
of record shall bear the sole responsibility for meeting the Engineering standard of care for all
aspects of the design and providing a design that’s required by the site-specific conditions and
intended use of the facilities, while at a minimum meeting the City’s design and construction
requirements.
1.04 Amendment
A. The City may amend the Engineering Standards. In order to ensure that the Engineer has the
City’s latest design standards, they are directed to the City’s website to acquire the City’s most
current design standards. The Engineering Standards will include a Record of Revisions to
identify any revisions to the Engineering Standards.
B. A formal request to modify current design criteria or add new design criteria can be submitted to
the City for consideration in writing to the Director of Engineering Services.
1.05 Deviation Requests
A. All deviations from the requirements included in the Engineering Standards shall be approved by
the Director of Engineering Services.. A grant of an alternative material, design, or method of
construction shall not affect nor relieve the Engineer of the obligation and responsibility of
such material, design, or method of construction for the intended purposes.
B. In the event that specific circumstances dictate requirements not already included in the
Engineering Standards, it shall be the responsibility of the Engineer to provide the additional
information as deemed necessary by the Director of Engineering Services in writing for review.
1.06 Applicability
The Engineer shall be responsible for the applicability of the information contained in the
Engineering Standards to the design of their particular project. The Engineer shall also be
responsible for the applicability and accuracy of the information furnished in their design.
Acceptance by the City of the plans for construction shall not be construed to relieve the Engineer
of any responsibility.
1.07 Other Local, State and Federal Environmental Regulations (this is not intended to
be a complete list and is provided for informational purposes only)
• Section 404 of the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1344)
• Water Rights http://www.tceq.state.tx.us/permitting/water_supply/water_rights/permits.html
• Migratory Bird Treaty Act http://www.fws.gov/pacific/migratorybirds/mbta.htm
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 1 – General Requirements May 2012 Page 1-4
• Water Well Drilling http://www.tgpc.state.tx.us/WaterWells.htm
• Threatened and Endangered Species and
o http://www.tpwd.state.tx.us/huntwild/wild/species/endang/index.phtml
• The Antiquities Code of Texas http://www.thc.state.tx.us/crm/crmantcode.shtml
• Air Quality http://www.tceq.state.tx.us/permitting/air/newsourcereview/before.html
• TCEQ Dam Requirements
1.08 Texas Accessibility Standards (TAS)
A. All plans and specifications for the construction or alteration of public buildings and facilities,
privately owned buildings and facilities leased or occupied by state agencies, places of public
accommodation, pedestrian facilities within public right-of-way, and commercial facilities must
be in compliance with the Texas Accessibility Standards (TAS) for individuals with disabilities
and must conform to the standards required by regulations issued by the Texas Department of
Licensing and Regulation (TDLR), under the Architectural Barriers Act, codified as Article
9102, Texas Civil Statutes (see Architectural Barriers Administrative Rules – Section 68.30
for exemptions).
B. Projects with a total estimated construction cost of $50,000 or more are required to submit a full
set of construction documents in accordance with Administrative Rule 68.20 to TDLR for
registration and review. For Public Right-of-Way projects, the estimated cost for the project shall
be based on pedestrian elements only in accordance with Administrative Rule 68.102. If a
project’s total estimated construction cost is less than $50,000, it is not required to be submitted
to TDLR for registration and review; however, the project is still required to comply with TAS.
An architect, engineer, interior designer, or landscape architect with overall responsibility for the
design of a building or facility subject to subsection 5(j) of the Architectural Barriers Act, shall
mail, ship, or hand-deliver the project registration form, review and inspection fees, and
construction documents to the TDLR, a registered accessibility specialist, or a contract provider
not later than thirty (30) business days after the design professional seals and signs the
construction documents. An Architectural Barriers Project Registration form must be completed
for each subject building or facility.
1.09 Engineering Criteria – Section Descriptions
The following is a brief description of the contents of each section.
A. Section 1 – General Requirements
This section includes an overview and definitions, abbreviations, and acronyms used in the
manual. This section also includes general minimum requirements applicable to all projects,
including submittal requirements to the City and to other agencies.
B. Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements
This section includes minimum requirements associated with the City’s thoroughfares, including
roadway geometry, street lighting, signage and markings, and traffic signals, etc.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 1 – General Requirements May 2012 Page 1-5
C. Section 3 – Subgrade and Pavement Design Requirements
This section includes minimum requirements associated with pavement and subgrade design
requirements (including geotechnical requirements) for roadways within the City,
D. Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements
This section includes minimum storm drainage design requirements to be followed in the design
of storm drainage facilities, and demonstrates the design procedures to be used on drainage
projects within the City. This section also addresses floodplains, bridge hydraulics, erosion
control and sustainable development.
E. Section 5 – Utility Design Requirements
This section includes minimum design requirements for public wastewater facilities, water
distribution and transmission system facilities.
F. Section 6 – Landscaping Design Requirements
This section provides additional requirements and standards to address landscaping requirements
within roadway right-of-way, specifically in the medians of arterial roadways.
G. Section 7– Irrigation Design Requirements
This section provides additional requirements and standards to address irrigation requirements
within roadway right-of-way.
H. Section 8 – Environmental Requirements
This section provides additional requirements and standards to address environmental
requirements, including stormwater best management practices.
I. Section 9 – Structural Design Requirements
This section establishes minimum structural design and geotechnical requirements for various
items including bridges, concrete structures, retaining walls, and screening walls. This section
also addresses slope stability analysis.
J. Section 10 – Survey Requirements
This section is to address survey requirements.
K. Appendix
1. General Notes – The latest version of general notes shall be included in the Construction
Plans for all projects.
2. Standard Details - All projects shall be constructed in accordance with the City’s standard
details which are available through the City web site. It is the responsibility of the engineer to
use the most current detail, as the details are subject to change. If a necessary standard detail
is not available from the City, TxDOT details are generally acceptable except for utility
construction. For utility work, a standard detail may be selected from the most recent version
of Public Works Construction Standards as issued by the North Central Texas Council of
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 1 – General Requirements May 2012 Page 1-6
Governments (NCTCOG). It is the responsibility of the Design Engineer to provide a detail in
the plans if a standard detail is not available.
3. Approved Materials List – Products that have been pre-approved for use on projects are
available in this listing on the City web site. Products not shown on this list must be approved
prior to installation.
4. Technical Specifications – All projects shall be constructed in accordance with the most
recent version of the City specifications which are available through the City web site or
TxDOT specifications. It is the responsibility of the Design Engineer to use the most current
specification, as the specifications are subject to change. If a necessary specification is not
available from the City or TxDOT, then one may be selected from the most recent version of
NCTCOG Public Works Construction Standards.
5. Plan Checklists – common elements necessary on most plans that should be verified by
designer prior to submittal of plans. These elements are routinely reviewed by staff and if
missing can delay issuance of construction permits. Various checklists will be made available
on the website as developed over time.
1.10 Submittal Requirements for Construction Plans
A. All improvements shall be designed in accordance with the City design criteria, specifications,
and standard details referenced as part of the Engineering Standards.
B. Up to five (5) copies of complete construction plans, technical specifications, construction details,
requested calculations, construction cost projection, geotechnical report, and certified plan
submittal checklist are required to be submitted to the City for review and approval. All submitted
items shall be 100% complete at the time of the submittal. Any incomplete components of a
submittal shall result in the entire submittal being considered incomplete and shall be returned to
the Engineer not reviewed
C. The construction plans shall be submitted on 22” x 34” sheets and electronic PDF copy. Each
sheet of the construction plans shall contain a title block, including space for the notation of
revisions. This space is to be completed with each revision to the plan sheet and shall clearly note
the nature of the revision and the date that the revision was made.
. If the submittal is for a private project, the City will notify the
Engineer and Developer of the incomplete submittal.
D. See Plan Checklist in Appendix section for a recommended order of plan sheets.
E. Record Drawings shall be submitted on mylar print and electronic CAD files for public
infrastructure projects. The CAD file shall include linework for property boundaries, right-ofway,
easements, roadway, signals, lighting, drainage, water, and sewer facilities. Refer to Survey
Requirements for additional electronic submittal requirements.
F. Each construction plan sheet shall bear the seal and signature of the Licensed Professional
Engineer in the State of Texas who prepared the plans. If standard details are included in the
construction plan submittal, the Engineer shall provide the following certification on the title
sheet of the plans:
The standard [City, TxDOT, etc.] details specifically identified in this
set of construction plans [or specifically included in these
bidding/contract documents] have been selected by me or under my
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 1 – General Requirements May 2012 Page 1-7
direct responsible supervision as being applicable to this project.
__________________, P.E., Firm Registration # _____
G. The Engineer shall provide the following certification on the title sheet of the plans: title sheet of
the construction plans shall bear a signature block for approval for construction which shall read
as follows:
These construction plans have been reviewed by the City of Frisco.
The City has determined that they are in general compliance with the
City’s Master Plans and Engineering Standards. The City’s review and
release of these plans does not represent that the City has reengineered
or verified the engineering of the proposed improvements.
The Design Engineer is responsible for all engineering and recognizes
that specific site circumstances or conditions may require
improvements constructed to exceed minimum standards contained in
the City’s Engineering Standards. The Design Engineer is responsible
for the applicability and accuracy of the plans and specifications
contained herein. _________________, P.E., Firm Registration #
_____
H. Specific information required for submittals can be found within this document and in the plan
checklists located on the City website . The City reserves the right to specify additional
requirements as necessary to facilitate the review.
Responsible
Preliminary Site Plan - Private
Submittals Reviewing Department
Overall Concept Development Services
Paving, Grading, Drainage Engineering
Traffic (Signs, Markings, Signals, Lighting, TCP) Traffic
Utilities Engineering
Preliminary Plans (30/60%) - Public
Paving, Grading, Drainage Engineering
Traffic (Signs, Markings, Signals, Lighting, TCP) Traffic
Utilities Engineering
Landscaping and Irrigation (Public) Parks
Construction Plans (Final) - Public and Private
Paving, Grading, Drainage Engineering
Traffic (Signs, Markings, Signals, Lighting, TCP) Traffic
Utilities Engineering
Landscaping and Irrigation (Public) Parks
Landscaping and Irrigation (Private) Development Services
Project Manual (Public) Engineering
Technical Specifications (Private) Engineering
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 1 – General Requirements May 2012 Page 1-8
I. Any projects requiring permits from agencies other than the City (such as railroad, TxDOT,
NTTA, etc) shall submit the required permit documents to the City for approval. City staff will
review and submit permit requests to the agencies.
J. A separate checklist is available for construction plan sets to be submitted at the pre-construction
conference.
1.11 Easements
A. General - Easements shall be provided for public facilities including water, wastewater, reclaimed
water, drainage features, and traffic signal or lighting equipment that are located outside the
public right of way. Storm drain lines are also considered public if they cross property lines and
collect runoff from adjacent properties. For single-family residential developments, water,
wastewater, reclaimed water and storm drain lines shall not cross residential lots unless
specifically approved by the Director of Engineering Services. Additional easement width may
be required to accommodate future maintenance of the facilities.
B. Acquisition of Easements - Easements that have not been dedicated on a plat may be acquired by
separate instrument. The acquisition of any easement is the owner’s responsibility. If the owner
cannot obtain a required offsite easement, the owner may request assistance from the City. Prior
to requesting assistance, the owner shall provide a written offer to the property owner based on
fair market value. The City’s assistance does not relieve the owner of the cost of purchasing the
easement. In addition, the owner shall reimburse the City for all costs associated with the
acquisition.
C. The process for acquiring an easement by separate instrument is as follows:
• Submit a metes and bounds description, a drawing of the easement sealed, signed and dated
by a licensed surveyor, and ownership information to Engineering Services.
• Engineering Services will prepare the easement documents on city forms.
• Person requesting the easement shall pay any document preparation and filing fees required
by the city.
• After fee is paid to City, the easement documents will be sent to the person requesting the
easement to obtain all necessary signatures (other than City’s).
• Return all signed documents to the city for filing with the county.
• City will send a copy of the filed easement to the person requesting the easement and the
easement grantor, if needed.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 1 – General Requirements May 2012 Page 1-9
D. Abandonment of Right of Way and Easements - Right of way and easements that have not been
abandoned by plat may be abandoned by separate instrument. Signatures are required from all
the public utility companies, including franchise utilities and the adjacent affected property
owners indicating either agreement or disagreement to the proposed abandonment. Right of way
and easements proposed to be abandoned that do not contain improvements may be processed
administratively. If improvements are present, the abandonment request will be forwarded to
City Council for approval. Abandonments opposed by the affected property owners will also be
forwarded to City Council for approval. Right of way and easements granted to entities other
than the City shall be abandoned by that entity.
E. The following describes the process for abandoning right of way or easements:
• All property owners abutting the proposed abandonment shall be notified by the applicant by
certified letter. A written response from each abutting property owner must be received by
the city prior to staff review.
• All public utilities including franchise utilities must consent to the abandonment.
• The applicant shall provide a description as to how the city originally acquired the right of
way or easement (i.e., by plat, by separate instrument, etc.).
• For right of way, the applicant shall provide a certified appraisal stating the value. In
addition, the applicant shall provide an explanation that identifies why the proposed use of
the right of way will benefit the community under private ownership, versus retention of the
property as public right of way.
• For easements, the applicant shall describe why the easement is no longer needed.
F. The right of way/easement abandonment application shall be submitted along with the supporting
documentation to the Engineering Services Department for coordination and processing. The
application form is available from the Engineering Department or the City’s website.
G. Easement Use Agreements - The city may allow permitting of certain improvements within
easements with the execution of an Easement Use Agreement, which is in addition to a building
permit. The agreement states that the City is not responsible for the maintenance or
reconstruction of any improvements located in the easement or right of way and that the owner
must remove the improvement at the request of the City. Forms and instructions are available
from Development Services, or on the City’s website. <LINK>
H. The Easement Use Agreement is processed by Development Services with concurrence and
review by Engineering Services. The following items will require an Easement Use Agreement:
• Driveways/flatwork
• Brick, stone fences
• Retaining walls (less than 3 feet that support a structure, or greater than 3 feet)
• Private storm systems/area drains
• Swimming pools decks
• Wood decks, gazebos and patios (covered/uncovered)
• Buildings and other permanent improvements
Items listed below may be allowed without the execution of an Easement Use Agreement and
with approval from the Director of Engineering Services:
• Paving or flatwork
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 1 – General Requirements May 2012 Page 1-10
• Wooden or chain-link fences (where allowed)
• Retaining walls less than three feet in height that do not support a structure or infringe on the
required visibility triangles.
1.12 Fees
A listing of the required fees is available on request from Development Services.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-1
SECTION 2 - THOROUGHFARE DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-2
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements
2.01 General
A. The arrangement, character, extent, width, alignment, and location of all streets, public ways,
alleys, and driveways shall be in conformity with the City’s Thoroughfare Plan and
Comprehensive Plan and should be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets,
alleys and driveways, topographical and environmental features, scenic views, and the land uses
proposed to be served by such streets.
B. All thoroughfare designs shall meet the guidelines in AASHTO’s current A Policy on Geometric
Design of Highways and Streets.
2.02 Street Design
A. Thoroughfare Definitions – The City recognizes five basic classifications of public roadways that
include highways, major thoroughfares, minor thoroughfares, collectors, and local streets as
identified in the transportation element of the Comprehensive Plan. Each class provides a certain
degree of continuity, capacity, and accessibility to adjacent land uses. While differentiated by
function, there is also a variance in geometric design. Table 2.1 summarizes the general design
criteria of roadways within the City. The typical cross sections are depicted in Figure 2.1.
1. Major Thoroughfares – Six-lane divided roadways defined herein as Type A thoroughfares.
Type A thoroughfares are typically initially constructed as four-lane divided roadways with a
wider median and then widened to six lanes at a later date. Frontage roads are also
considered major thoroughfares.
2. Minor Thoroughfares – Four-lane divided roadways defined herein as Type B thoroughfares.
3. Collectors – Commercial collectors provide access from a Type A or B thoroughfare to nonresidential
properties and are defined herein as Type C thoroughfares. Residential collectors
connect to a Type A or B thoroughfare, extend more than six hundred feet (600’) into a
residential neighborhood, and have no homes fronting on them. Residential collectors can be
built with the cross section of a Type D, F, or G thoroughfare.
4. Local Streets – Residential streets with homes fronting on them are defined herein as Type D,
E, F, and G thoroughfares, each with different design characteristics depending on whether
the homes are front entry or alley served and whether or not the street is adjacent to a school
or park.
5. Private Streets – Private streets shall be designed and constructed to the same standards as
public streets. Any gated entrances shall also meet the requirements of Section 2.05.K.
6. Public Ways – Public ways shall be designed and constructed to the same standards as public
streets and shall meet the design criteria of a commercial collector (Type C thoroughfare)
unless otherwise allowed under Subsection a below. Public ways shall be privately
maintained, shall be dedicated to public use, and shall not be gated.
a. A public way can be reduced to the design criteria of a Type F thoroughfare if the owner
agrees to prohibit parking on the public way and to actively enforce such prohibition.
The parking prohibition shall be recorded on the plat and shall be clearly posted along the
public way.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-3
B. Roadway Geometrics – Geometrics of City streets shall be defined as the geometry of the
pavement and curb areas that govern the movement of traffic within the confines of the right-ofway
(ROW). Included in the geometrics are pavement width, horizontal curvature, width of
traffic lanes, median nose radii, curb radii at street intersections, pavement cross-slope, crown
height, pavement thickness, and geometric shapes of islands separating traffic movements and
other features.
1. Design Speed – The design speed is a primary factor in the horizontal and vertical alignment
of roadways. Design features such as curvature, super-elevation, turning movement radii,
and sight distance affects roadway lane width, pavement width, pavement cross-slope,
pavement crown, and clearances. Refer to Table 2.1.
2. Grades – Roadway grades shall be a minimum of eight-tenths percent (0.8%) in order to
insure proper flow of surface drainage toward inlets and a maximum of six percent (6%).
Steeper grades may be permitted on local residential streets and where required by
topographical and/or natural features, as approved by the Director of Engineering Services.
3. Roadway Centerline
a. Roadways shall be placed in the center of the ROW. The centerline of curves shall be
tangent to the centerline of street at each end of curve.
b. If offset, roadway centerlines for Type C, D, E, F, and G thoroughfares shall be offset a
minimum of one hundred and twenty five feet (125’). If offset, Type A and B
thoroughfares shall be offset to meet the median requirements in Section 2.03.B.
4. Cross-Slope/Crown Height – Type A and B thoroughfares shall have a two-percent (2%)
cross-slope. The cross-slope can vary where there is a transition into or out of a maximum
two percent (2%) superelevation. Type C and D thoroughfares shall have six-inch (6”)
parabolic crowns, Type E thoroughfares a four-inch (4”) parabolic crown, and Type F and G
thoroughfares a five-inch (5”) parabolic crown
5. Pavement Thickness and Reinforcement – See Section 3 of the Engineering Standards for
subgrade and pavement design requirements.
6. Transitions – A concrete transition shall be constructed where four (4) lanes of a thoroughfare
connect to a two (2) lane thoroughfare. The transition occurs only in the direction in which
traffic needs to be shifted laterally to join the thoroughfare with a different cross section.
a. Transitions from a four (4) lane to a two (2) lane thoroughfare shall be a minimum of
sixteen feet (16’) wide, a minimum of three hundred feet (300’) long, and meet
AASHTO’s current minimum design requirements based on a design speed of 25 mph.
b. A transition from a two (2) lane to a four (4) lane thoroughfare that occurs less than one
thousand feet (1,000’) from a traffic signal, or from an intersecting Type A or B
thoroughfare, shall be a two (2) lane transition twenty-four feet (24’) wide, a minimum of
three hundred feet (300’) long, and meet AASHTO’s current minimum design
requirements based on a design speed of 25 mph.
c. A transition from a two (2) lane thoroughfare to a four (4) lane thoroughfare that occurs
more than one thousand feet (1,000’) from a traffic signal, and from an intersecting Type
A or B thoroughfare, shall be a one (1) lane transition sixteen feet (16’) wide, a minimum
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-4
of three hundred feet (300’) long, and meet AASHTO’s current minimum design
requirements based on a design speed of 25 mph.
7. Dead-End Streets/Cul-de-Sacs/Stub Streets
a. All dead-end streets shall have a turn-around unless otherwise allowed in Subsection d
below. Turn-arounds at the end of dead-end streets (cul-de-sacs) shall have a circular
driving surface that has a minimum radius of fifty feet (50’) and a street right-of-way that
has a minimum radius of sixty feet (60’).
b. The maximum length of a dead-end street with a turn-around (cul-de-sac) shall be six
hundred feet (600’), measured from the right-of-way line of the intersecting street to the
center point of the turn-around, except in conditions of unusual topography.
c. If any residential lot fronts onto the dead-end portion of a street that will be extended in
the future, a temporary turn-around that meets the standards described above shall be
constructed at the end of the dead-end street within a temporary street easement. The
following note shall be placed on the plat: “Cross-hatched area is temporary street
easement for turn-around until street is extended (give direction) with future development
of abutting property”.
d. A stub street is an undivided dead-end street that will be extended in the future that does
not have a turn-around, which is only allowed under the following conditions: No
residential lots shall front onto a stub street. Non-residential lots adjacent to a stub street
shall have access to another street. If the length of a residential stub street exceeds the
depth of the adjacent residential lots, it shall be temporarily blocked at the rear edge of
the lots (or alley) with barrel-mounted barricade. If a non-residential stub street extends
more than one hundred feet (100’) beyond the last driveway on the street, it shall be
temporarily blocked at the last driveway with barrel-mounted barricade.
e. A stub street shall have a permanent Type III barricade installed at its terminus. A
residential stub street shall also have a 24”x30” sign prominently posted at its terminus
with black letters on a white background that state, “NOTICE – This street will be
extended as part of a future development.” The installation and cost of these barricades
and signs shall be the responsibility of the developer.
C. Minimum Horizontal Design Radius
1. The minimum centerline radius is a function of design speed, superelevation, and the vehicle
side friction factor. Side friction is the force that keeps a vehicle from sliding off of the
roadway.
2. The minimum horizontal radii are shown in Table 2.2 and are in accordance with the
guidelines in AASHTO’s 2011 edition of A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and
Streets.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-5
TABLE 2.1: General Roadway Design Criteria
Criteria
Thoroughfare Class
Major
Type A
Minor
Type B
Commercial
Collector
Type C
Local
Type D
Local
Type E
Local
Type F
Local
Type G
Right-of-Way
(ROW) 120’(1) 90’(2) 60’ 60’ 50’ 60’ 60’
Pavement Width
(face to face)
36’ in each
direction
24’ in each
direction 36’ 36’ 26’ 30’ 26’
Traffic Lanes 6 4 2 2 2 2 2
Left Turn-lane
Width 2 @ 10’ 1 @ 11’ N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A.
Right Turn-lane
Width 11’ 11’ N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A.
Median Width 24’ 18’ N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A.
Parkway Width 12’ 12’ 12’ 12’ 12’ 15’ 17’
Design Speed, V
(MPH) 45 45 30 30 25 25 25
Minimum Grade 0.8% 0.8% 0.8% 0.8% 0.8% 0.8% 0.8%
Maximum Grade 6% 6% 6% 6% 6% 6% 6%
Min. Horizontal
Radii See Table 2.2
Min. Tangent
Between Curves 100’ 100’ 100’ 100’ N.A. N.A. N.A.
Min Length of
Vertical Curve See Table 2.3 and Table 2.4
Stopping Sight
Distance 425’ 360’ 200’ 200’ 155’ 155’ 155’
Parking Prohibited Prohibited Prohibited Allowed Allowed Allowed Allowed
Volume Range
(VPD) 36-45,000 20-28,000 12-18,000 6-12,000 N.A. N.A. N.A.
(1) 140’ or 160’ ROW at intersections (See Figures 2.2 and 2.4)
(2) 110’ or 120’ ROW at intersections (See Figures 2.3 and 2.5)
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-6
FIGURE 2.1: Typical Cross Sections R. O. W.
THRU
THRU THRU THRU
107'
140'
THRU
24' MEDIAN
10' LEFT
TURN
6' SIDEWALK
6' SIDEWALK
47'
12'
R. O. W.
10' LEFT
TURN
22'
PKWY.
12'
RIGHT
TURN
THRU
12'
11'
PKWY.
12' 12' 12' 11'
36'
2' SDWLK
Major Thoroughfare Type A (Intersection)
ESMT.
2' SDWLK
ESMT.
PKWY.
12'
R. O. W.
6' SIDEWALK
12'
THRU
12' 12'
THRU THRU
36' 24' MEDIAN
THRU THRU THRU
12' 12' 12'
36'
120'
96'
2' SDWLK 2' SDWLK
PKWY.
12'
R. O. W.
6' SIDEWALK
Major Thoroughfare Type A (Midblock)
ESMT. ESMT.
THRU
THRU
12'
THRU
24'
12'
77'
110'
THRU
18' MEDIAN
12' 12'
35'
11' LEFT
TURN
TURN
RIGHT
2' SDWLK
PKWY.
11'
R. O. W.
6' SIDEWALK
6' SIDEWALK
2' SDWLK
R. O. W.
PKWY.
22'
11'
Minor Thoroughfare Type B (Intersection)
90'
THRU
THRU THRU
PKWY. 24'
12'
12'
18' MEDIAN
12'
66'
THRU
24' PKWY.
12' 12'
12'
R. O. W.
2' SDWLK
6' SIDEWALK
2' SDWLK
6' SIDEWALK
R. O. W.
Minor Thoroughfare Type B (Midblock)
ESMT. ESMT.
ESMT. ESMT.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-7
FIGURE 2.1 (Cont.): Typical Cross Sections
THRU
125'
160'
THRU
10' LEFT
TURN
6' SIDEWALK
46'
11'
R. O. W.
10' LEFT
TURN 12'
RIGHT
TURN
THRU
12'
12'
PKWY.
11'
Major Thoroughfare Type A (At Frontage Road)
THRU THRU THRU
36'
12' 12' 12'
23'
PKWY.
6' SIDEWALK
R. O. W.
2' SDWLK
ESMT.
2' SDWLK
ESMT.
10' LEFT
TURN
10' LEFT
TURN
Major Thoroughfare Type A
(Between Frontage Roads)
10' LEFT
TURN
10' LEFT
TURN
4' MEDIAN
THRU
120'
THRU
6' SIDEWALK
11'
R. O. W.
11' LEFT
TURN 12'
RIGHT
TURN
12'
PKWY.
11'
Minor Thoroughfare Type B (At Frontage Road)
THRU THRU
83'
12' 12'
23'
PKWY.
6' SIDEWALK
14' MEDIAN
R. O. W.
11' LEFT
TURN
Minor Thoroughfare Type B
(Between Frontage Roads)
11' LEFT
TURN
34'
4' MEDIAN
2' SDWLK
2' SDWLK ESMT.
ESMT.
23' MEDIAN
THRU THRU THRU
12' 12' 11'
55'
THRU THRU
11' 12'
THRU
12'
55'
THRU THRU
12' 11'
THRU THRU
11' 12'
34'
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-8
FIGURE 2.1 (Cont.): Typical Cross Sections
50'
R. O. W.
13'
5' SIDEWALK
THRU
12'
PKWY.
R. O. W.
13'
5' SIDEWALK
THRU
12'
26' PKWY.
R. O. W.
5' SIDEWALK
THRU
18'
12'
PKWY.
R. O. W.
5' SIDEWALK
THRU
18'
60'
36'
12'
PKWY.
85'
13' MEDIAN
61'
R. O. W.
12'
5' SIDEWALK
PKWY.
2'
THRU
24'
R. O. W.
12'
5' SIDEWALK
THRU
24'
2'
PKWY.
2' 2' 2' 2'
5' SIDEWALK 5' SIDEWALK
R. O. W.
17' 17'
R. O. W.
26'
6'
PKWY.
THRU
13'
THRU
13'
PKWY.
60'
Commercial Collector Type C
and
Local Type D
Local Type E
Local Type G - Rear Entry
Divided Residential Subdivision Entrance
2' SDWLK
5' SIDEWALK 5' SIDEWALK
R. O. W.
15' 15'
R. O. W.
30'
5.5'
PKWY.
THRU
15'
THRU
15'
PKWY.
60'
5.5'
2' SDWLK
Local Type F - Front Entry
ESMT. ESMT.
2' SDWLK
ESMT.
2' SDWLK
ESMT.
6'
Residential Collector
Use the cross-section of Type D, F, or G
Refer to the Zoning Ordinance for street tree spacing, size, and species. Refer to the Zoning Ordinance for street tree spacing, size, and species.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-9
TABLE 2.2: Minimum Horizontal Centerline Radius
Design Speed,
V (MPH)
Friction Factor,
F
Superelevation,
e (ft/ft)
Radius, R (ft)
(Rounded for Design)
25 0.23 -0.02 250(1)
30 0.20 -0.02 350
35 0.18 -0.02 525
40 0.16 -0.02 775
45 0.15 -0.02 1100
50 0.14 -0.02 1400
(1) May be reduced to two hundred feet (200’) radius at mid-block locations provided that it is shown that the
general public safety is not compromised (e.g., stopping sight distance). A curve, with a radius less than two
hundred fifty feet (250’) must be a minimum of three hundred feet (300’) from a street or alley intersection.
D. Minimum Vertical Alignment
1. Vertical curves are utilized in roadway design to affect gradual change between tangent
grades and will result in a design which is safe, comfortable in operation, pleasing in
appearance and adequate for drainage. Vertical curve alignment shall also provide Stopping
Sight Distance (SSD) in all cases. SSD is a function of design speed, perception-reaction
time, and deceleration rate. The perception-reaction time is assumed to be 2.5 seconds and is
in accordance with the guidelines in AASHTO’s 2011 edition of A Policy on Geometric
Design of Highways and Streets. The equation for SSD appears below:
a
SSD Vt V
2
=1.47 +1.075
SSD = stopping Sight Distance (ft)
t = brake reaction time (2.5 sec.);
V = vehicle design speed (MPH); and
a = deceleration rate, (11.2 ft/s2)
2. To determine the minimum acceptable length of Crest and Sag curves shown in Tables 2.3
and 2.4, it is assumed that approach grades are between -3% and 3% in the SSD calculation.
The SSD for grades steeper than -3 % or 3% shall be in accordance with the guidelines in
AASHTO’s current A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets. Tables 2.3 and
2.4 also show values of K. K is defined as the rate of vertical curvature and is equivalent to
the horizontal distance in feet required to make a one percent (1%) change in grade. The
values of A are equivalent to the algebraic difference in grade between the two grades that are
being joined together by the vertical curve.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-10
TABLE 2.3: Minimum Acceptable Crest Curve Given Speed and Difference in Grade of Road
Design
Speed, V
(MPH)
SSD
(ft) K
Length of Vertical Curve (L=KA)
A=1.6 A=2 A=3 A=4 A=5 A=6 A=7 A=8 A=9 A=10
25 155 12 50 50 50 50 60 80 90 100 110 120
30 200 19 50 50 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 190
35 250 29 50 60 90 120 150 180 210 240 270 290
40 305 44 70 90 140 180 220 270 310 360 400 440
45 360 61 100 130 190 250 310 370 430 490 550 610
50 425 84 140 170 260 340 420 510 590 680 760 840
TABLE 2.4: Minimum Acceptable Sag Curve Given Speed and Difference in Grade of Road
Design
Speed,
V
(MPH)
SSD
(ft) K
Length of Vertical Curve (L=KA)
A=1.6 A=2 A=3 A=4 A=5 A=6 A=7 A=8 A=9 A=10
25 155 26 50 60 80 110 130 160 190 210 240 260
30 200 37 60 80 120 150 190 230 260 300 340 370
35 250 49 80 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 490
40 305 64 110 140 200 260 320 390 450 520 580 640
45 360 79 130 160 240 320 400 480 560 640 720 790
50 425 96 160 200 290 390 480 580 680 770 870 960
E. Standard Intersection Layout
1. Street intersections shall intersect at ninety degree (90º) angles. Intersection approaches for
Type A and B thoroughfares shall remain perpendicular for a minimum distance equal to the
corresponding design speed Stopping Sight Distance (SSD) identified in Table 2.1. For
residential collector and/or local street intersections, up to a five degree (5º) tolerance is
allowable.
2. When the classification of a thoroughfare changes as it crosses an intersecting street, the
design of both thoroughfare approaches shall maintain the characteristics of the higher class
thoroughfare for a minimum distance specified by the Director of Engineering Services.
3. The through lane(s) on one approach shall align with the receiving lane(s) on the other side of
the intersection. If pre-existing physical encroachments make an offset necessary, a through
lane can be offset no more than six feet (6’) from its receiving lane when crossing a Type B
or smaller thoroughfare and offset no more than eight feet (8’) when crossing a Type A
thoroughfare. These requirements apply to both public street and private driveway
approaches to an intersection.
4. The curb radii shall be a minimum of twenty feet (20’) where Type D, E, F, and G
thoroughfares intersect with Type D, E, F, and G thoroughfares. The curb radii shall be a
minimum of forty feet (40’) where Type A, B, and C thoroughfares intersect with Type A and
B thoroughfares. The curb radii at all other intersecting streets shall be a minimum of thirty
feet (30’). Larger curb radii may be required to accommodate fire trucks and/or commercial
trucks.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-11
5. Type A-A, A-B, and B-B intersections shall maintain a maximum slope of two percent (2%)
a minimum distance of two hundred feet (200’) upstream and downstream of the intersection.
6. Roadway connections to a Type A or B thoroughfare shall maintain a maximum slope of two
percent (2%) a minimum distance of one hundred feet (100’) upstream and downstream of
the intersection.
7. A separate grading plan shall be provided for Type A-A, A-B, and B-B intersections.
Grading plans shall account for future extensions of Type A and Type B thoroughfares for a
minimum distance of six hundred feet (600’) beyond the curb return of the intersection in all
directions.
8. At four-way intersections of parabolic streets, the reduction of the crown height shall occur
on the thoroughfare with the through gutter.
a. For Type C and D thoroughfares, the crown height reduction from six inches (6”) to three
inches (3”) shall occur through the intersection and transition from the curb return to a
point fifty feet (50’) past the curb return.
b. For Type E thoroughfares, the crown height reduction from four inches (4”) to two inches
(2”) shall occur through the intersection and transition from curb return to a point thirty
feet (30’) past the curb return.
c. For Type F and G thoroughfares, the crown height reduction from five inches (5”) to
three inches (3”) shall occur through the intersection and transition from curb return to a
point thirty feet (30’) past the curb return.
9. A minimum of nine and a half feet (9.5’) of parkway shall be maintained from the back of the
curb along the curb’s radius.
10. ROW width for a Type A thoroughfare that intersects a Type A or Type B thoroughfare shall
be one hundred forty feet (140’) for a distance of two hundred feet (200’) and then taper at a
15:1 ratio to the standard ROW width. See Figure 2.2.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-12
200' 150' with
140' ROW 120' ROW
a 15:1 Taper
11' Pkwy
22' Pkwy
200' 150' with
12' Pkwy
12' Pkwy
a 15:1 Taper
Type A Thoroughfare
Type A or B Thoroughfare
FIGURE 2.2: Type A Thoroughfare Intersection Detail
11. ROW width for a Type B thoroughfare that intersects a Type A or Type B thoroughfare shall
be one hundred ten feet (110’) for a distance of one hundred fifty feet (150’) and then taper at
a 15:1 ratio to the standard ROW width to allow build-out of the intersection. See Figure 2.3.
150' 150' with
110' ROW 90' ROW
a 15:1 Taper
11' Pkwy
22' Pkwy
150' 150' with
12' Pkwy
12' Pkwy
a 15:1 Taper
Type B Thoroughfare
Type A or B Thoroughfare
FIGURE 2.3: Type B Thoroughfare Intersection Detail
12. The ROW width for a Type A thoroughfare that intersects with a pair of highway frontage
roads shall be one hundred sixty feet (160’) for a distance of three hundred feet (300’) and
then taper at a 15:1 ratio to the standard ROW width to allow build-out of the intersection.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-13
The ROW width for a Type B thoroughfare that intersects with a pair of highway frontage
roads shall be one hundred twenty feet (120’) for a distance of three hundred feet (300’) and
then taper at a 15:1 ratio to the standard ROW width to allow build-out of the intersection.
See Figures 2.4 and 2.5.
FIGURE 2.4: Type A Thoroughfare Intersection with Frontage Road
FIGURE 2.5: Type B Thoroughfare Intersection with Frontage Road
160' ROW
120' ROW
12' Pkwy
23' Pkwy
300' 300' with
a 15:1 Taper
12' Pkwy
12' Pkwy
Type A Thoroughfare
Frontage Road
300' 300' with
a 15:1 Taper
Extended Left-Turn Lane
Extended Left-Turn Lane
300'
14' Pkwy
23' Pkwy
300' 225' with
a 15:1 Taper
12' Pkwy
12' Pkwy
Type B Thoroughfare
Frontage Road
120' ROW
90' ROW
225' with
a 15:1 Taper
Extended Left-Turn Lane
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-14
F. Roundabouts
1. Roundabouts may be considered for the intersection of Type B, C, D, E, F, or G
thoroughfares with Type C, D, E, F, or G thoroughfares. Roundabouts shall not be installed
at a Type A-A, A-B, or B-B intersection without a detailed traffic simulation and cost-benefit
analysis approved by the Director of Engineering Services. Roundabouts shall not be
installed along a six-lane Type A thoroughfare.
2. Roundabouts on private property that connect to a private street or to a fire lane shall be
designed to the standards in these design requirements.
3. Roundabouts shall be designed to accommodate a City fire truck making all possible entry
and exit movements. A fire truck shall be able to make the “through” movement without
traveling on a truck apron.
4. Roundabouts shall include the typical features of a modern roundabout shown in Figure 2.6
and described in these design requirements.
5. The curb surrounding the central island shall be six inch (6”) vertical curb if a truck apron is
provided and six inch (6”) mountable curb if no truck apron is provided. The curb
surrounding a truck apron shall be three inch (3”) mountable curb. The curb surrounding all
faces of each splitter island shall be four inch (4”) mountable curb.
6. The inscribed circle radius shall be a minimum of fifty five feet (55’) and a maximum of
eighty feet (80’) for a single lane roundabout, and a minimum of seventy-five feet (75’) and a
maximum of a hundred feet (100’) for a two-lane roundabout.
7. The circulatory roadway shall have a minimum width of sixteen feet (16’), face-to-face. The
circulatory roadway shall be at least as wide as the maximum entry width at the roundabout.
If the circulatory roadway is less than twenty nine feet (29’) wide, face-to-face, a truck apron
shall be provided. The combined width of the circulatory roadway and the truck apron shall
be a minimum of twenty nine feet (29’). Truck aprons shall provide a solid surface of
concrete pavers that are a contrasting color compared to the pavement of the circulatory
roadway and shall not give the appearance of being a sidewalk.
8. Single lane entries and exits shall be a minimum of sixteen feet (16’) wide, face to face.
Two-lane entries and exits shall be a minimum of twenty four feet (24’) wide, face to face.
9. Splitter islands shall provide a solid surface of concrete pavers unless the entry and exit on
the same leg of the roundabout are both at least twenty four feet (24’) wide, face-to-face. The
pavers shall be a contrasting color compared to the street pavement and no signs shall be
installed in the splitter island. If pavers are not required, the splitter island can contain
landscaping provided it does not interfere with the necessary sight distance.
10. Crosswalks shall pass through or in advance of each splitter island.
11. All streets, fire lanes, and approved driveways shall intersect radially with a roundabout.
Residential driveways shall not intersect with a roundabout.
12. Landscaping and/or monuments within the central island are encouraged, but shall be limited
so that the minimum sight distances described in FHWA’s Roundabouts: An Informational
Guide are provided at the roundabout. For vehicles approaching the roundabout, this includes
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-15
the approach stopping sight distance to the crosswalk or the yield line, the stopping sight
distance to the crosswalk on the next exit, and the intersection sight distance to circulating
vehicles and vehicles entering at the immediate upstream entry. For circulating vehicles, this
includes the stopping sight distance on the circulatory roadway.
13. Parking is prohibited within a roundabout.
14. On any approach to a roundabout, driveways, alley connections, and on-street parking shall
not be permitted between the crosswalk and the yield line nor along any portion of street that
contains a splitter island.
15. The ROW for a roundabout shall extend a minimum of twelve feet (12’) beyond the back of
its outer curb. The ROW for any street entering the roundabout will flare out as the street
flares so that a minimum of twelve feet (12’) is provided beyond the back of curb on each
side of the street.
16. The roundabout entries and exits and the pavement contained within the inscribed circle
radius shall be constructed on a uniform plane of the same grade, which shall not exceed two
percent (2%). Roadway approaches to the roundabout shall have a maximum slope of two
percent (2%) for a distance of at least two hundred feet (200’) for Type B thoroughfares and
at least one hundred feet (100’) for Type C, D, E, F, and G thoroughfares.
17. Roundabouts shall be illuminated by street lights as described in FHWA’s Roundabouts: An
Informational Guide.
FIGURE 2.6: Typical Roundabout
Pavers
Entry width
Exit width
Yield Line
Circulatory
Roadway
Width
Truck Apron
(if necessary)
Inscribed
Circle
Radius
Central island radius
Mountable curb
Splitter island
(mountable curb)
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-16
G. Residential Frontage
1. Residential lots shall not front onto a Type A, B, or C thoroughfare or a residential collector
unless parallel access roads are provided. The minimum distance between adjacent curbs of
the thoroughfare and the access road shall be twenty feet (20’). Access road ROW shall be in
addition to the thoroughfare ROW and access roads shall not connect to the adjacent
thoroughfare.
2. Residential lots shall not front onto a Type D, E, F, or G thoroughfare within one hundred
feet (100’) of the ROW line of the nearest Type A or B thoroughfare.
3. Residential lots shall not front onto any portion of a Type D, E, F, or G thoroughfare that is
part of a residential collector, which is a street that connects to a Type A or B thoroughfare
and extends into a neighborhood for more than six hundred feet (600’) without changing
direction (see Section 2.02.I.5).
4. Residential lots shall not front onto a roundabout. Residential lots adjacent to roundabouts
shall be oriented so that their houses do not face the roundabout and their driveways do not
intersect with the roundabout or along any section of street with a splitter island.
H. Partial Streets
1. Longitudinal partial dedications of Type A and B thoroughfares shall be permitted when only
one side of a future thoroughfare is being developed. In such a case, one-half of the total
right-of-way shall be dedicated and a minimum of twenty four feet (24’) of pavement, faceto-
face, shall be constructed.
2. Longitudinal partial dedications of Type C, D, E, F, or G thoroughfares shall be prohibited,
except when essential to the reasonable development of a property in conforming with the
requirements of the Subdivision Ordinance, and where the Planning & Zoning Commission
finds that it will be practical to require the dedication of the other portion of the street when
the adjoining property is developed. Whenever a partial street exists along a common
property line, the other portion of the street shall be dedicated when the adjoining property is
subdivided or developed. Where a partial street is being dedicated along a common property
line and the ultimate planned ROW width is sixty feet (60’), the first ROW dedication will be
thirty-five feet (35’).
a. The developer shall construct a minimum of twenty four feet (24’) of pavement, face-toface,
for all Type C or D thoroughfares that are partial streets at the time of development.
b. The developer shall construct the full width of pavement face-to-face for all Type E, F, or
G thoroughfares that are partial street dedications at the time of development.
I. Street Lengths
1. Type A, B, and C thoroughfares have no street length restrictions. Residential streets (Type
D, E, F, and G thoroughfares in a single-family, duplex, or townhome neighborhood) shall
have street length restrictions to discourage speeding and cut-through traffic.
2. A residential street that intersects with a Type A or Type B thoroughfare and has residential
lots fronting any portion of the street shall not exceed a maximum length of six hundred feet
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-17
(600’) measured from the Type A or Type B thoroughfare ROW line. Such an entrance street
shall be a minimum of thirty feet (30’) wide, face to face, or be divided according to Section
2.03.B.7. On each side of the entrance street, at least one cross street shall have a minimum
width of thirty feet (30’), face to face, between the entrance street and the first intersection
that provides access deeper into the subdivision. See Figure 2.7 for an example.
FIGURE 2.7: Example of 30’ Entrance Street Requirements
3. Residential streets that do not intersect with a Type A or Type B thoroughfare shall not
exceed one thousand two hundred feet (1,200’) in length before changing direction. A
change in direction occurs when one of the following elements is used:
a. A horizontal curve radius of three hundred fifty feet (350’) for a Type D thoroughfare or
of two hundred fifty feet (250’) for a Type E, F, or G thoroughfare that changes the
course of the street between ninety (90°) and one hundred twenty degrees (120°) (see
Figure 2.8). A tangent that is a minimum of one hundred feet (100’) long shall be
provided between reverse curves.
b. A street offset using two elbow intersections, each between ninety (90°) and one hundred
twenty degrees (120°). The minimum distance between reverse elbows shall be one
hundred fifty feet (150’). See Figure 2.9.
Type A or B Thoroughfare
30' Street
30' Street
30' Street
Entrance Street
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-18
FIGURE 2.8: Change in Street Direction: Curve
FIGURE 2.9: Change in Street Direction: Offset
4. Residential streets that do not intersect with a Type A or B thoroughfare may extend to a
length of one thousand eight hundred feet (1,800’) without a change in direction when one of
the following is provided:
a. A zipper street with a twenty two foot (22’) wide travel section with parking cut-outs that
are nine feet (9’) wide and forty-four feet (44’) to eighty-eight feet (88’) long and a tree
island between the parking cut-outs that is a minimum of thirty feet (30’) long and nine
feet (9’) wide. Parking cut-outs shall be offset from parking cut-outs on the opposite side
of the street. A tree shall be planted in each tree island per the requirements in the
Zoning Ordinance. Front entry homes are prohibited on this type of street. See
Figure 2.10.
250' RADIUS - TYPE E, F, G
350' RADIUS - TYPE D
1200' STRAIGHT STREET
BLOCK BLOCK
90 - 120°
90 - 120°
150' MIN
1200' STRAIGHT STREET
125' MIN
"T" OR
OFF-SET
R.O.W.
R.O.W.
BLOCK BLOCK
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-19
b. A Type G residential street with street trees, block lengths that do not exceed seven
hundred feet (700’), and at least one four-leg intersection. See Figure 2.11.
c. A roundabout installed at one or more of the intersections along the street, not counting a
roundabout installed at the start or end point of the street.
5. A residential collector shall have no street length restriction provided that no residential lots
front onto any part of the collector and the collector shall not have any straight sections
exceeding one thousand feet (1,000’). A residential collector is a street that connects to a
Type A or B thoroughfare and extends into a neighborhood for more than six hundred feet
(600’) without changing direction. A residential collector shall be constructed with the cross
section of a Type D, F, or G thoroughfare.
FIGURE 2.10: Maximum Street Length: Zipper Street
FIGURE 2.11: Maximum Street Length: Short Blocks, Trees and a Four-Leg Intersection
R.O.W.
R.O.W.
5' SIDEWALK PLACED
ON ROW LINE
WITH 2' SIDEWALK
EASEMENT.
44' MIN - 88' MAX
MUST BE IN 22'
INCREMENTS
3' R. (MIN) 30'
MIN
9' PARKING
11' LANE
11' LANE
9' PARKING
22'
TYP
30'
MIN
30'
MIN
30'
MIN
1800' MAXIMUM STREET LENGTH
WITH PARKING CUTOUTS
REAR ENTRY HOMES ONLY
60' ROW
PROVIDE A TREE IN THE
PARKWAY ON EVERY LOT
1800' STRAIGHT STREET
125'
MIN
R.O.W.
R.O.W.
"T" OR
OFF-SET
700' BLOCK MAX
27' STREET
PROVIDE AT LEAST ONE
FOUR-LEG INTERSECTION
125'
MIN
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-20
J. Block Requirements
1. Block Length – Blocks shall not exceed one thousand two hundred feet (1,200’) in length,
measured from street ROW line to street ROW line. In the case of non-rectangular blocks,
each side of the block with lots fronting it shall not exceed one thousand two hundred feet
(1,200’), measured between the vertices formed by the extension of ROW lines at each corner
of the block. Blocks shall be further restricted so that they shall contain no more than twenty
(20) lots on one side. Blocks with a continuous series of lots longer than one thousand two
hundred feet (1,200’), measured along one or more sides, may be required to be bisected by a
pedestrian easement and a sidewalk (see Section 2.06.B.14).
2. Block Width – Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two (2) tiers of lots and shall have a
block width no less than two hundred feet (200’), except when only one tier of lots is possible
due to the size of the property or the need to back up to a Type A or B thoroughfare.
2.03 Median, Left-Turn Lane, Right-Turn Lane, Deceleration Lane, and Island Design
A. Required Median Openings and Left-Turn Lanes
1. Median openings on divided thoroughfares shall be required at all street intersections.
Median openings may be constructed to serve non-residential drives provided that the
minimum spacing requirements herein are met. Left-turn lanes are required for each street or
driveway that connects to a median opening. The design of median openings and left-turn
lanes shall accommodate potential future left-turn lanes that might serve undeveloped land.
2. All non-residential lots on a divided thoroughfare shall have direct or indirect access to a
median opening. Indirect access shall be provided through a series of fire lane and access
easements.
3. Multi-family developments on a divided thoroughfare shall have direct access to a median
opening.
4. The City can modify, relocate, or remove any existing or planned median opening to facilitate
traffic flow and/or preserve the health, safety and welfare of the Public, as reasonably
determined by the Director of Engineering Services utilizing recognized industry standards as
they exist, may be amended, or in the future arising.
B. Minimum Left-Turn Storage, Taper Length, and Median Opening Width, Location, and Spacing
Requirements
1. Left-Turn Lane Storage
a. All single left-turn lanes constructed on divided thoroughfares of ultimate cross section
width shall be a minimum of eleven feet (11’) wide. Where double left-turn lanes are
provided, each left-turn lane shall be a minimum of ten feet (10’) wide.
b. All left-turn lanes constructed as future through lanes on divided thoroughfares shall be
twelve feet (12’) wide for the entire storage and taper length requirements as listed in
Table 2.5.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-21
c. Minimum storage requirements are listed in Table 2.5. Storage requirements may be
increased by the City based upon actual and projected traffic demands of the properties
that will be served by the left-turn lane.
d. Left-turn lanes will be delineated by using the City’s current Pavement Markings and
Markers standard details.
e. Concrete pavers shall be required in the median where the median width is six feet (6’) or
less, back of curb to back of curb. If the median width is greater than six feet (6’), then
concrete pavers shall be required for a minimum distance of ten feet (10’) from the
median nose. See Figure 2.12.
2. Taper Length – The taper specifications for left-turn lane entrance areas are specified in
Table 2.5. The variables used for the specifications are shown in Figure 2.12.
TABLE 2.5: Minimum Left-Turn Lane Design Requirements
Type of Thoroughfare
On
Type of
Thoroughfare
At
Turn
Lane
Width(s)
(ft)
Length of
Full-Width
Storage(ft)
Taper Specifications
Length(ft) R1(ft) R2(ft)
A A, B 10(1)(4) 150,250(2) 200 505 505
B A, B 11 150 100 250 250
A, B C, Residential
Collector 11(4) 150 100 250 250
A, B D, E, F, G 11(4) 100(3) 100 250 250
A, B
Non-
Residential
Driveway
11(4) 150 100 250 250
TxDOT Road
A,B,C,D,E,F,
G and Non-
Residential
Driveway
See TxDOT’s Roadway Design Guide and Specifications(5)
Frontage Road
A,B,C,D,E,F,
G and Non-
Residential
Driveway
Apply Type A Thoroughfare specifications to Dallas Pkwy
Apply TxDOT specifications to SH 121 and US 380
1. Double left-turn lanes
2. 150 feet for the inside left-turn lane; 250 feet for the outside left-turn lane
3. 150 feet of storage shall be required for gated communities.
4. Left-turn lanes that will become a future through lane shall be twelve feet (12’) in width and be square at the end
and incorporate a street header.
5. Turn lane designs on Preston Road (SH 289) shall also meet the requirements set forth in the Preston Corridor
Access Management Plan.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-22
FIGURE 2.12: Typical Left Turn Lane Dimensions
3. Median Openings
a. Median openings shall accommodate all turning paths and crosswalks.
b. The width of mid-block median openings shall not be less than sixty feet (60’). They
may be greater than sixty feet (60’) where necessary to accommodate turning paths and
crosswalks subject to approval by the Director of Engineering Services.
c. Median openings shall not be less than seventy feet (70’) wide at divided high capacity
driveways (see Section 2.05.B.5).
4. The minimum distance to the first mid-block median opening along a Type A or B
thoroughfare that is immediately downstream from a Type A or B thoroughfare is shown in
Figure 2.13. This distance varies from three hundred fifty feet (350’) to six hundred feet
(600’), measured nose to nose, depending on the thoroughfare type and the type of mid-block
opening.
Storage Length
Lane Width
Length of
Taper
R2 1
R
Concrete Pavers per
Section 2.03.B.1.e
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-23
FIGURE 2.13: Minimum Spacing between Type A or B Thoroughfares and First Mid-Block
Median Opening on a Type A or B Thoroughfare
100 Ft. Taper
Type B Thoroughfare
150 Ft. Storage
Type A or B
100 Ft. Taper 150 Ft. Storage
First Mid-Block Opening
for a Commercial Collector,
Residential Collector, or
Non-Residential Driveway
400 Ft. Overall
100 Ft. Taper 100 - 150 Ft. Storage
200 Ft. Taper
Type A or B
150 Ft. Storage
500 Ft. Overall
100 Ft. Taper
Type B Thoroughfare
150 Ft. Storage
Type A or B
100 Ft. Taper 100 Ft. Storage
First Mid-Block Opening
for any Residential Street
that is not a Collector
350 Ft. Overall
First Mid-Block
Opening
150 Ft. Storage
200 Ft. Taper
Frontage Road
250 Ft. Storage
600 Ft. Overall
100 Ft. Taper
Type B Thoroughfare
150 Ft. Storage
Frontage Road
100 Ft. Taper 150 Ft. Storage
First Mid-Block Opening
400 Ft. Overall
Type A Thoroughfare
(See Table 2.5)
First Mid-Block Opening
Extended Left-Turn Lane
Extended Left-Turn Lane
Extended Left-Turn Lane
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-24
5. The minimum distance between median openings on a Type A or B thoroughfare where leftturn
storage is provided in both directions for Types C, D, E, F, and G intersecting
thoroughfares and driveways is shown in Figure 2.14. The distances shown are measured
nose to nose. Refer to Table 2.11 for driveway design requirements.
FIGURE 2.14: Minimum Distance between Mid-Block Median Openings on a Type A or B
Thoroughfare
6. Medians without Left-Turn Lanes in Both Directions
a. If a left-turn lane is required in only one direction, the minimum length of the median
shall be the sum of the required left-turn storage, taper length, fifty foot (50’) tangent, and
length of median nose. This requirement is reflected in Figure 2.15. This median design
is only allowed if access is not compromised for vacant property on the opposite side of
the thoroughfare.
Type A or B Thoroughfare
Type A or B Thoroughfare
100 Ft. Taper
100 Ft. Taper
150 Ft. Storage
150 Ft. Storage
Mid-Block Opening for a
Commerical Collector,
Residential Collector, or
Non-Residential Driveway
150 Ft. Storage
100 Ft. Storage
100 Ft. Taper
100 Ft. Taper
Mid-Block Opening for a
Commercial Collector,
Residential Collector, or
Non-Residential Driveway
400 Ft. Overall
350 Ft. Overall
Mid-Block Opening for a
Commercial Collector,
Residential Collector, or
Non-Residential Driveway
Mid-Block Opening for
any Residential Street
that is not a Collector
300 Ft. Overall
100 Ft.
Transition
100 Ft. Taper
Type A or B Thoroughfare
Mid-Block Opening for
any Residential Street
that is not a Collector
100 Ft. Storage
Mid-Block Opening for
any Residential Street
that is not a Collector
100 Ft. Storage
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-25
FIGURE 2.15: Minimum Length of Median Where A Left-Turn Lane is Needed in Only One
Direction
b. If the left-turn storage is not required in either direction, but the median is simply a
spacer between two median openings, the minimum length of the spacer must be one
hundred feet (100’) (see Figure 2.16). A minimum spacing of one hundred feet (100’)
from the median opening to the first non-residential driveway shall be maintained.
FIGURE 2.16: Minimum Spacer Length
c. If a driveway is not served by a left-turn lane, then seventy-five feet (75’) of separation
shall be provided from edge of driveway to the median opening.
7. Medians on Public Street Entrances to Developments
a. Medians installed on undivided thoroughfares at entrances to subdivisions for aesthetics
or any other purpose shall be a minimum of thirteen feet (13’) wide and one hundred feet
(100’) long (see Figure 2.1 for Divided Residential Subdivision Entrance cross section).
b. A divided residential subdivision entrance shall transition to the normal residential street
width upstream or downstream of the first street intersection. No part of the transition
shall occur within an intersection.
c. If specified by zoning, alternative design standards may be required for these types of
subdivision entrances.
C. Minimum Right-Turn Storage and Taper Length
1. Right-Turn Lane Storage
a. At all intersections on Type A and B thoroughfares, right-turn lanes shall be constructed
at the time of development.
b. All right-turn storage areas shall be eleven feet (11’) wide.
Storage Length Taper 50' Min.
100 ft. Minimum Spacer
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-26
c. Additional ROW shall be required adjacent to right-turn lanes so that there is a minimum
of ten feet (10’) of ROW from the back of curb.
d. Right-turn lanes will be delineated by using the City’s current Pavement Markings and
Markers standard details.
e. Minimum storage requirements are listed in Table 2.6. Storage requirements may
increase based upon actual and projected traffic demands.
f. A minimum tangent section of thirty feet (30’) shall be provided between the preceding
driveway or cross street curb return and the taper of a right-turn lane.
2. Taper Length – The taper specifications for right-turn lane entrance areas are specified in
Table 2.6. The variables used for the specification are shown in Figure 2.17.
TABLE 2.6: Minimum Right-Turn Lane Design Requirements
Type of
Thoroughfare
On
Type of
Thoroughfare
At
Turn
Lane
Width(s)
(ft)
Length of
Full-Width
Storage(ft)(1)
Taper Specifications(2)
Length(ft) R1(ft) R2(ft)
A A, B 11 225 150 515 515
B A, B 11 175 150 515 515
A, B C, Residential
Collector 11 150 110 280 280
A, B D, E, F, G 11 100 110 280 280
TxDOT Road A,B,C,D,E,F,G See TxDOT’s Roadway Design Guide and Specifications
Frontage Road A,B,C,D,E,F,G Apply Type A Thoroughfare specifications to Dallas Pkwy
Apply TxDOT specifications to SH 121 and US 380
1. Measured from the intersecting thoroughfare face of curb.
2. No driveways are permitted within the taper area.
R
R
Storage Length
Length of
Taper
Lane Width
2
1
Tangent
Section
Street or
Driveway
FIGURE 2.17: Typical Right-Turn / Deceleration Lane Dimensions
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-27
D. Minimum Deceleration Lane Storage and Taper Length
1. Deceleration Lane Storage
a. Deceleration lanes are required on Type A and B thoroughfares at all non-residential and
multi-family driveways.
b. All deceleration lane storage areas shall be eleven feet (11’) wide.
c. In locations where there will be less than ten feet (10’) of ROW adjacent to the
deceleration lane, a street easement shall be dedicated such that the combination of ROW
and street easement extends at least ten feet (10’) from the back of curb of the
deceleration lane. Street easements shall extend along the street a minimum of forty feet
(40’) beyond the far edge of the driveway to allow for utility connections.
d. Deceleration lanes will be delineated by using the City’s current Pavement Markings and
Markers standard details.
e. Minimum storage requirements are listed in Table 2.7. Storage requirements may
increase based upon actual and projected traffic demands.
f. A minimum tangent section of thirty feet (30’) shall be provided between the preceding
driveway or cross street curb return and the taper of a deceleration lane.
g. A tangent section is not required when a deceleration lane is immediately downstream
from an intersecting Type A or Type B thoroughfare.
2. Taper Length – The taper specifications for deceleration lane entrance areas are specified in
Table 2.7. The variables used for the specification are shown in Figure 2.17.
TABLE 2.7: Minimum Deceleration Lane Design Requirements
Type of
Thoroughfare
On
Type of
Thoroughfare At
Turn Lane
Width(s)
(ft)
Length of
Full-Width
Storage(ft)(1)
Taper Specifications
Length(ft) R1(ft) R2(ft)
A Non-Residential
Driveway
11 110(2) 110(2) 280 280
B Non-Residential
Driveway 11 90 110(2) 280 280
TxDOT Road Non-Residential
Driveway See TxDOT’s Roadway Design Guide and Specifications
Frontage Road Non-Residential
Driveway
Apply Type A Thoroughfare specifications to Dallas Pkwy
Apply TxDOT specifications to SH 121 and US 380
1. Measured from the edge of the driveway.
2. When a deceleration lane is immediately downstream from an intersecting Type A or B thoroughfare, its storage
can be reduced to 100 feet and its taper can be reduced to 70 feet (see Figure 2.23)
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-28
E. Cost of Median Openings and Turn Lanes
1. Median openings, left-turn lanes, and right-turn lanes constructed for residential streets and/or
subdivision entrances not referenced on the Thoroughfare Plan shall be the responsibility of
the developer and shall be constructed to City (or TxDOT) standards and inspected by the
governing entity.
2. Median openings, left-turn lanes and deceleration lanes for multi-family and non-residential
developments shall be the responsibility of the developer and shall be constructed to City (or
TxDOT) standards and inspected by the governing entity.
3. If median openings, left-turn lanes, deceleration lanes or right-turn lanes are not constructed
at the time of development, the developer shall escrow funds for such future improvements
prior to final acceptance. The escrow amount shall include all costs for engineering,
inspection, and construction.
2.04 Alley Design
A. Alley Intersections
1. Alleys shall not intersect any Type A, B, or C thoroughfare nor any residential collector.
2. Alleys that are parallel to and share a common ROW line with a Type A, B, or C
thoroughfare or a residential collector shall turn away from that thoroughfare not less than
forty feet (40’) or one subdivision lot width (whichever is greater) from the cross street ROW
as shown in Figure 2.18.
3. Alleys shall intersect with a residential street so that the alley ROW line is not less than forty
feet (40’) or one subdivision lot width (whichever is greater) from the ROW of the nearest
cross street as shown in Figure 2.18.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-29
Minimum of
40 Feet or
One Subdivision
Lot Width
Cross Street
Alley
ROW
Residential Street
Type D or Above Thoroughfare
FIGURE 2.18: Minimum Distance from Intersection for Parallel Alley
4. All alley intersections with streets shall be perpendicular or radial, within a five degree (5°)
tolerance, at the intersection of the ROW lines.
5. The offset between alleys on opposite sides of a residential street shall be less than three feet
(3’) or greater than seventy-five feet (75’) measured from edge of alley to edge of alley.
6. Alleys shall not align with existing or future streets or driveways on the opposite side of a
street. Alleys shall be offset from such a street or driveway by a minimum of seventy-five
feet (75’) measured from edge of alley to edge of street or driveway.
7. Alleys that intersect at “elbow” street intersections shall not intersect within thirty (30°)
degrees of the centerline of the adjacent streets. See Figure 2.19.
8. Alleys shall not intersect with a roundabout.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-30
FIGURE 2.19: Alley Intersecting an Elbow
9. Internal alley intersections shall consist of no more than three alley approaches.
10. The offset between alleys on the opposite side of an intersecting alley shall be a minimum of
one hundred feet (100’) measured from centerline to centerline.
11. As an alley approaches an intersection with another alley, the pavement width shall increase
to fourteen feet (14’) using a taper twenty feet (20’) long. The wider pavement shall be
maintained for a distance of fifteen feet (15’) prior to the radius of the intersection. Two feet
(2’) of parkway shall be maintained between the pavement and the ROW line at all times.
See Figure 2.20.
12. No permanent dead end alley shall be permitted in new subdivisions. Alleys shall connect
and/or be aligned with alleys in adjacent subdivisions.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-31
18' ROW
20'
Taper
15'
Tangent
12' 14'
42'R
40'R
15'
Tangent
20'
Taper
14'
12'
20'
Taper
15'
Tangent
14' 12' 18' ROW
18' ROW
FIGURE 2.20: Alley to Alley Intersection
13. The radius of alley pavement at street intersections shall not be less than fifteen feet (15’). At
the intersection of two alleys, the radius of the alley ROW is dependent upon the alley ROW
intersection angle as listed in Table 2.8. At the intersection of two alleys, the radius of the
alley pavement shall be two feet (2’) greater than the radius of the alley ROW.
TABLE 2.8: Alley Intersecting Alley Radius
Alley ROW Intersection Angle Minimum Required ROW Radius (ft)
1°-40° 70
41° -70° 50
71° -90° 40
> 90° 50
B. Alley ROW Width – Alley ROW shall be eighteen feet (18’) wide except for certain townhome
developments that are required by the Zoning Ordinance to follow the design standards in the
Form-Based Code Manual.
C. Alley Pavement Width – Alley pavement shall be twelve feet (12’) wide except near alley
intersections, as shown in Figure 2.20, and except near street intersections as shown in
Figure 2.21.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-32
Street
ROW
ROW
12' Pavement Width
18' ROW Width
16' Pavement Width
5' x 15' clip
20' Alley
Taper
15' Min. R
FIGURE 2.21: Alley to Street Intersection
D. Alley Length – Alleys shall not exceed eight hundred feet (800’) in length without an
intermediate connection to a residential street.
E. Alley Pavement Thickness – See Section 3 of the Engineering Standards for alley subgrade and
pavement design requirements.
F. Alley as Fire Lane – An alley that also serves the purpose of a fire lane shall be constructed to the
standards of a fire lane as required by the Fire Department. These standards include, but are not
limited to, a minimum pavement width of twenty four feet (24’) and a minimum radius of alley
pavement of twenty feet (20’) at street intersections.
G. Rear Alley Frontage – The minimum alley rear frontage shall be twenty feet (20’).
H. Alley Visibility Obstructions
1. No fence, wall, screen, sign, structure, landscaping rock greater than four inches (4”) in
height, or foliage of hedges, trees, bushes, or shrubs shall be erected, planted or maintained in
any alley ROW.
2. Foliage of hedges, trees, bushes, and shrubs planted adjacent to the alley ROW shall be
maintained by the property owner such that the overhang or encroachment shall be no less
than fourteen feet (14’) above the alley surface and no less than one foot (1’) outside the edge
of the pavement.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-33
I. Alley Grade
1. Alleys shall have a maximum grade of six percent (6%). Steeper grades may be permitted
where required by topographical and/or natural features, as approved by the Director of
Engineering Services.
2. Alleys shall maintain a maximum cross-slope of two percent (2%) at the intersection of the
adjacent sidewalk.
J. Vertical Curves in Alleys – Vertical curves in alleys shall be used in order to provide a design
which is safe, comfortable in operation, pleasing in appearance and adequate for drainage.
Vertical curve alignment shall also provide stopping sight distance in all cases based on a design
speed of 20 mph.
K. Alley Screening Walls – The area between screening walls and alleys shall be paved and graded
to drain to the invert.
2.05 Driveway Design
A. Introduction – Driveway design standards are needed to provide safe and efficient vehicular
access to and from the public street system, to provide public street capacity for accommodating
peak traffic volumes of public streets, to maintain smooth traffic flow, and to maintain street
ROW and drainage. The intent of driveway design standards is to achieve the following:
1. Prohibit the indiscriminate location and spacing of driveways while maintaining reasonable
vehicular access to and from the public street system.
2. Reduce conflicting turning movements and congestion thereby reducing vehicular crashes.
B. Definition of Driveway Types
1. Residential Driveway – Provides access to a single-family residence, duplex, or multi-family
building containing four or fewer dwelling units. Residential driveways shall intersect Type
D, E, F, and G thoroughfares only (according to the restrictions described below).
2. Non-Residential Driveway
a. Commercial Driveway – Provides direct access to an office, retail or institutional
building, or multi-family building having more than four dwelling units. It is anticipated
that such buildings will have incidental truck service. Commercial driveways shall
typically access Type A, B, or C thoroughfares only, with a maximum of one (1)
driveway accessing a residential collector. In the case of multi-family developments, the
primary driveway shall access a Type A or B thoroughfare. Exceptions for connections
to residential streets are specified in the Comprehensive Plan.
b. Industrial Driveway – Serves truck movements to and from loading areas of an industrial
facility, manufacturing, warehouse, or truck terminal. A retail development may have
one or more driveways specially designed, signed, and located to provide access for
trucks, which shall be considered industrial driveways. Industrial plant driveways whose
principle function is to serve administrative or employee parking lots shall be considered
commercial driveways. Industrial drives shall access Type A, B, and C thoroughfares
only.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-34
3. Standard Driveway – Provides two-way access at a single, undivided curb opening. The
minimum width of a standard driveway depends on land use and is shown in Table 2.9.
4. One-Way Driveway – Provides only inbound or outbound access and can only be permitted
when the orientation of on-site circulation and parking layout clearly utilize the driveway for
one-way movements. The minimum width for a one-way driveway depends on land use and
is shown in Table 2.9.
5. High Capacity Driveways – Intended to provide two-way access with geometric provisions
which more adequately respond to greater driveway volumes and/or access limitations than
standard driveways. These provisions include increased width, increased internal storage and
a median divider.
a. Divided high capacity driveways are required at the first median opening downstream of
a Type A-A, A-B, or B-B intersection.
b. The primary multi-family driveway shall be a divided high capacity driveway at a median
opening.
c. Divided high capacity driveways are required on Type A or Type B thoroughfares when
the number of parking spaces per driveway exceeds two hundred (200), except along a
frontage road.
C. Driveway General Design Parameters
1. The centerline angle for a driveway approach shall be ninety degrees (90º) to the street curb
line for all driveways.
2. Driveways shall not be permitted in the taper area of any right-turn lane or deceleration lane.
3. Driveways that intersect at a mid-block median opening shall have the driveway centerline
intersect with the midpoint of the median opening (measured nose-to-nose).
4. Driveway connections can be required by the Director of Engineering Services to ensure
adequate circulation.
5. Driveway elevations at the ROW line of a public street shall be a minimum of six inches (6”)
above the street gutter. A residential driveway that intersects an alley shall be a minimum of
three inches (3”) above the edge of the alley pavement at the ROW line and shall be high
enough to maintain gutter capacity.
6. Cross access is required between adjacent non-residential properties so that each property can
share the use of the driveway(s) on the adjacent property. A shared driveway that is centered
on the common property line is also encouraged. When one non-residential property
develops before the adjacent property develops, the full width of the shared driveway shall be
constructed at that time.
7. Driveway grades in a fire lane shall not exceed six percent (6%). Steeper grades may be
permitted in areas where buildings are not present, as approved by the Director of
Engineering Services and the Fire Department.
8. Driveways that serve as a fire lane shall be a minimum of twenty-four feet (24’) in width.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-35
9. Differential grades on driveways shall not exceed ten percent (10%).
10. Any sidewalk access across a driveway shall meet all state and federal ADA requirements for
accessibility.
11. Residential driveways shall be prohibited:
a. Along a Type D, E, F, or G thoroughfare within one hundred feet (100’) of an
intersection with a Type A or Type B thoroughfare measured from the ROW line.
b. Along any part of a Type A, B, or C thoroughfare or a residential collector.
12. Residential driveways shall provide access to an alley or an eligible public street according to
the following restrictions:
a. A residential lot shall be allowed a maximum of one (1) driveway onto a public street,
except in the case of a circular driveway approved by the Director of Engineering
Services.
b. A residential driveway that provides access to a garage shall connect to an alley or shall
connect to a residential street that is at least thirty feet (30’) wide, face-to-face.
c. A residential lot bordered by an alley and a residential street that is at least thirty feet
(30’) wide shall provide a driveway to the alley if trash pick-up services cannot be easily
provided on the residential street, as determined by the Environmental Services Division.
Factors that will be considered include, but are not limited to, trash truck routing and
whether existing or planned homes on the block already connect to the alley.
d. A residential lot shall be prohibited from having multiple driveway connections in a
configuration that would create the possibility of a cut-through route between a public
street and an alley that do not intersect or between two public streets that do not intersect,
as determined by the Director of Engineering Services.
e. If a residential driveway is shared between two properties, the driveway shall be centered
on the common property line unless otherwise approved by the Director of Engineering
Services.
f. A residential driveway connecting to an alley shall not be located within twenty feet (20’)
of the ROW line of a public street so as to prevent the driveway from being located in the
alley taper
g. A residential driveway connecting to a public street shall be located so its upstream edge
is no closer than fifteen feet (15’) from the curb return of an upstream intersection and so
its downstream edge is no closer than five feet (5’) from the curb return of a downstream
intersection.
h. A residential driveway that changes in width as it extends onto the property shall do so
with a curved transition or an angled transition that does not exceed a taper of one to one
(1:1) within ten feet (10’) of the property line.
13. Driveways shall be located so that they meet the required spacing from other driveways and
streets, as described in Subsections F, G, and H below. The spacing and location of
driveways shall be related to existing driveways and streets and to future driveways and
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-36
streets that are shown on approved preliminary site plans and/or site plans that have not
expired.
D. Driveway Width – The width of a driveway refers to the width of pavement at the property line
and is measured where the curb return radii ends perpendicular to the street curb or edge of
pavement. The minimum and maximum widths of driveways are listed in Table 2.9. A driveway
may transition to a different width as it extends onto the property, but its width shall not change
abruptly at the property line.
TABLE 2.9: Minimum and Maximum Driveway Widths(1)
1. Driveway width at the property line. A driveway may transition to a different width as it extends onto the property.
2. Driveways that serve as a fire lane shall be a minimum of twenty-four feet (24’) in width.
3. A residential driveway connecting to an alley may have a width up to a maximum of thirty-two feet (32’) if the garage
faces onto the alley; otherwise, its width is limited to twenty-four feet (24’).
E. Driveway Radius
1. All driveways intersecting dedicated streets shall be built with a circular curb radius
connecting the six-inch (6”) raised curb of the roadway to the design width pavement of the
driveway.
2. Driveway radii shall fall entirely within the subject property so as to begin at the street curb at
the extension of the property line.
3. Table 2.10 presents the minimum and/or maximum standards to be applied in designing and
locating driveways on public streets.
4. High capacity driveways shall meet the same standards as those defined in Table 2.10.
Driveway Type Land Use
Width in Feet (face to face)(2)
Minimum (ft) Maximum(ft)
Standard Driveway
Residential 10 24 to a street
32 to an alley(3)
Commercial 30 36
(40 at a gas station)
Industrial 30 40
One-Way Driveway
Residential (circular) 10 16
Commercial 24 24
Industrial 24 24
Divided High Capacity
Driveway
Entrance 24 24
Exit: Two Lanes 24 24
Three Lanes 30 36
Driveway Medians 4 11
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-37
TABLE 2.10: Driveway Design Requirements
Criteria Thoroughfare
Classification
Residential
Driveway (ft)
Commercial or
Multi-family
Driveway (ft)
Industrial
Driveway (ft)
Driveway Curb
Radius
Type A N.A. 30 40
Type B N.A. 30 40
Commercial
Collector Type C N.A. 30 40
Residential
Collector N.A. 30 N.A.
Local D, E, F, G 5-10 N.A. N.A.
Minimum Driveway
Spacing Along
Roadway
(edge to edge)
Type A N.A. 280 280
Type B N.A. 260 260
Commercial
Collector Type C N.A. 90 90
Residential
Collector N.A. max. of 1 drive N.A.
Local D, E, F, G
20
(10 when enclosing
both mailboxes)(2)
N.A. N.A.
Minimum Distance
to Intersection Along
Roadway
(edge to ROW line
of intersecting
street)(1)
Type A N.A. 75 / 200 75 / 200
Type B N.A. 75 / 200 75 / 200
Commercial
Collector Type C N.A. 100 / 100 100 / 100
Residential
Collector N.A. 100 / 100 N.A.
Local D, E, F, G
15 / 5 from curb
return to edge of
drive
N.A. N.A.
1. Upstream / downstream distance to intersection. See Figure 2.23.
2. If both mailboxes are located between two driveways, those driveways can be exactly 10 feet apart. If they are more than
10 feet apart, they must be 20 feet apart or more.
F. Driveway Spacing
1. Spacing between driveways is measured along the property line from the edge of one
driveway to the closest edge of the next driveway.
2. Table 2.10 defines minimum driveway spacing as a function of thoroughfare classification.
3. In the vicinity of a railroad crossing, the closest edge of a driveway shall be a minimum of
one hundred feet (100’) from the railroad ROW line.
4. Non-residential and multi-family driveways on opposite sides of an undivided street shall
align with each other or be spaced a minimum of seventy-five feet (75’) apart, measured edge
to edge, to ensure that conflicting movements do not overlap. This spacing shall also apply to
a driveway that is on the opposite side of an undivided street from an intersecting street. See
Figure 2.22.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-38
Driveway
Undivided
Thoroughfare
Driveway
75' Min.
FIGURE 2.22: Driveway Spacing on Opposite Sides of an Undivided Street
FIGURE 2.23: Distance Between Driveway and Intersection
G. Distance between Driveway and Intersection
1. Adequate distance between cross street intersections and access driveways shall be provided
to ensure intersection/driveway conflict areas are minimized.
2. Table 2.10 defines the upstream and downstream distance from an intersection as a function
of thoroughfare classification. The distances required from an intersection along a Type A or
B thoroughfare are shown in Figure 2.23
Min. 75'
Upstream
Distance
Direction of Travel
ROW
Driveway
Public Street
Type A or B Thoroughfare
ROW
100' Storage Min. 200' Downstream Distance
Driveway
70' Taper + 100' Storage
Street Easement
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-39
H. Driveways Located in Right-Turn Lanes
1. A driveway located within the right-turn lane of a public street intersection shall be spaced so
that its closest edge will be a minimum of seventy-five feet (75’) in advance of the ROW line
of the intersecting street. See Figure 2.23.
2. If a driveway is located within the right-turn lane of a public street intersection, the storage
length of the right-turn lane shall extend a minimum of one hundred feet (100’) beyond the
upstream edge of the driveway (see Figure 2.23). No driveway shall be permitted within the
taper area of a right-turn or deceleration lane.
I. Driveway Deceleration Lanes - Deceleration lanes are required on Type A and B thoroughfares at
all non-residential and multi-family driveways and shall meet the requirements of Section 2.03.D.
J. Driveway Storage Lengths
1. On-site internal storage shall be provided at all non-residential and multi-family driveways
for queuing of vehicles off-street, to minimize congestion, and increase safety both on the
public street and within the driveway.
2. Internal storage requirements shall be based on the number of parking spaces accessible by
the affected driveway. Divide the total number of parking spaces by the number of
driveways and then use Table 2.11 to determine the amount of internal storage required. This
calculation shall be based on the preliminary site plan for an overall development or the site
plan for a specific lot, whichever produces the largest ratio of parking spaces per driveway.
3. Internal storage length shall be measured from the ROW line to the first intersecting aisle,
internal driveway, or parking stall.
4. A circulation study will be required for all multi-story parking structures. Driveway storage
requirements will be determined as a result of the study.
TABLE 2.11: Minimum Driveway Storage Lengths
Parking Spaces per
Driveway
Storage Required (ft)
Multi-family or Commercial
Uses Industrial Land Uses
Non-Median
Opening(1)
Median
Opening(2)
Non-Median
Opening(1)
Median
Opening(2)
Less than 25 25 25 25 25
25-50 25 40 25 40
51-100 25 40 40 40
101-200 40 80 40 60
More than 200 100 150 40 100
1. Includes driveways that connect to one-way frontage roads.
2. Includes any driveway where a left-turn exit can be made, including driveways that connect to undivided roadways.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-40
K. Entrance Streets and Driveways for Gated Developments
1. To ensure that the minimum dimensions are adequate, a traffic study is required with the
submission of a Specific Use Permit application for all gated communities.
2. Residential/Multi-family Developments
a. Gated developments shall have a median divided street or driveway that will allow for a
vehicular turn-around prior to the gate in the event that access is denied.
b. The turn-around shall be a minimum of eighteen feet (18’) in width.
c. Entry gates shall be set back from the ROW line a minimum of one hundred thirty five
feet (135’) or as indicated in the traffic study. The card reader, or first stop, shall be set
back from the ROW line a minimum of one hundred feet (100’), or as indicated in the
traffic study, to provide storage for the longest queue of vehicles expected to access the
gate. See Figure 2.24.
d. Each direction of the divided street or driveway shall be a minimum of twenty-four feet
(24’) in width with curb radii of thirty feet (30’). See Figure 2.24.
e. The hinge point of the gate shall be a minimum of eighteen inches (18”) behind back of
the curb. The gate shall open to twenty-four inches (24”) behind back of curb.
f. Gates shall open sideways or swing open in the direction of travel on each side of the
divided street.
g. Gates shall be equipped with emergency access devices as required by the Fire
Department.
h. All gates shall provide pedestrian access. The movement of the gates shall not encroach
on sidewalks.
i. Gates shall remain open between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. whenever a guard is not onduty
during that time.
j. Any alternative designs shall require the approval of the Director of Engineering
Services.
3. Non-Residential Developments
a. Gated developments shall have a median separating ingress and egress traffic flow
allowing for a vehicular turn-around prior to the gate in the event that access is denied.
b. The turn-around shall be a minimum of eighteen feet (18’) in width.
c. Entry gates shall be set back from the ROW line, or fire lane, a minimum of seventy-five
feet (75’), or as indicated in the traffic study. The card reader, or first stop, shall be set
back from the ROW line a minimum of forty feet (40’), or as indicated in the traffic
study, to provide storage for the longest queue of vehicles expected to access the gate.
d. Each direction of the driveway shall be a minimum of twenty-four feet (24’) in width
with curb radii of thirty feet (30’). See Figure 2.24.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-41
FIGURE 2.24: Gated Entrance Detail
e. The hinge point of the gate shall be a minimum of eighteen inches (18”) behind back of
the curb. The gate shall open to twenty-four inches (24”) behind back of curb.
f. Gates shall open sideways or swing open in the direction of travel on each side of the
divided entrance.
g. Gates shall be equipped with emergency access devices as required by the Fire
Department.
h. All gates shall provide pedestrian access. The movement of the gates shall not encroach
on sidewalks.
4. Individual gated single-family residences shall have a minimum setback of twenty feet (20’)
from the property line. The movement of the gate(s) shall not encroach on a sidewalk, alley,
or street.
L. Non-Conforming Driveways
1. All nonconforming driveways on a lot, tract, parcel or site shall be allowed to remain in use
until the occurrence of one or more of the following events:
Storage Transition
12'
11'
Reader/Keypad
70'
20' R
11'
18'
10' x 10' ROW Clip
12'
24' 24'
30' R
25' x 25'
ROW Clip
Landscape ROW
Building Line
15' R
20' R
Gates Located at or Behind Building Line
Minimum
Stacking Distance
250' Minimum
Centerline Radius
30' R
Landscape ROW
Building Line
10'x10' ROW Clip
25' x 25' ROW Clip
100' ROW
12'
11'
12'
See Section 6.0.5(J)
for Setback
Requirements
Transition Storage
(100' - Residential / Multi-Family)
(40' - Other Non-Residential)
11'
1st Stop
Minimum
Gate
Distance
(135' - Res.)
(75' - Other)
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-42
a. A change in use, or an increase in intensity of use, occurs such that the site requires a ten
percent (10%) increase in required parking spaces.
b. Addition or expansion of required stacking spaces.
c. Any modification that changes the design or function of the existing driveway.
d. The addition of a median opening on the public street by a developer. All driveways that
are served by the new median opening shall comply with the requirements of these
standards.
2. Upon the occurrence of the events described above, the nonconforming driveway shall either
be reconstructed in accordance with these design requirements, or eliminated.
2.06 Sidewalk Location and Design
A. Definition of Sidewalk – A sidewalk is defined as the paved area designated for pedestrian use
which is generally located between the curb of the roadway and the adjacent property line. The
inside edge of the sidewalk is the edge closest to the street while the outside edge of the sidewalk
is farthest from the street.
B. Sidewalk Design – Sidewalks shall conform to the most current federal, state, and local ADA
requirements and to the following standards:
1. Sidewalk Grade – The maximum grade of the sidewalk shall be five percent (5%) or the
grade of the adjacent street, whichever is greater. The maximum cross-slope of the sidewalk
shall be two percent (2%).
2. Zoning Classification Requiring Sidewalks – Concrete sidewalks designed and located
according to City standards shall be constructed along all streets in all zoning classifications
except agriculture uses in agricultural zoned areas. Prior to developing any single-family,
duplex, or townhome residential lots, residential developers shall build sidewalks along all
streets adjacent to the subdivision and along the portions of any street within the subdivision
where residential lots do not front or side onto the street. Sidewalks along residential lots
shall be constructed by the homebuilder at the time each lot develops. Sidewalks adjacent to
non-residential and multi-family land uses shall be built at the time of lot development.
3. Hike and Bike Master Plan – Sidewalks shall be constructed with the width specified in the
Hike and Bike Master Plan along thoroughfares that are designated as off-street hike and bike
trail routes.
4. Type A and B Thoroughfares – A concrete sidewalk, a minimum six feet (6’) in width, shall
be located along all Type A and B thoroughfares. The sidewalk should typically be located
within the street ROW, but may extend into a sidewalk easement. The inside edge of the
sidewalk shall be no closer than five feet (5’) from the back-of-curb.
5. Type C, D, E, F, and G Thoroughfares – A concrete sidewalk, a minimum five feet (5’) in
width, shall be located along all Type C, D, E, F, and G thoroughfares. The sidewalk shall be
located within the street ROW unless pre-existing physical encroachments (e.g., utility
infrastructure or trees) dictate otherwise. The outside edge of the sidewalk shall be located
two feet (2’) inside the ROW line on Type C, D, and E thoroughfares. On Type F and G
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-43
thoroughfares, the outside edge of the sidewalk may be on the ROW line and a two-foot (2’)
sidewalk easement shall be provided adjacent to the ROW line.
6. See Section 3 of the Engineering Standards for sidewalk thickness requirements.
7. Sidewalk Easements – A minimum of two feet (2’) of ROW or sidewalk easement shall be
provided adjacent to the outside edge of the sidewalk. Any portion of sidewalk extending
outside the ROW shall be contained within a sidewalk easement, the inside edge of which
extends to the ROW line and the outside edge of which extends a minimum of two feet (2’)
beyond the outside edge of the sidewalk.
8. Parkways – The area between the curb and ROW line shall be graded at two percent (2%)
above the top of street curb. If the area between the curb and the sidewalk is at least three
feet (3’) wide, it shall contain grass that is maintained by the adjacent property owner. If the
area between the curb and sidewalk is less than three feet (3’) wide, it shall be paved with
concrete for a minimum length of fifteen feet (15’). If a parkway is adjacent to a nonresidential
or multi-family land use, the area between the curb and the sidewalk may be paved
with concrete or concrete pavers in lieu of grass.
9. Meandering Sidewalks – Sidewalks along Type A, B, and C thoroughfares and residential
collectors may meander for aesthetics and/or to avoid pre-existing physical encroachments.
Sidewalk easements adjacent to the standard ROW line will be required to contain any
portion of the meandering sidewalk that extends beyond the ROW. Sidewalk easements shall
provide a minimum clearance of two feet (2’) beyond the outside edge of the sidewalk. The
inside edge of a meandering sidewalk shall never be less than five feet (5’) from the back-ofcurb.
A tangent calculated at any point along the centerline of a meandering sidewalk shall
not be less than thirty degrees (30°) from perpendicular to the street. These requirements are
shown in Figure 2.25.
ROW
5' Min.
Sidewalk
Easement
2'
Back of Curb
Sidewalk
Easement
FIGURE 2.25: Meandering Sidewalk Detail
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-44
10. Sidewalks Adjacent to Screening Walls – In areas where a screening wall is provided along a
thoroughfare, the outside edge of the sidewalk shall either remain a minimum of two feet (2’)
from the wall or the sidewalk shall be paved up to the wall.
11. Access Ramps – Barrier-free ADA access ramps shall be provided at all street intersection
corners, at all crosswalks, and across any non-residential or multi-family driveway.
12. Sidewalks on Bridges
a. All street bridges shall have a sidewalk constructed on each side of the bridge. The
sidewalk shall have a minimum width of six feet (6’) with a parapet wall that is separated
from the travel lane by an eighteen inch (18”) shoulder. See Figure 2.26.
b. A standard pedestrian bridge rail protecting the sidewalk shall be provided on the outside
edge of the bridge. See Figure 2.26.
c. When an eight foot (8’) sidewalk is required on the bridge as part of a hike and bike trail,
the center lane may be reduced to eleven feet (11’) and the shoulders may be reduced to
twelve inches (12”).
13. Sidewalks Under Bridges – When new bridges are built as a part of the construction of a
roadway or the reconstruction of a roadway and a pedestrian crossing is needed beneath the
bridge, a sidewalk shall be built as a part of the embankment design underneath the structure
for future hike and bike trails. The Hike and Bike Master Plan will designate whether a
sidewalk is built on one or both sides of the waterway and whether the sidewalk shall be ten
feet (10’) or twelve feet (12’) wide.
14. Sidewalks on Culverts – All culvert crossings shall have a sidewalk, a minimum of six feet
(6’) wide, constructed on each side of the culvert. A standard pedestrian hand rail as shown
in Figure 2.27 shall be provided on the outside edge of the culvert. A parapet wall may be
required by the Director of Engineering Services.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-45
FIGURE 2.26: Typical Sidewalk on Bridge Section
PKWY.
R. O. W.
6' SIDEWALK
ROADWAY MEDIAN
RIGHT OF WAY WIDTH
2' SDWLK 2' SDWLK
R. O. W.
6' SIDEWALK
Typical Thoroughfare
ESMT. ESMT.
ROADWAY CULVERT
ROADWAY PKWY.
PEDESTRIAN
HANDRAIL
MIN. 42" HIGH
PEDESTRIAN
HANDRAIL
MIN. 42" HIGH
FIGURE 2.27: Typical Pedestrian Handrail Over Culvert
15. Sidewalks between Residential Lots
a. Where deemed necessary by the Director of Engineering Services, a block with a
continuous series of lots longer than one thousand two hundred feet (1,200’), measured
along one or more sides, shall be bisected by a fifty foot (50’) wide pedestrian easement
containing a sidewalk that is a minimum of five feet (5’) wide. Such a mid-block
pedestrian connection will be necessary where it would be beneficial to create a short-cut
to walk to a school, park, trail, or group of homes on the other side of the long block.
b. Pedestrian easements and sidewalk connections shall be provided between cul-de-sacs
and adjacent streets as required by the Subdivision Ordinance.
C
ROADWAY
OVERALL BRIDGE WIDTH
PED
RAIL
PRESTRESSED I-BEAMS
ABUTMENTS & BENTS
(SEE TXDOT STD.)
(SEE TXDOT STD.)
L
6' - 0"
WALKWAY
1' - 0" 1' - 0"
1' - 6" SHOULDER
46' - 0" 10' - 6"
11' - 0" LANE 12' - 0" LANE 11' - 0" LANE
34' - 0"
1' - 6" SHOULDER
1' - 0"
PARAPET
WALL
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-46
16. Sidewalk Escrow – When the delay of sidewalk construction is deemed appropriate by the
City due to future right-of-way improvements, escrow funds in lieu of the construction of
sidewalks may be approved by the Director of Engineering Services. Such funds shall be
escrowed with the City prior to final acceptance of the development. The escrow amount
shall be determined by the square footage of sidewalk to be constructed, as estimated by the
developer, and approved by the Director of Engineering Services.
17. Sidewalk Reimbursement – If the City constructs the sidewalk along any street before the
adjacent property develops, the owner of that property shall reimburse the City for its
construction costs when the property is to be subdivided or developed. This amount shall be
determined by multiplying the City’s square foot cost of constructing the sidewalk by the
square footage of sidewalk that is required along the property, subtracting out the square
footage of sidewalk the developer will remove or replace while developing the site, and
adding any cost associated with City-installed ADA access ramps, retaining walls, and
protective railing. The reimbursement shall be paid before any plat may be filed for the
property. If the property has already been platted or a plat is not required, the reimbursement
shall be paid prior to final acceptance or Certificate of Occupancy, whichever occurs first.
C. Sidewalks within Non-Residential and Multi-family Developments – All sidewalks within nonresidential
and multi-family developments shall be a minimum of four feet (4’) in width. At least
one ADA accessible sidewalk connection shall be made between each building and the public
sidewalk.
2.07 Public Right-of-Way Visibility Requirements
A. Adequate sight distance at the intersection of a thoroughfare and a proposed thoroughfare,
driveway, or alley must be ensured. This sight distance is provided through the use of Corner
Visibility Triangles and/or Sight Line Triangles. Corner Visibility Triangles are also known as
ROW Corner Clips and Sight Line Triangles are also known as Visibility, Access and
Maintenance Easements (VAMs). All intersection visibility requirements shall meet the
guidelines for sight triangles in AASHTO’s current A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways
and Streets.
1. Corner Visibility Triangles shall be provided on all corners of an intersection between two
thoroughfares or an intersection between an alley and a thoroughfare.
2. Sight Line Triangles shall be provided where a driveway, an alley, or a stop-controlled
thoroughfare intersects an uncontrolled thoroughfare and on any signalized intersection
approach where right turn on red operation is permitted.
3. No fence, wall, screen, sign, structure, foliage, hedge, tree, bush, shrub, berm, driveways,
parking, drive aisles, or any other item, either man-made or natural shall be erected, planted,
or maintained in a position that will obstruct or interfere with a driver’s clear line of sight
within a corner visibility triangle or a sight line triangle (i.e., a VAM).
4. The City has the right to prune or remove any vegetation within City right-of-way, including
within the corner visibility triangle, and within sight line triangle easements (including
VAMs), to abate a safety hazard and/or a nuisance.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-47
B. Corner Visibility Triangles
1. The corner visibility triangle is defined at an intersection of two thoroughfares by extending
the two ROW lines from their point of intersection to a distance as shown on Table 2.12.
These two points are then connected with an imaginary line to form the corner visibility
triangle as shown in Figure 2.28. This corner visibility triangle shall be dedicated as ROW.
TABLE 2.12: Corner Visibility Triangle Distances
Type of
Thoroughfare
On
Type of Thoroughfare
At
Distance(1)
(X)
A, B, C A, B, C, D, or any residential street that
potentially will be signalized 40’
A, B, C E, F, G that will remain unsignalized 25’
D, E, F, G D, E, F, G 10’
TxDOT Road,
Frontage Road
Use the specifications for a
Type A Thoroughfare
Unimproved
Road D, E, F, G 30’
1. The corner visibility triangle shall have the same dimension on all corners of the intersection.
FIGURE 2.28: Corner Visibility Triangle for an Intersection
2. Vision at all intersections of thoroughfares shall be clear at elevations between thirty inches
(30”) and nine feet (9’) above the average gutter elevation within the corner visibility triangle
and meet AASHTO’s current minimum requirements.
3. Where alleys intersect residential Type E, F, and G thoroughfares, the corner visibility
triangle is measured as fifteen feet (15’) along the residential street ROW and five feet (5’)
along the alley ROW from the point of intersection. These two points are then connected
with an imaginary line to form the corner visibility triangle as shown in Figure 2.29. The
alley corner visibility triangle shall be dedicated as ROW.
X
X
X
X
Corner Visibility Triangle
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-48
15 Ft.
5 Ft.
Residential Street
Alley
ROW
FIGURE 2.29: Corner Visibility Triangle for an Alley
C. Sight Line Triangles
1. The sight line triangle is formed by first extending a line along the center line of the proposed
thoroughfare or driveway that begins at the tangent curb of the intersecting thoroughfare and
extends to its endpoint fifteen feet (15’) into the proposed thoroughfare or driveway. For the
sight line triangle to the left, construct a second imaginary line that is parallel to and five feet
(5’) out from the intersecting thoroughfare’s curb that begins at the centerline of the side
street and continues to the left for a distance L (see Table 2.13) to its endpoint. To complete
the sight line triangle, connect the endpoints of the first two lines as shown in Figures 2.30
and 2.31. In the case of the sight line triangle to the right, the second imaginary line is
parallel and five feet (5’) out from the nearest edge of the conflicting traffic flow (or adjacent
median in the event of a divided thoroughfare). It begins at the centerline of the side street
and continues to the right for a distance R (see Table 2.13) to its endpoint. See Figures 2.30
and 2.31.
2. Distance to driver’s eye for driveways that intersect a street is fifteen feet (15’) from the
intersecting curb line as shown in Figures 2.30 and 2.31.
3. In the case where the thoroughfare contains existing horizontal curvature, the distances L and
R must be measured along the horizontal curve.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-49
4. Sight Line Triangles that extend outside of the ROW shall be identified and dedicated as
Visibility, Access and Maintenance Easements (VAMs) on the plat using City-approved
VAM language.
L R
5'
15'
5'
CL
CL
FIGURE 2.30: Sight Line Triangle for Undivided Thoroughfare
L R
5'
15'
5'
CL
L C
FIGURE 2.31: Sight Line Triangle for Divided Thoroughfare
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-50
TABLE 2.13: Sight Line Triangle Distances
Design
Speed
V (MPH)
Sight Distance by Lanes in Cross Section
L and R (ft)
2 4(2) 6(2)
25 280(3) N/A N/A
30 335 N/A N/A
35 390 N/A N/A
40 445 N/A N/A
45 500 530 565
50 555 590 625
(1) Source AASHTO’s 2011 A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets – Chapter 9.
(2) Manual calculations of the procedures in AASHTO’s 2011 A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways
and Street s– Chapter 9
(3) 150 feet with approval by the Director of Engineering Services.
D. Traffic Control Devices – Any landscape requirements in the Engineering Standards, the
Subdivision Ordinance, the Zoning Ordinance, or any other City ordinance shall not interfere
with the placement, visibility or maintenance of traffic control devices under governmental
authority and control.
2.08 Frontage Road Design
A. Frontage roads are typically a pair of one-way roadways found adjacent to existing or planned
freeway or tollway facilities.
B. Frontage roads are considered Type A thoroughfares. Frontage roads for the Dallas North
Tollway shall be designed to the Type A standards set forth in this document. Frontage roads
along state highways shall follow TxDOT design guidelines.
C. Access to frontage roads shall also conform to the standards set forth for Type A thoroughfares.
In addition, the following access restrictions apply to frontage road design:
1. Exit Ramp Restrictions:
a. No driveway shall be located less than fifty feet (50’) in advance of the concrete curb
gore of an exit ramp, measured from the edge of the driveway.
b. No driveway shall be located less than four hundred feet (400’) beyond the concrete curb
gore of an exit ramp, measured from the edge of the driveway.
2. Entrance Ramp Restrictions:
a. No driveway shall be located less than two hundred feet (200’) in advance of the concrete
curb gore of an entrance ramp, measured from the edge of the driveway.
b. No driveway shall be located less than fifty feet (50’) beyond the concrete curb gore of an
entrance ramp, measured from the edge of the driveway.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-51
2.09 Traffic Signal Installation
A. Introduction – According to the Texas Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices (TMUTCD),
traffic control signals should not be installed unless one or more of the signal warrants in the
manual are met. The satisfaction of a warrant or warrants is not in itself justification for a signal.
Information should be obtained by means of engineering studies and compared with the
requirements set forth in the warrants. The engineering study should indicate the installation of a
traffic signal will improve the overall safety and/or operation of the intersection. If these
requirements are not met, a traffic signal should neither be put into operation nor continued in
operation (if already installed).
B. Warrant Criteria
1. To justify the installation of a traffic signal, Part IV in the TMUTCD shall be followed. Part
IV describes the warrants for a traffic signal installation and provides guidelines and
requirements for the actual design and operation of a traffic signal.
2. Engineering studies must be conducted in order to assess whether a particular location
satisfies the warrant criteria listed in the TMUTCD. These studies may include one or more
of the following:
a. Traffic volume counts
b. Pedestrian volume counts
c. Delay studies
d. Speed studies
e. Gap studies
f. Diagram of physical conditions
g. Accident studies
C. Traffic Signal Spacing – Signal spacing is an important factor in being able to provide
progressive flow for a platoon of traffic. Traffic signal spacing shall be determined by the
Director of Engineering Services.
D. Traffic Signal Design and Installation – The design and installation of traffic signals shall follow
the City’s Technical Specifications.
E. Cost of Traffic Signal Installation
1. Traffic signals where a private driveway or a residential street intersects with a Type A or B
thoroughfare – The developer is responsible for the total cost of designing and constructing a
traffic signal that would only be warranted based on the traffic generated by the development.
The developer shall escrow funds for the cost of the traffic signal and the City shall construct
the traffic signal at the time of development or when the development reaches a certain level
of activity, as determined by the Director of Engineering Services. If a future traffic signal
will equally serve a development on each side of the thoroughfare, each development shall be
responsible for half the cost of the traffic signal.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-52
2. Traffic signals at Type A-A, A-B, and B-B intersections – The developer on each corner of a
Type A-A, A-B, or B-B intersection is responsible for a portion of the cost of designing and
constructing a future traffic signal at the intersection and shall escrow such funds with the
City at the time of development. Seventy-five percent (75%) of the total cost of designing
and constructing the traffic signal shall be divided equally among each of the four corners of
the intersection and then proportionally assessed to each lot within a fifteen (15) acre area at
each corner, measured eight hundred eight feet (808’) in each direction from the corner. In
the case of a three-leg intersection, an imaginary fourth leg shall be assumed for the purposes
of creating four corners. As each lot develops as a portion of each corner, the trips generated
by that land use shall be calculated and compared to the trips that would be generated by the
total fifteen (15) acre area, the ratio of which determines the proportion of the traffic signal
escrow that shall be assessed to that lot. If a preliminary site plan has not been approved for
the whole fifteen (15) acre area, the land uses of a typical shopping center shall be assumed.
If there are less than fifteen (15) acres that can be developed on a corner, the trips generated
by a developing lot will be compared to a hypothetical fifteen (15) acre shopping center.
2.10 Street Lighting
A. The following standards shall apply to all Type A and Type B Thoroughfares:
1. Street lighting shall be placed in the medians, with spacing not to exceed one hundred eighty
feet (180’) and no closer than one hundred fifty feet (150’) depending on median breaks and
intersections.
2. Unless a photometric analysis suggests the use of a different type of luminaire, street lighting
shall use Full Cutoff, Type 3 Luminaires on thoroughfares with one hundred twenty feet
(120’) of ROW and Full Cutoff, Type 2 Luminaires on thoroughfares with one hundred feet
(100’) of ROW.
3. Die cast aluminum or extruded aluminum with segmented internal reflector, 250-watt Metal
Halide single or double head with davit arm(s) traffic black (RAL9017-traffic black) in color,
or the equivalent approved by the Director of Engineering Services shall be used.
4. Street lighting shall be installed prior to final acceptance of the construction of a
thoroughfare. When partial thoroughfares are constructed, the Director of Engineering
Services may allow the payment of a street light fee in lieu of installing the required lighting.
Where property lines bisect thoroughfares, each Owner (Developer) is responsible for onehalf
the total cost of fully developed street lighting along that segment of the thoroughfare.
5. When development occurs along a Type A or Type B thoroughfare, the Owner (Developer)
shall pay a street light fee to reimburse the City for the future or past installation of street
lighting. The fee shall be paid prior to final acceptance of the development and the amount
shall be determined by multiplying the then current fee rate by the amount of linear frontage
the developing lot has along one or both sides of the thoroughfare.
6. Poles are to be round and tapered with a maximum height of thirty feet (30') in accordance
with the City’s Standard Details and specifications.
7. Type A ground boxes with concrete aprons are required in accordance with the City’s
Standard Details and specifications.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-53
8. Street lighting foundations shall be thirty inches by ninety six inches (30” x 96”) in
accordance with the City’s Standard Details and specifications.
9. Street lighting conduit shall be two inch (2”) Schedule 40 PVC.
10. Street lighting shall use #12 AWG wiring inside the poles.
11. Electrical service pedestals shall be 240V/480V and meet the local service provider’s
specifications.
12. Conduit shall be installed as shown in Section 6.02, Landscape Requirements in the Median.
B. The following standards shall apply to all Type C commercial collectors:
1. Street lighting shall be placed in the parkway between the curb and the sidewalk, with
spacing not to exceed one hundred eighty feet (180’) and no closer than one hundred fifty feet
(150’).
2. Street lighting shall use Full Cutoff, Type 2 Luminaires.
3. Die cast aluminum or extruded aluminum with segmented internal reflector, 250-watt Metal
Halide single head with davit arm traffic black (RAL-9017 traffic black) in color, or
equivalent approved by the Director of Engineering Services shall be used.
4. Street lighting shall be installed prior to final acceptance of the construction of a commercial
collector. When the delay of installing street lighting is deemed appropriate by the Director
of Engineering Services, the Director may allow the payment of a street light fee in lieu of
installing the required lighting. Where property lines bisect collectors, each owner
(Developer) is responsible for one-half of the total cost of fully developed street lighting
along that segment of the collector.
5. When development occurs along a Type C commercial collector, the Owner (Developer)
shall pay a street light fee to reimburse the City for the future or past installation of street
lighting. The fee shall be paid prior to final acceptance of the development and the amount
shall be determined by multiplying the then current fee rate by the amount of linear frontage
the developing lot has along one or both sides of the collector.
6. Poles are to be round tapered with a maximum height of thirty feet (30’) in accordance with
the City’s Standard Details and specifications.
7. Type A ground boxes with concrete aprons are required in accordance with the City’s
Standard Details and specifications.
8. Street lighting foundations shall be thirty inches by ninety six inches (30” x 96”) in
accordance with the City’s Standard Details and specifications.
9. Street lighting conduit shall be two inch (2”) Schedule 40 PVC.
10. Street lighting shall use #12 AWG wiring inside the poles.
11. Electrical service pedestals shall be 240V/480V and meet the local service provider’s
specifications.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-54
C. The following standards shall apply to all Type D, E, F, and G Residential Streets:
1. Poles are to be round tapered, American style with Barrington base, black in color. Pole
height shall be twelve feet (12’) for Type D, E, F, and G local streets and fourteen feet (14’)
for residential collectors.
2. Lamp wattages shall be 100 watts High Pressure Sodium.
3. Luminaires shall be Acorn with refractive globes, metal cap and finial.
4. The Developer may install additional banding and/or medallions with prior approval from the
Director of Engineering Services. The cost for maintenance and/or replacement of the
banding and/or medallions shall be the responsibility of the developer or Homeowners’
Association.
5. Street lights shall be installed without multiple luminaires.
6. Street lights shall typically be located at intersections and at mid-block locations if the block
length is greater than six hundred feet (600’). Cul-de-sacs over two hundred twenty five feet
(225’) in length, measured from centerline of cross street to center point of cul-de-sac, shall
have a street light installed at the street intersection and at the beginning of the bulb. Other
locations may be required as deemed necessary by the Director of Engineering Services.
Street lights shall not be closer than one hundred fifty feet (150’) nor greater than six hundred
feet (600’) apart.
7. Subdivisions bounded by Type A or Type B thoroughfares shall have a common type of
luminaire throughout. Street lighting shall be installed prior to acceptance by the Director of
Engineering Services.
D. A lighting plan shall be required anytime street lighting is proposed, or modified. The lighting
plan shall be submitted to the Director of Engineering Services for a construction permit. A
certified engineer, architect, landscape architect, lighting engineer or designer shall prepare the
plan. The plan shall also contain a certification by the property owner or agent and the preparer
of the plan that the street lighting depicted on the plan complies with these requirements. The
submission shall contain but shall not necessarily be limited to the following:
1. Plans indicating the location of the lighting, and the type of illuminating devices, fixtures,
lamps, supports, reflectors, and other devices;
2. Description of the illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors, and other
devices and the description may include, but is not limited to, catalog cuts by manufacturers
and drawings (including sections where required) and height of the luminaires;
3. Photometric plan and data sheets, such as that furnished by manufacturers, or similar to that
furnished by manufacturers or the lighting designer, showing the angle of cut off or light
emissions; and
4. Water and sewer locations along with any other existing utilities lightly shaded on plans
showing any possible location conflicts with proposed lighting.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-55
E. The following are exempt from these requirements:
1. “Cobra head” type lighting fixtures having dished or “drop” lenses or refractors which house
other than incandescent light sources in undeveloped areas.
2. Temporary lighting approved in writing by the Director of Engineering Services.
3. Where existing or phased subdivisions are currently under construction, the continued use of
previously approved street lighting will be permitted. When a new phase of a subdivision is
divided by a residential collector, the street lighting standards contained in these requirements
shall be required.
4. City Council may vary from these requirements as part of the approval of public street and
sidewalk projects in overlay districts and Planned Developments.
5. Lighting luminaires in existence on the effective date of these requirements shall be exempt
from these standards and shall be considered legally non-conforming. Such fixtures may be
repaired, maintained and/or replaced. If an identical replacement of non-conforming
luminaires is not available, the new luminaires shall comply with these requirements.
2.11 Street Name Signs
A. Street name signs shall be installed at all intersections of public streets, private streets, and public
ways in accordance with the City’s Standard Details, Technical Specifications and requirements.
B. Street name blades shall be nine inch (9”) tall extruded aluminum.
C. The street name shall be left justified, with block numbers located in the upper right-hand corner.
Abbreviated street designations shall be located in the lower right-hand corner and right-justified.
D. The lettering of the street name shall be Clear View 2W, six inches (6”) tall and upper/lower case.
Letters of abbreviated street designations shall be three inches (3”) tall and all uppercase (i.e.,
LN, PKWY, DR, CT, etc.). Block numbers shall be 3” tall.
E. A street name shall be limited to sixteen (16) characters, not including the street designation. A
street name shall either consist of one word no longer than sixteen (16) letters or two words
separated by one space where the two words have no more than fifteen (15) letters combined.
F. Sign sheeting shall be diamond grade intensity. The background shall be green and the legend
shall be white.
G. For a street with only one cul-de-sac end, a standard W 14-2a shall be mounted over the street
name blade. In the case of a street with two cul-de-sac ends, two standard W 14-2a signs shall be
mounted over the street name blade in the appropriate directions.
H. Owners, developers, and/or contractors should contact Development Services at (972) 292-5300
to obtain block numbers. Block numbers are required on all street name blades, even if no homes
or buildings front onto the street.
2.12 Traffic Impact Analysis and Mitigation
A. Purpose – The purpose of a Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) is to assess the effects of specific
development activity on the existing and planned thoroughfare system. Development activity
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-56
may include but is not limited to rezoning, preliminary site plans, site plans, preliminary plats,
driveway permits, certificates of occupancy, and Thoroughfare Plan amendments.
B. Pre-submission Meeting – Prior to the commencement of a TIA, an initial or pre-submission
meeting with City staff is required to establish a base of communication between the City and the
applicant. This meeting will define the requirements and scope relative to conducting a TIA and
ensure that any questions by the applicant are addressed.
C. Applicability of TIA Requirements
1. Zoning – These TIA requirements shall apply to all zoning requests for land uses which will
generate 2,500 or more vehicle trips per day or contain a density of 0.75 Floor Area Ratio
(FAR) or greater. Applicable requests include zoning requests and Thoroughfare Plan
amendments, if no previous traffic assessment was performed. Special circumstances,
including but not limited to development with no case history, which do not meet the daily
trip generation threshold, may also require a TIA. Such circumstances, as determined by the
Director of Engineering Services may include, but are not limited to, impacts to residential
neighborhoods from non-residential development, inadequate site accessibility, the
implementation of the surrounding Thoroughfare Plan is not anticipated during the estimated
time period of the proposed development, the proposed land use differs significantly from
that contemplated in the Comprehensive Plan, or the internal street or access is not
anticipated to accommodate the expected traffic generation.
2. Development – These TIA requirements shall apply to all development requests for land uses,
except single-family residential development, which will generate over 100 total trips during
the AM or PM peak hour. Applicable development requests include concept plans,
preliminary site plans, site plans and preliminary plats. Special cases, in which site generated
peak hour trip activity is different from that of the adjacent street (weekdays 7:00-9:00 a.m.
and 4:00-6:00 p.m.), may require an additional separate analysis as determined by the
Director of Engineering Services. Such circumstances may include, but are not limited to,
commercial/retail, entertainment or institutional activity. The Director of Engineering
Services may waive the TIA for a development request if a TIA was performed previously
with the Zoning request and conditions listed in the report are still current.
3. Single-Family Residential Exception – A TIA for single-family residential development will
not be required if the development contains fewer than six dwelling units unless special
circumstances exist, as determined by the Director of Engineering Services. These special
circumstances may include, but are not limited to, impacts to other residential development
from cut-through traffic, inadequate site accessibility, the implementation of the surrounding
Thoroughfare Plan is not anticipated during the estimated time period of the proposed
development, the internal street or access system is not anticipated to accommodate the
expected traffic generation, or the development is outside the urban core of the community
4. Daycares and Schools – All development requests and/or specific use permit requests for a
daycare, Montessori school, private school, charter school, or public school shall include, at a
minimum, a traffic circulation study. This study shall include the estimated maximum peak
hour trip generation of the facility, the planned circulation of inbound and outbound traffic
during drop-off and pick-up operations, and the estimated length of the queue of cars waiting
to pick up students. The design of the site and the circulation plan shall ensure that school
traffic does back up onto any public street. The traffic circulation study shall include a
statement that the owner and/or operator of the daycare or school agrees to operate the facility
in accordance with the approved circulation plan. The circulation plan must be approved by
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-57
the Director of Engineering Services before the development request or the specific use
permit can be approved.
5. Determination of Applicability – The need for a TIA shall be determined by the Director of
Engineering Services based upon the results and recommendation from a pre-submission
meeting. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to demonstrate that a TIA should not
be required. If a TIA is required, the level of effort for a TIA submission shall be determined
based on the criteria set forth in Table 2.14. Depending upon the specific site characteristics
of the proposed development, one or more of the following elements may also be required as
part of the TIA: an accident analysis, sight distance survey, traffic simulation, traffic signal
warrant analysis, queuing analysis, turn lane analysis, and/or traffic circulation plan.
TABLE 2.14: Criteria for Determining TIA Study Requirements
Analysis
Category
Site Trips Generated at
Full Build-Out TIA Analysis Periods(1) Minimum Study Area(3)
I >50 peak hour driveway
trips; or
100-500 total peak hour
trips
1. Existing year
2. Opening year(2)
3. Five years after opening
1. All site access drives
2. All signalized
intersections and/or major
unsignalized intersections
within 0.5 mile to 1 mile of
site boundary
II >500 total peak hour
trips
1. Existing year
2. Opening year of each
phase
3. Five years after initial
opening
4. Ten years after final
opening with full build-out
1. All site access drives
2. All signalized
intersections and/or major
unsignalized intersections
within 1.5 miles of site
boundary
1. Analysis periods shall include build and no-build scenarios. Assume full occupancy when each phase opens.
2. Assume full build-out.
3. For certain projects, the City may require an enlarged study area. Land uses within the study area should include
recently approved or pending development adjacent to the site.
D. Requirements for TIA Updates – A TIA shall be updated when time or circumstances of the
original study fall within the parameters presented in Table 2.15. The applicant is responsible for
preparation and submittal of appropriate documentation in order for City staff to process the
zoning or development application. A TIA for site development requests must be updated if two
years have passed since the original submittal, or if existing or assumed conditions have changed
within the defined study area. The Director of Engineering Services shall make the final
determination as to the extent of a TIA update.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-58
TABLE 2.15: Criteria for Determining TIA Update Requirements
Original TIA
Report was
based on:
Changes to the Originally Proposed Development:
Access Changed(1) or
Trip Generation Increased by
more than 10%
Access Not Changed and
Trip Generation Increased by less
than 10%
Zoning; or
Preliminary Site Plan
or Site Plan that is
less than 2 years old
Letter Amendment Required:
Identify and report only analysis
conditions that have changed
Letter Documenting Change (No
analysis is required)
Preliminary Site Plan
or Site Plan that is
more than 2 years old
Prepare New Study. Must meet
all current TIA requirements
Prepare New Study. Must meet all
current TIA requirements.
1. Changed access includes proposed new access or refinement of general access locations not specifically addressed
in original proposed development.
E. Responsibility of TIA Preparation and Review
1. A TIA shall be prepared in accordance with all of the guidelines in this section and submitted
in accordance with the Development Review Schedule set by the City. The responsibility for
TIA preparation shall rest with the applicant and must be performed by a Professional
Engineer (P.E.) licensed in the State of Texas with experience in traffic and transportation
engineering. The final TIA report must be signed and sealed by the P.E. responsible for the
analysis to be considered for review by the City. Application and review fees are due at the
time of each submittal. City staff shall serve primarily in a review and advisory capacity and
will only provide data to the applicant when available.
2. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to submit four (4) draft TIA reports and
executive summaries with the zoning and/or development request submission. The proper
number of reports, the timing for submission, and the review of these reports shall be based
on standard City development review procedures. Incomplete TIAs or failure to submit a
TIA with the submission shall delay consideration of zoning and development requests.
Should it be determined during the review of any zoning and/or development plans that a TIA
is required, consideration shall be deferred until the applicant submits a completed TIA and
the City has reviewed the assessment.
3. The City shall review the TIA and provide comments to the applicant. It shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to submit four (4) finalized TIA reports and executive
summaries once all review comments have been addressed.
F. TIA Standards
1. Design Level of Service – The minimum acceptable level of service (LOS) within the City
shall be defined as LOS “D” in the peak hour for all critical movements and links. All
development impacts on both thoroughfare and intersection operations must be measured
against this standard.
2. Trip Generation Resources – The City’s standard for trip generation rates for various land use
categories shall be those found in the latest edition of Trip Generation published by the
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-59
Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) or other published or recognized sources
applicable to the region. Alternate trip generation rates may be accepted on a case-by-case
basis if the applicant can provide current supporting data substantiating that their
development significantly differs from the ITE rates. The Director of Engineering Services
must approve alternative trip generation rates in writing in advance of the TIA submission.
3. Trip Reductions – Trip reductions for passer-by trips and mixed-use developments will be
permitted, subject to analytical support provided by the applicant and approval by the
Director of Engineering Services on a case-by-case basis. Assumptions relative to
automobile occupancy, transit mode share, or percentage of daily traffic to occur in the peak
hour must be documented and will be considered subject to analytical support provided by
the applicant.
4. Study Horizon Years – The TIA must evaluate the impact of the proposed development on
both existing traffic conditions and future traffic conditions for the horizon year(s) as
specified in Table 2.14. However, applications for densities of 0.75 Floor Area Ratio (FAR)
or greater within the Dallas North Tollway, SH 121, US 380 or Preston Road corridors
(throughout the City Limits) shall require that the horizon year land use assumptions be
updated to reflect full development based on all proposed zoning. These applications should
also assume full development of the Master Thoroughfare Plan or pending amendments.
G. TIA Methodology
1. Site Location/Study Area – A brief description of the size, general features, and location of
the site, including a map of the site in relation to the study area and surrounding vicinity.
2. Existing Zoning – A description of the existing zoning for the site and adjacent property,
including land area by zoning classification and density by FAR, square footage, number of
hotel rooms, and dwelling units (as appropriate);
3. Existing Development – A description of any existing development on the site and adjacent
to the site and how it would be affected by the development proposal;
4. Proposed Zoning / Site Development – A description of the proposed zoning/development for
the site, including land area by zoning classification and density by FAR, square footage,
number of hotel rooms, and dwelling units (as appropriate); identify other adjacent land uses
that have similar peaking characteristics as the proposed land use; identify recently approved
or pending land uses within the area;
5. Thoroughfare System – A description and map of existing planned or proposed thoroughfares
and traffic signals for horizon year(s) within the study area;
6. Existing Traffic Volumes – Recent traffic counts for existing thoroughfares and major
intersections within the study area;
7. Projected Traffic Volumes – Background traffic projections for the planned thoroughfare
system within the study area for the horizon year(s);
8. Density of Development – A table displaying the amount of development assumed for
existing zoning and/or the proposed development (using gross floor area, dwelling units,
occupied beds, etc., as required by the trip generation methodology);
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-60
9. Existing Site Trip Generation – A table displaying trip generation rates and total trips
generated by land use category for the AM and PM peak hours and on a daily basis, assuming
full development and occupancy based on existing zoning (if applicable), and including all
appropriate trip reductions (as approved by the Director of Engineering Services);
10. Proposed Site Trip Generation – A table displaying trip generation rates and total trips
generated by land use category for the AM and PM peak hours and on a daily basis, assuming
full development and occupancy for the proposed development, and including all appropriate
trip reductions (as approved by the Director of Engineering Services);
11. Net Change in Trip Generation (for rezoning cases) – Proposed trip generation minus existing
trip generation (if applicable); the net increase in trips to be added to base volumes for the
design year;
12. Trip Distribution and Traffic Assignment – Tables and figures of trips generated by the
proposed development (or net change in trips, if applicable) added to the existing and
projected volumes, as appropriate, with distribution and assignment assumptions, unless
computer modeling has been performed;
13. Level of Service Evaluations – Capacity analyses for weekday AM and PM peak hours of the
roadway and peak hour of the site, if different from the roadway, for both existing conditions
and horizon year projections for intersections, thoroughfare links, median openings and turn
lanes associated with the site, as applicable;
14. Traffic Signal Evaluations – The need for new traffic signals based on warrants and their
impact on the performance of the transportation system;
15. Evaluation of Proposed/Necessary Mitigation – Capacity analyses for weekday AM and PM
peak hours of the roadway and peak hour of the site, if different from the roadway, for
intersections, thoroughfare links, median openings and turn lanes associated with the site
under proposed/necessary traffic mitigation measures;
16. Conclusions – Identification of all thoroughfares, driveways, intersections, and individual
movements that exceed LOS D or degrade by one or more LOS, the percentage of roadway
volume change produced by the proposed development, and any operational problems likely
to occur;
17. Recommendations – Proposed impact mitigation measures consistent with Subsection I
below; and
18. Other information required for proper review – As requested by the Director of Engineering
Services.
H. TIA Report Format
1. The TIA report must be prepared on 8½” x 11” sheets of paper. However, it may contain
figures on larger sheets, provided they are folded to this size. All text and map products shall
be computer-based and provided in both published format and computer file format (PDF).
In addition, all electronic files used as part of the traffic analysis (i.e., Synchro, HCS, Passer
II/III, CORSIM, VISSIM, etc.) shall be provided.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-61
2. The sections of the TIA report should be categorized according to the outline shown below:
Executive Summary
I. Introduction
A. Purpose
B. Methodology
II. Existing And Proposed Land Use
A. Site Location/Study Area
B. Existing Zoning
C. Existing Development
D. Proposed Zoning (if applicable)
III. Existing And Proposed Transportation System
A. Thoroughfare System
B. Existing Traffic Volumes
C. Projected Traffic Volumes
IV. Site Traffic Characteristics
A. Existing Site Trip Generation (if applicable)
B. Proposed Site Trip Generation
C. Net Change in Trip Generation (if applicable)
D. Trip Distribution and Traffic Assignment
V. Traffic Analysis
A. Level of Service Evaluations
B. Traffic Signal Evaluations
VI. Mitigation
VII. Conclusions
VIII. Recommendations
Appendices
I. Traffic Impact Mitigation
1. Mitigation of traffic impacts shall be required if the proposed development would cause a
facility or traffic movement to exceed LOS D, or where it already exceeds LOS D and the
development would contribute five percent (5%) or more of the total traffic during any
projected horizon year. If mitigation is required, the applicant must only mitigate the impact
of the proposed development, and would not be responsible for alleviating any deficiencies in
the thoroughfare system that may occur without the proposed development.
2. Acceptable mitigation measures shall include:
a. Staging of development in order to relate site development to the construction of the
required thoroughfare system;
b. Staging of development so that the site contributes less than five percent (5%) of the total
traffic to the affected facility or traffic movement during the projected horizon year;
c. Off-site improvements, including the provision of right-of-way and/or the participation in
funding for needed thoroughfare and intersection improvement projects (including, but
not limited to, through lanes, turn lanes or traffic signals); and
d. On-site improvements, including access controls and site circulation adjustments.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 2 – Thoroughfare Design Requirements May 2012 Page 2-62
3. Mitigation is not required if it can be shown that the traffic impacts of the project are fully
mitigated ten (10) years after the final opening with any improvements that are already
programmed to be implemented within five (5) years of the initial opening.
J. Administration of the TIA – Based on the results of the TIA and actions recommended by the
Director of Engineering Services, the Planning & Zoning Commission and/or the City Council, as
appropriate, shall take one or more of the following actions:
1. Approve the zoning or development request, if the project has been determined to have no
significant impact or where the impacts can be adequately mitigated;
2. Approve the development request, subject to a phasing plan;
3. Recommend study of the City Thoroughfare Plan to determine amendments required to
increase capacity;
4. Recommend amendment of the Capital Improvement Program (CIP) to expedite construction
of needed improvements; or
5. Deny the zoning or development request, where the impacts cannot be adequately mitigated.
K. Cost of TIA Review by City – The cost for review of TIA submittals shall be based on the
parameters set forth in the City’s Development Fee Schedule and paid in full at time of
submission.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 3 – Pavement and Subgrade Design Requirements May 2012 Page 3-1
SECTION 3 – PAVEMENT AND SUBGRADE DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 3 – Pavement and Subgrade Design Requirements May 2012 Page 3-2
Section 3 – Pavement and Subgrade Design Requirements
3.01 General
A. The following specifies minimum standards required for the design of pavement and subgrade for
roadways within the City. These minimum standards are not intended to replace the professional
judgment of the Engineer for any specific pavement project. The standards may need to be
expanded or modified on a case by case basis as determined necessary and appropriate by the
Engineer, and as approved by the Director of Engineering Services.
B. All roadway, alley, and fire lane pavements shall have a subgrade investigation and pavement
design.
C. Pavement and subgrade designs shall be submitted to the City for review in accordance with these
requirements. However, any such review shall be conducted as a means to verify if the design has
been performed in general conformance to the City’s requirements, and shall not be considered a
detailed technical review of the design for adequacy, accuracy, or completeness. The Engineer
performing the pavement design shall remain responsible for the technical adequacy, accuracy,
and completeness of the pavement and subgrade design and shall not be relieved of any
responsibility for such as a result of the City’s review.
D. When performing the pavement and subgrade designs and providing submittals of such to the
City, the Engineer shall specifically document in writing any intended deviations from the City’s
minimum standards, and shall provide adequate justifications as deemed necessary by the
Director of Engineering Services.
E. Refer to Engineering Standards Appendices (Standard Details, Technical Specifications) for
additional specific requirements.
3.02 Subgrade and Pavement Design Report
A. Results of the field and laboratory investigations, engineering analyses and recommendations
shall be presented in a report.
B. The report shall be signed and sealed by a Licensed Professional Engineer in the State of Texas
trained and qualified to provide geotechnical engineering analysis, and design recommendations.
C. The report shall contain a specific list of pavement and subgrade thickness, moisture conditioning
of subgrade soils (if applicable), and stabilization requirements including lime source, type, and
concentration (by dry weight) which can be easily incorporated to plans and specifications.
D. All calculations and laboratory tests shall be included in the report along with boring location
plan and geology maps.
E. The information and recommendations contained in the report must be accepted by the Director
of Engineering Services in writing.
3.03 Subgrade Design Requirements
A. Subgrade investigation may be conducted according to either of two methods: the Swell Test
Alternative or the calculated Potential Vertical Rise (PVR) -TxDOT Tex-124-E Alternative.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 3 – Pavement and Subgrade Design Requirements May 2012 Page 3-3
B. The subgrade investigation shall consist at a minimum of a field investigation and a laboratory
investigation.
C. Field Investigation elements include:
1. Swell Test Alternative: Borings shall be drilled on center of roadway at 250’ spacing (or
less), alternating between each roadway direction or on a 200’ grid throughout a subdivision
to a depth of at least 10’ below finished subgrade.
2. PVR-TxDOT Tex-124-E Alternative: Borings shall be drilled on center of roadway at 250’
spacing (or less), alternating between each roadway direction or on a 200' grid throughout a
subdivision to a depth of at least 20’ below finished subgrade.
3. Borings shall be sampled at 3’ intervals or less to a depth of 10’ and at 5’ intervals or less
thereafter.
4. Bulk samples of each soil type encountered in the upper 5’ shall be taken.
5. Logs shall be developed to provide a lithographic log of the soil types encountered in each
boring, descriptions of each layer and groundwater conditions.
D. Laboratory Investigation elements include:
1. Swell characteristics and movement potential shall be determined using either the Swell Test
Alternative or calculated Potential Vertical Rise for a 20’ depth of moisture penetration.
Assumptions involved in calculating the PVR shall be documented and submitted to the City
upon request.
Swell Test Alternative: Test for swell potential using ASTM D 4546 at 200 psf
stress at least two samples per boring at varying depths from 0’ to 10’ to
determine with reasonable certainty the average swell potential of the subgrade.
PVR-TxDOT Tex-124-E Alternative:
2. Moisture Content Tests (ASTM D 2216) shall be performed. Due to the variability in
moisture contents, the Geotechnical Engineer shall assess the condition of the samples and
the season. When in the Geotechnical Engineer's opinion the samples are wetter than should
normally be expected, the samples may be air dried such that the samples represent the drier
portion of the year. Average all swell test results to determine the mean maximum swell
percentage and the standard deviation. For samples taken during the months of June through
September use the mean swell percentage. For samples taken during all other time periods
use the mean plus one standard deviation to determine the design swell percentage.
Test for swell potential using swell tests
(ASTM D4546) and/or soil suction tests (ASTM D5298) necessary to calculate
PVR for a 20’ moisture penetration.
3. Soil types in each boring shall be subjected to classification tests; Atterberg limits (ASTM D
4318) and Percent Passing the No. 200 sieve (ASTM D 1140) and moisture/density. Where
logs show uniform conditions, the number of tests can be reduced by visual classification, as
long as there is at least one set of classification tests per each two borings.
4. Based upon the results of classification tests, group the samples and identify the subgrade soil
types in the upper 5’ which impact the pavement design
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 3 – Pavement and Subgrade Design Requirements May 2012 Page 3-4
5. Test for sulfates in the upper 3’ of the subgrade in each boring using EPA 9038 or EPA 375.4
with 10:1 dilution ratio. Provide sufficient testing to determine with reasonable certainty the
levels of sulfate present.
6. Provide engineering recommendation regarding acceptable sulfate levels for each soil type at
the required lime stabilization content. See 3.03.F below
7. Perform a lime stabilization series for each soil type expected to be in the upper 12” of the
subgrade. The Eades-Grimm method of pH testing shall be used to obtain a beginning point.
Additional testing shall be performed for each soil type to determine lime content. Minimum
Design Criteria are:
pH = 12.4 after mellowing (ASTM D 2976)
Swell potential <1.0 percent under 200 psf stress test (ASTM D 4546)
The minimum lime content shall be the percentage, by weight, of hydrated lime
required to meet the City’s minimum requirements plus 1.0%.
For light brown Eagle Ford formation clays, the minimum lime percentage shall
be 7.0 percent hydrated lime (plus 1% for field variations for a total of 8%). For
dark brown Eagle Ford formation clays, the minimum lime percentage shall be
10.5 percent hydrated lime (plus 1% for field variations for a total of 11.5%).
E. Weathered Eagle Ford formation shale material encountered within 8’ below finished subgrade
shall be excavated to a depth of at least the depth of required moisture treatment and replaced
with on-site light brown or dark brown clays or other approved material.
F. Light brown Eagle Ford formation clays having over 5,000 ppm (0.5%) sulfate, and dark brown
Eagle Ford formation clays having over 25,000 ppm (2.5%) sulfate shall be stabilized using
double application method. (See Technical Specifications for description of lime application
methods.)
G. Weathered Eagle Ford formation shale is not suitable for stabilization without appropriate
detailed engineering and laboratory design and acceptance by the City. Weathered Eagle Ford
formation shale having over 15,000 ppm (1.5 %) sulfate level shall be lime stabilized using
double application method.
H. The results of the field and laboratory investigation shall be used to provide a subgrade design
typically consisting of moisture treated subgrade and lime stabilized subgrade.
I. Alternative subgrade treatment and stabilization with comparable performance may be proposed
if recommended by the Geotechnical Engineer and if approved by the Director of Engineering
Services in writing, .
J. The following engineering requirements will apply to the moisture treated subgrade:
1. Swell Testing Alternative: Use Figure 3.1 to determine the minimum depth of moisture
treatment based on average swell potential percentage to 10’ (mean plus one standard
deviation) and anticipated speed limit.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 3 – Pavement and Subgrade Design Requirements May 2012 Page 3-5
2. PVR-TxDOT Tex-124-E Alternative:
3. Moisture treatment to a minimum of 3 percentage points above optimum moisture content at
a minimum of 95 percent standard Proctor (ASTM D 698) shall be required for at least 2’ of
the subgrade. Thicker zones of moisture treatment may be required depending upon the
average swell potential. The thickness shall be determined in accordance with Figure 3.1 or
as determined by calculations.
The PVR shall be calculated based upon 20’ moisture
penetration and shall provide moisture treatment depth to limit the PVR to 4.5”. Submit all
calculations and assumptions involved in calculating the PVR and the recommended depth of
moisture treatment to the City for review upon request.
FIGURE 3.1: Recommended Depth of Moisture
K. The upper portion of the subgrade shall be lime stabilized in accordance with the laboratory
determined lime percentage. A minimum subgrade thickness of 8” for residential streets and 12”
for arterial streets shall be lime stabilized.
L. Moisture treatment and lime stabilization shall extend at least 4’ beyond the edge of pavement. A
moisture barrier consisting of at least 10 mil poly sheeting shall be placed horizontally on the
subgrade beyond the pavement edge and extend at least 6’ on either side of the pavement neat
line after final compaction. The barrier shall be covered with at least 8” of lightly compacted soil.
3.04 Pavement Design Requirements
A. The roadway pavement thickness shall be based on subgrade investigation and Pavement Design
Catalog.
Type A & B
Type C D E F G Alleys
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 3 – Pavement and Subgrade Design Requirements May 2012 Page 3-6
B. Pavement Design Catalog is provided for each of the two main soil formations in Frisco: the
Eagle Ford and the Austin Chalk. Adequate testing is required to determine which soil formation
the project site lies within.
C. The Pavement Design Catalog is based on the data contained in Table 3.1. Any alternate designs
shall be based on the same data.
D. All concrete for paving shall be Class C unless otherwise approved by the Director of
Engineering Services.
E. All concrete which comes into contact with soils containing more than 0.1% (1,000 ppm) sulfate
shall be designed to resist sulfate attack.
F. All asphalt shall be Type C.
G. Reinforcement shall be no less than #4 bars on 18” spacing.
H. Within the Pavement Design Catalog, the following applies :
1. Each option correlates to a specified range of swell potential.
2. Layer thickness is shown in inches and is not to scale.
3. Thoroughfare classes correspond to a specific range of average daily traffic (ADT).
4. For simplicity, Options 2.1-2.6 only show Type A & B Thoroughfares since Types C-G
Thoroughfares will not incorporate a nonwoven geotextile interlayer and CTB. For Types CG,
use Options 1.1-1.6
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 3 – Pavement and Subgrade Design Requirements May 2012 Page 3-7
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 3 – Pavement and Subgrade Design Requirements May 2012 Page 3-8
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 3 – Pavement and Subgrade Design Requirements May 2012 Page 3-9
Table 3.1 – Pavement Design Inputs
Input
Thoroughfare Classification
Type A Type B Type C Types D-G,
Alley, Fire
Lane
Design Period 20 years 20 years 20 years 20 years
Initial Serviceability 4.5 4.5 4.5 4.5
Terminal Serviceability 2.5 2.3 2.3 2.0
Concrete MOR @ 28 days 620 psi 620 psi 620 psi 620 psi
Concrete E @ 28 days 5,000,000 psi 5,000,000 psi 5,000,000 psi 5,000,000 psi
Modulus of Subgrade Reaction
(Eagle Ford Shale Formation) 300 psi/in 300 psi/in 300 psi/in 270 psi/in
Modulus of Sugrade Reaction
(Austin Chalk Formation) 420 psi/in 420 psi/in 420 psi/in 420 psi/in
Reliability 95% 92% 90% 85%
Standard Deviation 0.35 0.35 0.35 0.35
Load Transfer Coefficient 2.9 2.9 2.9 2.9
Drainage Coefficient 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0
Design Average Daily Traffic
(ADT) 60,000 30,000 20,000 12,000
Traffic Growth Rate 3% 3% 3% 3%
Percent Trucks 3% 3% 2% 2%
Lanes 6 4 2 2
Lane Distribution Factor 0.7 1 1 1
I. Alley pavement thickness shall be 8”–5”–8” with pavement strength and reinforcement as shown
in the Standard Details.
J. Sidewalk thickness shall be as shown in Table 3.2.
Table 3.2 – Sidewalk Thickness
K. Fire lane paving shall be designed with the same design inputs as Types D-G streets.
Sidewalk Width Thickness of
Concrete
Reinforcing
up to 6’ 4” #3 bars @ 18” o.c.e.w.
fiberglass mesh
or
6’-1” to 7’-11” 5” #3 bars @ 18” o.c.e.w.
fiberglass mesh
or
8’ or greater 6” #3 bars @ 18” o.c.e.w.
fiberglass mesh
or
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-1
SECTION 4 – DRAINAGE DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-2
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements
4.01 General
A. This section contains the minimum storm drainage design criteria to be followed in the design of
storm drainage facilities and demonstrates the design procedures to be used on drainage projects
in the City of Frisco.
B. The design factors, formulas, graphs and procedures described are intended to serve as guidelines.
Responsibility for the actual design remains with the Engineer. Deviation from the requirements
of these standards shall be approved by the Director of Engineering Services.
C. The Engineer shall prepare the design plans in accordance with the standard design checklist.
D. It is the responsibility of the Engineer to provide all necessary calculations and designs described
herein. The Engineer shall provide the City the data, calculations, and designs necessary to
demonstrate the design does not adversely impact the surrounding or downstream property and
meet local, state, and federal rules, regulations, and requirements.
E. The Engineer shall use the city’s base models for development along floodplain areas. If a model
is not available, the Engineer shall be required to provide a floodplain model in accordance with
city standards and guidelines.
4.02 Determining Design Discharge
The Rational Method may be used to determine the runoff generated from a property when a
contributing drainage area is less than 200 acres. A unit hydrograph method shall be used to
determine the runoff generated from a property with a contributing drainage area greater than 200
acres. The Director of Engineering Services may require developments with contributing drainage
areas less than 200 acres to use a unit hydrograph method if the hydrologic results of the
contributing drainage area or components within the drainage area more accurately reflect a unit
hydrograph.
A. Rational Formula (Drainage Areas < 200 acres)
The Rational Formula for computing peak runoff rates is as follows:
?? = ?? * ?? * ??
Q = runoff rate (cfs)
C = runoff coefficient (dimensionless)
I = rainfall intensity (in/hr)
A = drainage area (ac)
B. Runoff Coefficient (C)
1. Runoff coefficients shall be based on the future land use plan, which is included in the City’s
Comprehensive Plan. Runoff coefficients reflecting other conditions may be used based on
the guidelines set forth in Section 4.02.F.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-3
2. Table 4.1 provides guidelines for runoff coefficients for typical land use within the city;
however, a weighted runoff coefficient may be used for the design if it is more representative
of the site conditions.
3. A lower runoff coefficient may be used if sustainable elements are included in the design.
The Engineer shall notify Engineering Services of the design intent and provide the necessary
data, calculations and design to support the desired runoff coefficient. All sustainable designs
are subject to approval by Engineering Services (refer to Section 4.18 for sustainable design
options).
Table 4.1 Runoff Coefficients and Inlet Time Guidelines
Land Use Runoff Coefficient
“C”
Inlet Time
(Minutes)
Single Family Residential 0.55 15
Two Family, Patio Home, Town Home 0.70 10
Multiple Family 0.80 10
Non-Residential Uses 0.90 10
Park Area 0.35 20
School 0.70 15
Church 0.80 10
Undeveloped 0.30 20
Hospital 0.90 10
Streets 0.90 10
C. Time of Concentration (Tc)
SCS methodology shall be used to determine the time of concentration (Tc). This method
separates the flow through the drainage area into sheet flow, shallow concentrated flow, and open
channel flow. The Tc is the sum of travel times for sheet flow, shallow flow and open channel
flow. The time of concentration flow path and sheet flow path shall be made available to the City
upon request.
1. Sheet Flow: The maximum allowable length for sheet flow is 300’ for undeveloped drainage
areas and 100’ for developed areas. When selecting n for sheet flow, consider cover to a
height of about 0.1’. This is the only part of the plant cover that will obstruct sheet flow. The
Tt in minutes for sheet flow is determined using the following equation:
???? =
0.007(????)0.8
(??2)0.5??0.4
Tt = travel time (hr)
n = Manning’s roughness coefficient (Table 4.2)
L = flow length (ft)
P2 = 2-year, 24-hour rainfall, 3.6in
S = slope of hydraulic grade line (land slope, ft/ft)
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-4
Table 4.2 Sheet Flow ‘n’ Values
Surface Description n
Smooth surfaces (concrete, asphalt, gravel, or bare soil) 0.011
Fallow (no residue) 0.05
Cultivated soils
Residue cover less than 20% 0.06
Residue cover greater than 20% 0.17
Grass:
Short Prairie Grass 0.15
Dense grasses 0.24
Range (natural) 0.13
Woods:
Light underbrush 0.40
Dense underbrush 0.80
2. Shallow Concentrated Flow
Shallow concentrated flow begins where sheet flow ends. A projected slope should be
established along the flow line for the shallow concentrated flow length. The Tt in minutes
for shallow concentrated flow is determined by the following equation:
???? =
??
3600??
Tt = travel time (hr)
L = flow length (ft)
V = velocity (fps)
Unpaved = 16.1345*(S)^0.5
Paved = 20.3282*(S)^0.5
3. Open Channel Flow
Open Channel Flow is where the runoff is located within a defined channel or in some cases,
closed storm systems. The Tt for open channel flow is determined using the following
equation:
???? =
??
3600??
?? =
1.49??23
??12
??
Tt = travel time (hr)
V = average velocity (ft/s)
r = hydraulic radius (ft)
A = cross sectional flow (ft2)
P = wetted perimeter (ft)
s = slope of the hydraulic grade line (channel slope, ft/ft)
n = Manning’s roughness coefficient
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-5
The Engineer shall compare the calculated time to the time listed in Table 4.1. If the
calculated Tc differs from the value in Table 4.1, the Engineer shall provide information to
justify the Tc calculations.
D. Rainfall Intensity (I)
The rainfall intensity (I), shall be based on the National Weather Service Rainfall Frequency Data
presented in Technical Memorandum NWS Hydro-35, dated June 1977 (2 to 100 year) and U.S.
Geologic Survey Frequency Data presented in Water Resources Investigations Report 98-4044,
dated 1998 (500 year). The intensity for a particular duration can be obtained using the
coefficients from Table 4.3. If the calculated inlet time differs from the value in Table 4.2, the
Engineer shall provide information to justify the inlet time calculations.The equation used to
determine the intensity values for various storm events and durations is provided below.
?? =
??
(???? + ??)??
Refer to the following table for b, d, and e.
Table 4.3 Intensity Coefficient Table
2-year 5-year 25 year 100- year
B 81.319 82.686 106.665 112.783
D 15.788 15.497 18.069 17.572
E 0.864 0.820 0.806 0.771
E. Unit Hydrograph Method (Drainage Areas > 200 acres)
1. The use of a unit hydrograph method shall be based upon standard and accepted engineering
principles normally used in the profession subject to the approval Engineering Services.
Acceptable methods include the Soil Conservation Services (SCS) Technical Release
Number 55 (TR-55) for drainage areas 200 acres to 2,000 acres and SCS’s Technical Release
Number 20 (TR-20), or the United States Army Corps of Engineers HEC-HMS models for
drainage areas 200 acres or more.
2. The post development unit hydrograph method shall be based upon fully developed
watershed conditions assuming no effects from upstream or on-site detention facilities, unless
the requirements set forth in Section 4.03.B are met, or as directed by Engineering Services.
The Engineer should discuss the approach method with Engineering Services prior to design.
3. Circumstances that may require the use of a unit hydrograph method include open channels,
reclaiming floodplains, creating lakes, regional detention/retention facilities or building other
types of drainage related facilities on major drainage courses. The city requires fully
developed watershed conditions be used for all modeling. FEMA’s flows shall not be used as
the flows are generally based upon existing watershed conditions.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-6
4. Coincident peak flows can also be considered using Table 4.4.
Table 4.4: Frequencies for Coincidental Occurrences
Area Ratio 100 year design
Main Stream Tributary
10000:1 2 100
100 2
1000:1 10 100
100 10
100:1 25 100
100 25
10:1 50 100
100 50
1:1 100 100
100 100
5. Modeling Requirements
HEC-HMS shall be used in developing all hydrologic models. Other hydrologic models may
be used upon approval from Engineering Services. The following criteria should be used:
a. 24-hour storm duration using an SCS Type II distribution.
b. Rainfall values calculated using coefficients provided in Table 4.3.
c. The SCS Curve Number (CN) method shall be used to determine the loss rate. CN
values shall be taken from TR-55.
d. Tc values shall be calculated as shown in Section 4.02.C.
e. Muskingum Cunge method shall be used for routing of the Unit Hydrograph through the
drainage system. Engineering Services may request for other routing methods, such as
the Modified Puls Routing Method, to be used in the design if the method is more
characteristic of the hydrologic and hydraulic conditions of the watershed.
F. Runoff from Off-Site Developments
1. Off-site Flows for Developed Upstream Watershed
The Engineer may take the effects of upstream detention into account if the hydrologic and
hydraulic information for the existing upstream ponds are shown on the construction plans
and the information can be verified by record drawings or a record survey. An emergency
overflow path between the existing detention ponds and the proposed site shall be identified
and clearly indicated on the construction plans. The Engineer shall confirm the hydrologic
and hydraulic effects of upstream facilities in accordance with Section 4.9.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-7
2. Off-site Flows for Undeveloped Upstream Watershed
If an undeveloped upstream property exists, the Engineer shall assume fully developed
conditions without detention for the off-site area unless a Downstream Assessment shows the
downstream facilities cannot convey the fully developed peak flows.
4.03 Downstream Assessment
The design of a storm drain facility must account for the offsite flows that are routed through the
development, flows generated by the development, and the impacts of the development and the
drainage system on downstream facilities. The storm water discharge from the development shall
not cause adverse impacts to adjacent or downstream properties or facilities. In order to determine
the impacts to the downstream properties or facilities, a Downstream Assessment may be
required. The following summarizes the process for a Downstream Assessment.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-8
Figure 1: Downstream Assessment Flow Chart
1. Does the development alter
drainage patterns or add
impervious area causing an
increase in runoff?
Yes
2. A Downstream
Assessment is not
required. Review
other City related
design criteria.
5. Provide an
Adequate Outfall per
Section 4.08.H.
3. Is the site 20 acres or
larger?
No
No
7. Perform Downstream
Assessment using Unit
Hydrograph Method per
Section 4.02.C and
4.2.E
4. On-Site Detention to
existing conditions
provided?
Yes No
6. Perform Downstream
Assessment per Section
4.02.A and 4.02.B
Yes
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-9
Downstream Assessments shall be prepared and submitted to the City with the construction plans.
The study shall demonstrate the development will produce no adverse impacts. No adverse
impacts may include, but are not limited to:
a. No new or increased flooding of existing insurable (FEMA) structures (habitable
buildings).
b. No increases in water surface elevations for the 2, 5, 25, and 100 year storm events unless
contained in existing channel (with freeboard), roadway, drainage easement and ROW.
Dry lane and gutter capacity requirements set forth in Section 4.04.A shall also be met.
c. Post-development channel velocities shall not be increased by more than 5% above predevelopment
velocities. Exceptions to these criteria require a certified
geotechnical/geomorphologic study that provides documentation that a higher velocity
will not increase erosion.
d. No increases in downstream discharges caused by the proposed development that, in
combination with existing discharges, exceeds the existing capacity of the downstream
storm drainage system.
e. The Downstream Assessment shall extend to a point downstream where the proposed
development creates no adverse impacts. The downstream point is known as the Zone of
Influence. The Engineer shall determine how far downstream the analysis for the
Downstream Assessment shall extend. For properties less than 20 acres, the Downstream
Assessment may use the 10% rule to determine the Zone of Influence. For all other
properties, the Zone of Influence will be defined by a detailed hydrologic and hydraulic
modeling analysis.
f. The 10% rule states the Zone of Influence can be considered to be the point where the
drainage area controlled by the drainage facility comprises 10% of the total drainage area.
As an example, if a structural control drains 10 acres, the Zone of Influence ends at a
point where the total drainage area is at least 100 acres.
g. If a portion of a larger property is being developed, the Zone of Influence shall be
determined based on the entire property.
4.04 Street Capacity
A. Straight Crown Streets:
1. All straight crown street capacities shall be hydraulically designed using Manning’s equation:

Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-10
2. The City requires a minimum of 9’ of pavement in each direction during the 100-year event
for Type A and B thoroughfares.
3. The dry lane criteria shall be met in both the interim and future conditions.
B. Parabolic Crown Streets
1. All parabolic crown street capacities shall be hydraulically designed using Manning’s
equation.
2. During a 100 year storm event, the gutter depth on Type C, D, E, F, and G thoroughfares are
required by the City not to exceed 6” or top of curb, whichever is less.
3. During a 100-year storm event, the City requires a minimum of 9’ of pavement in each
direction for Type C and D thoroughfares.
4.05 Alley Capacity
A. All alley capacities shall be hydraulically designed using Manning’s equation.
B. The 100 year storm event shall be contained within the edge of pavement.
C. In residential areas where the standard alley section capacity is exceeded, storm sewer systems
with inlets shall be provided.
D. Grate combination inlets shall be located in alleys upstream from an intersection and where
necessary to prevent water from entering intersections in amounts exceeding allowed street
capacity.
4.06 Valley Gutters
A. The use of valley gutters to convey storm water across a street intersection is subject to the
following criteria:
1. Valley gutters shall not cross Type A, B, C, and D thoroughfares.
2. At any intersection, valley gutters perpendicular to the main street will not be permitted; and
valley gutters parallel to the main street may only cross a lower classified street.
4.07 Inlet Location and Capacity
A. Gutter Flow
Curb inlets shall be placed to ensure that the 100 year flow in a street does not exceed the dry lane
requirements for straight crown streets and top-of-curb elevation for parabolic crown streets as
per Sections 4.04. The following form of the Manning’s equation should be used to evaluate
gutter flow hydraulics:
?? = ??
0.56
??
?? ????5/3??1/2??8/3
Q = Gutter flow rate (cfs)
Sx = Pavement cross slope (ft/ft)
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-11
S = Longitudinal slope (ft/ft)
T = Width of flow in roadway (ft)
n = Manning’s roughness coefficient
Depth of flow in the gutter can be calculated using the following modified form of the equation
above:
???? = ?? ??
????????
??1/2 ??
3/8
yo = depth of water in the curb and gutter cross section (ft or m)
Z = 1.24
If the flow in the gutter is still excessive, the storm sewer shall be extended to a point where the
gutter flow can be effectively intercepted by curb inlets.
B. Capacity of Curb Inlet on Grade
To determine the capacity of a curb inlet on grade, first determine the ratio of the flow in the
locally depressed gutter section to the total flow in the road.
??0 = 1/ ??1 +
????
????
????1 +
????/????
(??/??) - 1
??
2.67
- 1??
-1
??
E0 = Ratio of flow in the depressed gutter to the total flow
SW = Gutter cross slope (ft/ft)
Sx = Roadway cross slope (ft/ft)
T = Width of flow in roadway (ft)
W = Width of depressed gutter section (ft)
Then calculate the equivalent cross slope at the depressed curb inlet opening.
???? = ???? +
??
??
??0
Se = Equivalent cross slope (ft/ft)
Sx = Roadway cross slope (ft/ft)
a = Gutter Depression Depth (ft)
W = Width of depressed gutter section (ft)
E0 = Ratio of flow in the depressed gutter to the total flow
Then calculate the inlet length required to capture 100% of the gutter flow.
???? = 0.60??0.42??0.3 ??
1
??????
??
0.6
LT = Required length of inlet (ft)
Q = Total flow in the roadway (cfs)
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-12
S = Roadway longitudinal slope (ft/ft)
n = Manning’s roughness coefficient
Se = Equivalent cross slope (ft/ft)
The efficiency of a curb inlet opening shorter than LT is:
?? = 1 - ??1 -
??
????
??
1.8
E = Inlet efficiency
L = Length of the curb inlet opening (ft)
LT = Required length of inlet to capture 100% of the roadway flow (ft)
The total flow captured by the curb inlet is:
???? = ????
Qi = Flow capture by inlet (cfs)
E = Inlet efficiency
Q = Total flow in the roadway (cfs)
C. Capacity of Curb Inlets in Sag
The capacity of a curb inlet in sag depends on the water depth at the curb opening and the height
of the curb opening. The inlet operates as a weir to a depth equal to the curb opening height and
as an orifice at depths greater than 1.4 times the opening height. At depths between 1.0 and 1.4
times the opening height, flow is in a transition stage and the capacity should be based on the
lesser of the computed weir and orifice capacities.
1. If the depth of flow in the gutter (d) is less than or equal to 1.4 times the inlet opening height
(h), (d=1.4H), determine the length of inlet required considering weir control. Calculate the
capacity of the inlet when operating under weir conditions with the following equation:
?? = ????(?? + 1.8??)??1.5
2. Rearrange above equation to produce the following relation for curb inlet length required:
?? = ??
??
????????
1.5?? - 1.8??
Q = total flow reaching inlet (cfs)
Cw = weir coefficient (3.0)
yo = head at inlet opening (ft)
L = length of curb inlet opening (ft)
W = lateral width of depression (ft)
???? = ?? ??
????????
??1/2 ??
3/8
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-13
yo = depth of water in the curb and gutter cross section (ft or m)
Q = gutter flow rate (cfs)
n = Manning’s roughness coefficient
S = longitudinal slope (ft/ft)
SX = pavement cross slope (ft/ft)
Z = 1.24
3. If the depth of flow in the gutter is greater than the inlet opening height (d>h), determine the
length of inlet required considering orifice control. The equation for interception capacity of
a curb opening as an orifice follows:
?? = ??0h????2??????
Q = total flow reaching inlet (cfs)
C0 = orifice coefficient = 0.70
h = depth of opening (ft) (this depth will vary slightly with the inlet detail used)
L = length of curb opening inlet (ft.)
g = acceleration due to gravity = 32.2 ft/s2
de = effective head at the centroid of the orifice (ft) de=d - h/2
Rearranging equation allows a direct solution for required length:
?? =
??
??0h??2??????
4. If both steps 1 and 2 were performed (i.e., h<d=1.4h), choose the larger of the two computed
lengths as being the required length.
5. Select a standard inlet length that is greater than the required length.
D. Capacity of Wye Inlets
??
??
= 3.1??3/2
Q = flow (cfs)
P = perimeter of opening (ft)
y = head/depth (ft)
Wye (drop) inlets shall be located to collect water on non-paved areas where it is not practical to
use a headwall. No double Wye inlets shall be allowed.
E. Curb Inlet Placement
1. Placing several curb inlets at a single location is only permitted in areas with steep grades
(4% or greater) to prevent flooding and avoid exceeding street capacity in flatter reaches
downstream.
2. No more than 20’ of inlet shall be constructed at one location along one curb line.
3. Curb inlets shall be placed upstream from right angle turns and street intersections.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-14
4. An emergency overflow path shall be provided on the plans for sag locations. An emergency
overflow path is the path the storm water will take if the drainage facility becomes clogged or
ceases to function as designed. The emergency overflow path must be located within public
right-of-way or within a drainage easement.
5. Curb inlet depth shall not be less than 4.5’ from top of curb for all public improvements.
6. Inlets are required at the low point of a superelevation to prevent flow across the roadway.
7. Multiple sag inlets shall be located no closer than 300’.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-15
FIGURE 2: Inlet Spreadsheet
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-16
F. The Inlet Spreadsheet provided in Figure 2 shall be provided with the construction plans for
review by the City. A description of each of the columns shown in the inlet spreadsheet is
provided below:
• Column 1: Design Point for Inlet
• Column 2: Inlet number
• Column 3: Location of inlet by storm drain station number
• Column 4: Drainage area designation for incremental area
• Column 5: Drainage area size (acres)
• Column 6: Runoff coefficient (C)
• Column 7: Time of concentration (minutes)
• Column 8: 100-year intensity (in/hr)
• Column 9: 100-year runoff, Q=CIA (cfs)
• Column 10: 100-year carryover flow from upstream inlet (cfs)
• Column 11: 100-year total gutter flow (Column 9 + Column 10) (cfs)
• Column 12: Percentage of flow traveling from lower station side of sag inlet based on
percentage of drainage area and carryover flow from that side (cfs)
• Column 13: Percentage of flow traveling from higher station side of sag inlet based on
percentage of drainage area and carryover flow from that side (cfs)
• Column 14: 100-year total gutter flow reaching the lower station side of the sag inlet
(Column 11 times Column 12) (cfs)
• Column 15: 100-year total gutter flow reaching the higher station side of the sag inlet
(Column 11 times Column 13) (cfs)
• Column 16: Longitudinal slope of the approach gutter. For sag inlets, half the longitudinal
slope of the approach gutter on the lower station side of the inlet (S0) (ft/ft)
• Column 17: Not used for on-grade inlets. For sag inlets, half the longitudinal slope of the
approach gutter on the higher station side of the inlet (S0) (ft/ft)
• Column 18: Street crown section type (straight crown [“rooftop”] or parabolic)
• Column 19: Roadway cross slope “Sx” (%)
• Column 20: Manning’s roughness coefficient (n) for pavement (0.0175 for concrete
pavement)
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-17
• Column 21: Street capacity based on Manning’s equation. For sag inlets calculate the street
capacity for both the lower and higher station sides of the inlet and use the greater of the two.
(cfs)
• Column 22: Total right-of-way capacity as a function of the cross-sectional area of the rightof-
way at the inlet. For sag inlets, the total right of way capacity on the lower station side of
the inlet. (cfs)
• Column 23: Not used for on-grade inlets. For sag inlets, the total right of way capacity on the
higher station side of the inlet. (cfs)
• Column 24: Depth of gutter flow "yo" in approach gutter from spread of water or from direct
solution of Manning's equation for gutter capacity. For sag inlets, the depth of gutter flow on
the lower station side of the inlet. (ft)
• Column 25: Not used for on-grade inlets. Depth of gutter flow "yo" in approach gutter from
spread of water or from direct solution of Manning's equation for gutter capacity. For sag
inlets, the depth of gutter flow on the higher station side of the inlet. (ft)
• Column 26: Spread of water (T) or width of ponding in the gutter measured from the face of
curb. Column 19 times column 24, or the distance from the gutter to the crown, if the crown
height is exceeded. For sag inlets, the spread of flow on the lower station side of the inlet. (ft)
• Column 27: Not used for on-grade inlets. Spread of water (T) or width of ponding in the
gutter measured from the face of curb. Column 19 times column 25, or the distance from the
gutter to the crown, if the crown height is exceeded. For sag inlets, the spread of flow on the
higher station side of the inlet. (ft)
• Column 28: Gutter cross slope (Sw) (%)
• Column 29: Width of depressed gutter section (ft)
• Column 30: 100-year ratio of flow in the depressed gutter to the total flow (E0)
• Column 31: Gutter depression depth (a) (ft)
• Column 32: Equivalent cross slope (Se) (%)
• Column 33: 100-year inlet length required to capture 100% of the gutter flow (LT) (ft)
• Column 34: Actual length (L) in feet of inlet which is to be provided (10’, 15’ or 20’). For
wye inlets the length provided is equal to the perimeter of the opening intercepting flow. The
length for wye inlets may be less than the total perimeter if the wye is not located in a sag
location.
• Column 35: Efficiency of a curb inlet where the length provided is shorter than the length
required. (E)
• Column 36: Discharge (Q) in cubic feet per second which the inlet in question actually
intercepts.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-18
• Column 37: Discharge capacity of the inlet (Q) (cfs)
• Column 38: Carryover flow (q) is the amount of water which passes the inlet in a 100-year
storm. A substantial portion of the 100-year flow should be picked up by the inlet. The
carry-over flow should be accounted for in further downstream inlets and should be reflected
in the inlet bypass flow in the Storm Drain Hydraulics Table (minor variances may occur due
to travel time routing in the Hydraulics Table).
• Column 39: Downstream inlet that carryover flow travels to
• Column 40: Important comments relating to inlet
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-19
4.08 Design of Enclosed Storm Sewer System
A. Design Flow
All enclosed systems shall be hydraulically designed and all required calculations shall be
provided on the construction plans. The hydraulic gradient and full-flow velocity shall be
calculated using the design flow, appropriate pipe size, and Manning’s equation:
?? = _??
1.486
??
?? ?? ????2
??3?? ????1
??2??_
Q = Runoff rate (cfs)
A = Cross sectional area of the conduit (ft2)
n = Manning’s roughness coefficient (0.013 for concrete)
R = Hydraulic radius (ft) (Area of conduit divided by wetted perimeter (R=A/P)
S = Slope of the hydraulic gradient (ft/ft)
B. Hydraulic Gradient
1. The City requires that all hydraulic gradient calculations begin at the outfall of the system.
2. The starting hydraulic grade line (HGL) shall be based upon the results of the Downstream
Assessment per Section 4.03.B. if a downstream assessment is conducted. The results of the
Downstream Assessment will provide the Engineer with the capacity and resulting design
storm of the downstream facilities.
3. The starting HGL at an outfall into a creek or channel shall be the 100-year fully developed
water surface unless an approved flood hydrograph is available to provide a coincident flow
elevation for the system’s peak.
4. When a proposed storm sewer is to connect to an undersized existing storm sewer system,
calculation of the hydraulic gradient for the proposed storm sewer shall start at the outfall of
the existing storm sewer system.
C. Hydraulic Design
1. The hydraulic grade line (HGL) must be calculated for all storm drain mains and laterals
using appropriate head loss equations. In all cases, the storm drain HGL must remain below
lime treated subgrade and must be at least 1’ below top of curb at each inlet.
2. In partial flow conditions, the HGL represents the actual water surface within the pipe. The
velocity of the flow should be calculated based on actual area of flow, not the full flow area
of the pipe or box.
3. Unless partial flow conditions exist, the beginning hydraulic gradient shall begin at either the
top of pipe or at the hydraulic gradient of the receiving stream at the coincident frequency,
whichever is higher.
D. Lateral Design
1. The HGL shall be calculated for all proposed laterals and inlets, and for the existing laterals
being connected into a proposed drainage system.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-20
2. Laterals shall intersect the storm drain at standard angles.
E. Velocity Head Losses (HL)
1. Adjustments are made in the HGL whenever the velocity in the main changes due to conduit
size changes or discharge changes. Laterals in partial flow must be designed appropriately
and the partial flow velocity shall be used in the calculations.
2. In determining the HGL for the lateral, begin with the hydraulic grade of the trunk line at the
junction plus the HL due to the velocity change. Where the lateral is in full flow, the
hydraulic grade is projected along the friction slope calculated using Manning’s Equation.
3. HL losses or gains for wyes, pipe size changes, and other velocity changes will be calculated
by the following formulas:
HL = ??(V2)2
2g ?? - ??(V1)2
2g ??
HL = Head loss or gain (ft)
v1 = Upstream velocity (fps)
v2 = Downstream velocity (fps)
g = Gravity constant (32.2 ft/s2)
4. HL for pipe in full flow at manholes, bends, and inlets, where the flow quantity remains the
same, shall be calculated as follows:
???? = ???? ??
_??_2
2??
??
HL = Head loss or gain (ft)
v = Velocity in the lateral (fps)
g = Gravity constant (32.2 ft/s2)
Kj = Coefficient of loss per Table 4.5
5. Head losses or gains at manholes and junction boxes where there is an increase in flow
quantity shall be calculated as follows:
???? = ??
(??2)2
2??
?? - ???? ??
(??1)2
2??
??
HL = Head loss or gain (ft)
v1 = Upstream velocity (fps)
v2 = Downstream velocity (fps)
g = Gravity constant (32.2 ft/s2)
Kj = Coefficient of loss per Table 4.4
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-21
Table 4.5 Velocity Head Loss in Closed Conduits
Inlet
Schematic Kj
1.25
Manhole at Change in Pipe Direction
Schematic Angle Kj
90° 0.55
60° 0.48
45° 0.42
30° 0.30
0° 0.05
Bend in Pipe
Schematic Angle Kj
45° 0.35
30° 0.20
Manhole
Schematic Angle Kj
0° 1.00
22 1/2° 0.75
45° 0.50
60° 0.35
90° 0.25
.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-22
FIGURE 3 Storm Drain Calculations Spreadsheet
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-23
The Engineer shall include a completed Storm Drain Calculations Spreadsheet (see Figure 3) in
the construction plans. A description of the runoff calculations is provided below followed by a
description of the hydraulic design calculations:
• Column 1: Enter the downstream storm drain station number.
• Column 2: Enter the upstream storm drain station number. This is the design point.
Design should start at the farthest upstream point.
• Column 3: Enter the distance (in feet) between the storm drain stations.
• Column 4: Enter the designation of the drainage area(s) at the design point in Column 2
corresponding to the designations shown on the drainage area map.
• Column 5: Enter the area in acres for the drainage area identified in Column 4.
• Column 6: Enter the total drainage area in acres within the system corresponding to
storm drain station shown in Column 2.
• Column 7: Enter the runoff coefficient “C” for the drainage area shown in Column 5.
• Column 8: Multiply Column 5 by Column 7 for each area.
• Column 9: Determine the total “CA” for the drainage system corresponding to the inlet
or manhole shown in Column 2.
• Column 10: Determine inlet time of concentration.
• Column 11: Determine flow time in the storm drain in minutes. The flow time is equal
to the distance in Column 3 divided by 60 times the velocity of flow through the storm
drain in ft/sec.
• Column 12: Total time of concentration in minutes. Column 10 plus Column 11. Note
that time of concentration only changes at a downstream junction with another drainage
area(s). It remains the same from an inlet or junction to the next inlet or junction picking
up additional drainage areas. The junction of two paired inlets with each other is not a
downstream junction.
• Column 13: The intensity of rainfall in inches per hour for the 100-year storm frequency.
• Column 14: The 100-year storm runoff in cfs. Column 9 times Column 13.
• Column 15: The proposed inlet carryover from upstream inlets during a 100-year storm.
This should generally correspond to the carryover flow in Column 10 of the Inlet
Spreadsheet (minor variances may occur due to travel time routing in the Hydraulics
Table).
• Column 16: The proposed inlet carryover during a 100-year storm. This should
generally correspond to the carryover flow “q” in Column 38 of the Inlet Spreadsheet
(minor variances may occur due to travel time routing in the Hydraulics Table).
• Column 17: Design Discharge for the storm drain system (“Qpipe”) in cfs
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-24
• Column 18: Enter the selected pipe size for circular pipe.
• Column 19: Enter the selected width for box pipe.
• Column 20: Enter the selected height for box pipe.
• Column 21: Enter the appropriate Manning’s roughness coefficient “n” (0.013 for
concrete pipe and box culverts).
• Column 22: Enter the slope of the frictional gradient (hydraulic gradient) determined by
Manning’s equation. In a partial flow condition, the friction slope is the slope of the
water surface and should follow the slope of the pipe.
• Column 23: This is the upstream HGL before the structure and is calculated as Column
24 plus the friction loss (Column 3 times Column 22).
• Column 24: This is the beginning hydraulic gradient of the line. It is equal to the Design
HGL (Column 32) for the next downstream segment, or the beginning HGL of the system
as described above.
• Column 25: Velocity of flow in incoming pipe at the junction, inlet or manhole at the
design point identified in Column 2.
• Column 26: Velocity of flow in outgoing pipe (i.e. the pipe segment being analyzed) at
junction, inlet or manhole at design point identified in Column 2.
• Column 27: Velocity head of the velocity in Column 25.
• Column 28: Velocity head of the velocity in Column 26.
• Column 29: Head loss coefficient “Kj”, at junction, inlet or manhole at design point from
Table 4.5.
• Column 30: Multiply Column 27 by Column 29.
• Column 31: Head Loss at Structure. At a junction or change in pipe size, this is Column
28 minus Column 30. At a bend or inlet, this is Column 26 times Column 29. In all cases
this is 0.10’ minimum.
• Column 32: Design HGL at the design point identified in Column 2. Column 24 plus
Column 31. This is the beginning HGL (Column 24) for any upstream pipe discharging
into that junction.
• Column 33: Invert elevation for the pipe being analyzed at the downstream storm drain
station in Column 1.
• Column 34: Invert elevation for the pipe being analyzed at the design point (upstream
storm drain station) in Column 2.
• Column 35: Top of curb elevation at the design point in Column 2.
• Column 36: Comments regarding pipe being analyzed.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-25
F. Storm Drain
1. Alignments of proposed storm drain systems shall use existing easements and rights-of-way.
If located within an easement, the storm sewer shall be centered within the easement. If
located within rights-of-way, the centerline of the storm sewer shall be located under paving
7’ from the back of curb. No part of the storm sewer is to be designed within the lime-treated
subgrade of a proposed pavement.
2. Horizontal and vertical curve design for storm sewers shall take into account joint closure.
3. A minimum full flow velocity of 2.5 fps and a minimum slope of 0.5% shall be maintained in
the pipe unless otherwise approved by the Director of Engineering Services.
4. Only standard sizes shall be used. The minimum allowable pipe size is 18”. Pipe sizes shall
not be decreased in the downstream direction, unless otherwise approved by the Director of
Engineering Services.
5. In situations where only the lower portion of an enclosed storm sewer system is being built,
stub-outs for future connections must be included.
6. The required storm drain capacity to meet existing and future needs, if applicable, shall be
provided.
G. Manhole Placement
The following is a list of guidelines governing the placement of storm sewer manholes to ensure
adequate accessibility of storm drainage system:
1. Storm sewer lines shall have points of access no more than 500’ apart. A manhole shall be
provided where this condition is not met.
2. A manhole shall be required where two or more pipes connect into a main at the same joint.
3. A manhole shall be located where pipe sizes or slopes change unless otherwise approved by
the Director of Engineering Services.
H. Outfall Design
The Engineer shall demonstrate the drainage from the site is conveyed to an adequate outfall. An
adequate outfall is a structure or location that is adequately designed as to not cause adverse
flooding conditions, erosion, or any other adverse impacts. An adequate outfall shall also have
capacity to convey the increased runoff.
4.09 Detention/Retention Facility Design
A. Detention facilities shall be designed based upon the following minimum criteria:
1. Detention shall be provided for the 2, 5, 25, and 100 year design storms based on the results
of a downstream assessment. Sites without a downstream assessment will be required to
provide detention to undeveloped runoff rates.
2. Pilot channels may be required for detention facilities for maintenance purposes if the bottom
slope is less than 2%. The Engineer shall provide a maintenance plan for the detention
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-26
facility as part of the design. The maintenance plan shall indicate the ingress and egress
locations to enter and maintain the pond, maintenance roles and responsibilities, contact
information for the party responsible for the maintenance, and a maintenance schedule.
3. Criteria established by the State of Texas for dam safety (TAC Title 30, Part 1, Chapter 299)
and impoundment of state waters (Texas Water Code Chapter 11) shall apply where required
by the state, and where, in the Engineer’s judgment, the potential hazard requires these more
stringent criteria.
B. Should the Downstream Assessment results show that downstream facilities are adequate and onsite
detention is not required, fully developed off-site conditions must be taken into account for
the on-site design facilities.
C. All detention/retention facilities shall demonstrate and provide an adequate outfall in accordance
with City Requirements.
D. Detention Storage Calculation
1. Detention facilities without upstream detention areas and with drainage areas of 20 acres or
less can be designed using the Modified Rational Method otherwise the Unit Hydrograph
Method shall be used.
2. If the Unit Hydrograph Method is used, the model shall extend through the Zone of Influence
(see Section 4.03) and include existing detention facilities within the Zone of Influence
watershed.
3. No required parking space or fire lane may be located within a surface drainage pond. A
maximum depth of 6” of ponded water is allowed in the parking lot.
E. Pond and Spillway Geometry
1. Detention structures shall have a minimum of 1’ of freeboard above the 100-year water
surface elevation.
2. Where embankments are used to temporarily impound detention, the effective crest of the
embankment will be a minimum of 2’ above the 100-year water surface elevation.
3. The steepest side slope permitted for a vegetated embankment is 4:1.
4. Earth embankments used to temporarily or permanently impound surface water must be
constructed according to specifications as required based on geotechnical investigations of
the site and all regulatory requirements.
5. Detention facilities shall be designed with an emergency spillway in case the primary outfall
ceases to function as designed. The spillway shall be designed to pass a minimum of the 100-
year flood event.
6. The detention facility bottom must be designed to provide positive drainage.
7. Access shall be provided to the banks and bottom of a detention facility for maintenance.
a. Engineer shall provide an operations and maintenance plan that will detail access.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-27
b. Facilities with permanent pools shall address dewatering procedures.
8. It is the responsibility of the Engineer to consider pedestrian and vehicular safety in the
design of detention facilities. Perimeter rails or fencing may be required.
9. Underground detention facilities shall be designed with reinforced concrete if located under
fire lane or within city right of way.
F. Texas Commission Environmental Quality Requirements for Dams
The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) provides design and review criteria
for construction plans and specifications, construction, operation and maintenance, inspection,
repair, removal, emergency management, site security, and enforcement of dams. As of the date
of these design standards, dams that fall under TCEQ dam safety regulations meet the following
criteria:
• have a height greater than or equal to 25’, and a maximum storage capacity greater than or
equal to 15 acre-feet
• have a height greater than 6’, and a maximum storage capacity greater than or equal to 50
acre-feet
The design engineer shall refer to the Texas Administrative Code, Title 30, Part 1, Chapter 299
Dams and Reservoirs for current dam safety criteria. All proposed construction or modification of
dams are required to adhere to TCEQ dam safety criteria. Should the design engineer desire to
utilize an existing facility that would qualify under this criteria and the use of the facility changes
from an agricultural use to another use, the existing facility may need to be brought into
compliance with the TCEQ dam safety criteria. If dams that fall under the TCEQ dam safety
criteria, the City will require review and approval from TCEQ prior to authorizing construction.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-28
Water features and detention facilities with permanent pools must obtain a TCEQ water rights
permit if applicable. Refer to TCEQ for water rights regulations.
For permanent pool ponds without a water rights permit, the Engineer shall provide a signed
statement to the City stating the water rights permit is not required.
4.10 Miscellaneous Drainage Requirements
A. Lot Drainage - Lot to lot surface drainage is prohibited. Pad elevations shall be no less than 12”
above curb elevation. Figure 4 is provided below for reference when performing lot grading
designs. Lot grading type and finished floor elevations shall be shown on the construction plans.
Type B and Type C Lot Grading must back to alleys, open space, or drainage easement. Type C
Lot Grading may only be used with approval of Engineering Service. Refer to the International
Residential Building Code (IRC) Section 401.3 (latest version) for additional requirements.
Figure 4
Typical Lot Grading Patterns
B. Storm Drain Materials
1. All public storm sewers shall be reinforced concrete.
2. All storm sewers under a fire lane or roadway and within a drainage easement shall be
reinforced concrete. Any structure under a fire lane must be designed to withstand applicable
loadings, including loading of a fire apparatus.
C. The minimum finished floor elevation for any lot adjacent to a drainage feature shall be 2’ above
the adjacent 100 year fully developed water surface elevation and shall be shown on the final plat.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-29
D. Should mitigation be required under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, the areas shall be
identified on the engineering construction plans.
E. Refer to Section 4.15 for floodplain reclamation requirements.
4.11 Open Channel Design
Excavated open channels may be used to convey storm waters where the construction costs
and/or long-term maintenance cost involved with a closed storm sewer system is not justified
economically. Open channels shall be designed to convey the full design discharge.
The allowable excavated channel cross section is shown on Figure 5. The maximum velocities
allowed for various types of excavated channel cover are shown in Table 4.6. These maximum
velocities do not apply for drainage facilities discharging off-site. A downstream assessment in
accordance with Section 4.03.B shall be performed to determine maximum discharge velocities.
FIGURE 5: Open Channels -Excavated
A. Unlined unvegetated excavated channels are not allowed. Construction of excavated channels will
not be considered complete until the channel banks are stabilized. Vegetation selected for channel
cover must conform with allowable vegetation from the Approved Material List.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-30
B. Supercritical flow shall not be allowed in channels except at drop structures and other energy
dissipators.
C. At transitions in channel characteristics, velocities must be reduced to the maximum velocity per
the downstream assessment in accordance with Section 4.03.B. Velocities must be reduced before
the flow reaches the natural channel using either energy dissipators and/or wider less steep
channel.
D. Channel armoring for erosion control shall be provided where deemed necessary by the Director
of Engineering Services.
E. If the channel cannot be maintained from the top of the bank, a maintenance access ramp shall be
provided and included within the drainage easement.
F. Minimum channel bottom widths are recommended to be equal to twice the depth of the channel.
Any permanent open channel shall have a minimum bottom width of 5’.
G. All open channels require a minimum freeboard of 1’ freeboard.
H. The minimum slope for an excavated improved channel is 1% unless a pilot channel is
constructed, or otherwise approved by the Director of Engineering Services.
Table 4.6 provides allowable ranges for roughness coefficients of open channels.
Table 4.6 Channel Roughness Coefficients
Channel Description
Roughness Coefficient
Minimum Normal Maximum
Minor Natural Streams
Moderately Well Defined Channel
-grass and weeds, little brush 0.025 0.030 0.033
-dense weeds, little brush 0.030 0.035 0.040
-weeds, light brush on banks 0.030 0.035 0.040
-weeds, heavy brush on banks 0.035 0.050 0.060
-weeds, dense willows on banks 0.040 0.060 0.080
Irregular Channel with Pools and Meanders
-grass and weeds, little brush 0.030 0.036 0.042
-dense weeds, little brush 0.036 0.042 0.048
-weeds, light brush on banks 0.036 0.042 0.048
-weeds, heavy brush on banks 0.042 0.060 0.072
-weeds, dense willows on banks 0.048 0.072 0.096
Flood Plain, Pasture
-short grass, no brush 0.025 0.030 0.035
-tall grass, no brush 0.030 0.035 0.050
Flood Plain, Cultivated
-no crops 0.025 0.030 0.035
-mature crops 0.030 0.040 0.050
Flood Plain, Uncleared
-heavy weeds, light brush 0.035 0.050 0.070
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-31
Channel Description
Roughness Coefficient
Minimum Normal Maximum
-medium to dense brush 0.070 0.100 0.160
-trees with flood stage below branches 0.080 0.100 0.120
Major Natural Streams
Moderately Well Defined Channel 0.025 ----- 0.060
Irregular Channel 0.035 ----- 0.100
Unlined Vegetated Channels
Mowed Grass, Clay Soil 0.025 0.030 0.035
Mowed Grass, Sandy Soil 0.025 0.030 0.035
Unlined Unvegetated Channels
Clean Gravel Section 0.022 0.025 0.030
Shale 0.025 0.030 0.035
Smooth Rock 0.025 0.030 0.035
Lined Channels
Smooth Finished Concrete 0.013 0.015 0.020
Riprap (Rubble) 0.30 0.40 0.50
I. Water surface elevations and flow velocities in channels are impacted by the maintenance
condition in the channel. Calculations shall be performed assuming maintained and unmaintained
vegetative conditions. Lower (maintained) Manning’s values shall be used to determine
maximum velocities, while higher (unmaintained) Manning’s values shall be used to determine
water surface elevations per Figure 5.
J. Any channel modification must meet the applicable requirements of all Local, State and Federal
Regulatory Agencies.
K. An erosion hazard setback shall be included within the Drainage Easement for the channel. The
purpose of this setback is to reduce the potential for any damage to a private lot or street right-ofway
caused by the erosion of the bank. The erosion hazard setback shall be determined as
follows, and is provided in Figure 6:
1. For stream banks composed of material other than rock, locate the toe of the natural stream
bank. Project a 4:1 line sloping away from the bank until it intersects finished grade. From
this intersection add 15’ away from the bank. This shall be the limit of the erosion hazard
setback.
2. Figure 6 is intended to illustrate various scenarios under which the erosion hazard setback can
be applied and how it interacts with the floodplain access easement. Scenario 1 shows a
situation where the setback may be located outside the 100-year floodplain and access
easement boundaries. Scenarios 2 and 3 show locations where the erosion hazard setback will
be located inside the 100-year floodplain and access easement boundaries.
L. Any modifications within the area designated as erosion hazard setback, will require a
geotechnical and geomorphological stability analysis, and a grading permit (two separate items).
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-32
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-33
Figure 6 Natural Open Channels
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-34
4.12 Hydraulic Design of Culverts
A. All culverts, headwalls, wingwalls, and aprons shall be designed in conformance with the City
Standard Details. The Engineer is responsible for selecting the applicable detail.
B. Culvert calculations shall be provided to the City for review. Calculations may include, but are
not limited to, headwall, tailwater, and flowline elevations, lowest adjacent grade and structure
elevations, inlet and outlet control calculations and velocity calculations.
C. There is no minimum freeboard requirement for culvert crossings; however, an emergency
overflow path shall be identified and provided on the construction plans. An emergency overflow
path is the path the storm water will take when the drainage facilities becomes clogged or does
not function in the manner as to which it was designed. The emergency overflow path shall be
limited to public right-of-way or drainage easements.
D. Culverts should always be aligned to follow the natural stream channel. The engineer is shall
provide sufficient information to analyze the upstream and downstream impacts of the culvert and
illustrate the interaction of the channel and culvert alignment.
E. Headwalls and Entrance Conditions:
1. The Engineer shall be responsible for the headwall and wingwall designs. Headwalls and
endwalls refer to the entrances and exits of structures, respectively, and are usually formed of
cast-in-place concrete and located at either end of the drainage system. Wingwalls are vertical
walls, which project out from the sides of a headwall or endwall.
2. The culvert entrance losses are provided in Table 4.7. The values of the entrance coefficient
Ke represent a combination of the effects of entrance and approach conditions. Losses shall
be completed using the following formula:
???? = ???? ??
??2
2??
??
He = Entrance head loss (ft)
Ke = Entrance loss coefficient
v = Velocity (fps)
g = Gravity constant (32.2 ft/s2)
F. Concrete culvert headwalls and wingwalls shall use form-liner surface finish unless otherwise
approved by Director of Engineering.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-35
Table 4.7 Culvert Entrance Losses
Type of Structure Ke
Pipe, Concrete
-projecting from fill, socket and (groove end) 0.2
-projecting from fill, square cut end 0.5
-headwall or headwall and wingwalls: socket end of pipe (groove end) 0.2
-headwall or headwall and wingwalls: square edge 0.5
-headwall or headwall and wingwalls: rounded (radius = 0.0933D) 0.2
-mitered to conform to fill slope 0.7
-beveled edges, 33.7° or 45° 0.2
-side or sloped tapered inlet 0.2
Pipe, or Pipe-Arch
-projecting from fill (no headwall) 0.9
-headwall or headwall and wingwalls: square edge 0.5
-mitered to conform to fill slope, paved / unpaved slope 0.7
-beveled edges, 33.7° or 45° 0.2
-side or sloped tapered inlet 0.2
Box, Reinforced Concrete
-headwall parallel to embankment (no wingwalls): squared on three sides 0.5
-headwall parallel to embankment (no wingwalls): rounded on three sides to radius 1/12
barrel dimension on three sides 0.2
-wingwalls at 30° to 75° to barrel: square edged at crown 0.4
-wingwalls at 30° to 75° to barrel: crown edge rounded to radius of 2/12 barrel
dimension, or beveled top edge. 0.2
4.13 Bridge Design Hydraulics
A. The City requires that head losses and depth of flow through bridges be determined with a HECRAS
program or other approved program. The following guidelines pertain to the hydraulic
design of bridges:
1. Fully developed 100 year water surface must not be increased upstream of the bridge.
2. Excavation of the natural channel is not allowed as compensation for loss of conveyance.
3. Channelization upstream or downstream of the proposed bridge will normally only be
permitted when necessary to realign the flow to a more efficient angle of approach.
4. Side swales may be used to provide additional conveyance downstream of and through
bridges.
5. Bridges are to be designed with the lowest point (low beam) low chord at least 2’ above the
water surface elevation of the design storm.
B. A scour analysis shall be submitted with design plans.
4.14 Energy Dissipators
A. The Engineer shall be responsible for all energy dissipation designs.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-36
B. A Downstream Assessment shall be performed to ensure modifications to the storm drainage
system, through development or construction of storm drainage facilities, do not have an adverse
impact on downstream conditions.
C. Grouted rock rip-rap or gabion baskets or mattresses are required for energy dissipation. Other
designs may be considered.
D. All energy dissipation designs shall include supporting calculations showing the design is
adequate. The City may require the Engineer to provide a hydraulic model as supporting
documentation.
E. All energy dissipators should be designed to facilitate future maintenance. The design of outlet
structures in or near parks or residential areas shall give special consideration to appearance and
shall be approved by the Director of Engineering Services.
4.15 Floodplain Alterations
A. No new construction is allowed in floodplain areas, but construction is allowed in those areas that
have been reclaimed from the floodplain.
B. Floodplain alteration shall be allowed only if all the following criteria are met:
1. Flood studies shall include flows generated for existing conditions and fully-developed
conditions for the 2, 5, 10, 25, and 100 year storm events.
2. Alterations of the floodplain shall not increase the water surface elevation of the design flood
of the creek on other properties.
3. Alterations shall be in compliance with FEMA guidelines.
4. Alterations of the floodplain shall meet the requirements of Section 4.03.
5. Alterations shall result in no loss of valley storage for a Major Creek, as defined by the
Subdivision Ordinance, and a 15% maximum loss of valley storage for any other tributary for
any reach, except at bridge and culvert crossings where it can be proven that there are no
detrimental effects downstream.
6. Any alteration of floodplain areas shall not cause any additional expense in any current or
projected public improvements, including maintenance.
7. The floodplain shall be altered only to the extent permitted by equal conveyance on both
sides of the natural channel, as defined by the United States Army Corps of Engineers in a
HEC-RAS analysis. The right of equal conveyance applies to all owners and uses, including
greenbelt, park areas, and recreational areas. Owners may relinquish their right to equal
conveyance by providing a written agreement to the Director of Engineering Services.
8. A grading permit shall be required to perform any grading activities on site.
9. The toe of any fill shall parallel the natural direction of the flow.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-37
10. Grading activities in the floodplain shall incorporate and consider other City planning
documents and ordinances such as the Tree Preservation Ordinance, the Major Creek
Ordinance, the Floodplain Ordinance, and the 2004 Final Riparian and Wetland Assessment.
11. Incorporates and considers other city planning documents and ordinances.
C. The above criteria shall be met before any floodplain alteration may occur. Typical projects
requiring a floodplain alteration include placing fill (whether or not it actually raises the property
out of the floodplain) constructing a dam, straightening channel sections, making improvements,
(substantial or otherwise), to existing structures in a floodplain in which the existing outside
dimensions of the structure are increased, and temporary storage of fill materials, supplies and
equipment.
D. In general, the information needed for the application shall be performing by running a backwater
model, such as HEC-2 or HEC-RAS, and a flood routing model, such as TR-20, HEC-1, or HECHMS.
Unless a pre-existing model is in place, HEC-HMS and HEC-RAS shall be used. The
backwater information shall be used to determine that upstream water surface elevations and
erosive velocities have not increased. Flood routing information shall be used to insure that the
cumulative effects of the reduction in floodplain storage of floodwater will not cause downstream
increases in water surface elevations and erosive velocities.
E. The Engineer is responsible for providing documentation of the relevant USACE approved
permits prior to beginning modification to the floodplain, or for providing a signed and sealed
statement detailing why such permits are unnecessary.
F. Verification of Floodplain Alterations:
1. Prior to final acceptance by the City for a certified statement shall be prepared by a Licensed
Professional Engineer showing that all lot elevations, as developed within the subject project,
meet the required minimum finished floor elevations shown on the construction plans. This
certification shall be filed with the Director of Engineering Services.
2. In addition, at any time in the future when a building permit is desired for existing platted
property which is subject to flooding or carries a specified or recorded minimum finished
floor elevation, a Registered Professional Land Surveyor shall survey the property prior to
obtaining a building permit. The certified survey data showing the property to be at or above
the specified elevation shall be furnished to the Director of Engineering Services for
approval. Certification of compliance with the provisions of this ordinance pertaining to
specified finished floor elevations shall be required.
3. The owner/developer shall furnish, at his expense, to the Director of Engineering Services
sufficient engineering information to confirm that the minimum finished floor elevations
proposed are as required by this ordinance. Construction permits will not be issued until a
Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) or amendment has been accepted by the
Director of Engineering Services for submittal to FEMA. Letters of Map Revision shall be
submitted to the Director of Engineering Services for submittal to FEMA prior to final
acceptance of the project. The contractor shall supply to the Director of Engineering Services
all necessary documentation and fees to be forwarded to FEMA for application for a Letter of
Map Amendment if the Letter of Map Revision has not yet become effective.
4. All submittals to FEMA shall be made through the Engineering Services Department. The
owner/developer will provide the City with an additional copy of the CLOMR or LOMR
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-38
submittal as well as the required FEMA submittal and shipping fees. Upon City approval,
receipt of the fees, and receipt of the FEMA review copy, the City will forward the submittal
to FEMA.
5. All response to FEMA comments shall be submitted to the City prior to submittal to FEMA.
The City will review the response to comments in a timely manner.
4.16 Erosion and Sedimentation Control
A. See Section 8 for requirements for Stormwater Best Management Practices and Stormwater
Management Plan.
4.17 Drainage Easements
A. The following minimum width exclusive drainage easements are required when facilities are not
located within public rights-of-way or easements:
1. Storm sewers are to be located within the center of a 15’ drainage easement or 1.5 times the
depth plus the width of the structure rounded up to the nearest 5’, whichever is greater.
2. Overflow flumes are to be located with the edge being a minimum of 1’ off the property line
within a 10’ drainage easement.
B. Storm drain lines are considered public if they cross property lines and collect runoff from
adjacent properties. Drainage easements shall be dedicated to the City when a drainage system
crosses a property line. For single-family residential developments, storm drain lines shall not
cross residential lots unless approved by the Director of Engineering Services.
C. Drainage Easements shall be dedicated for all floodplains and shall include an erosion hazard
setback to reduce the potential for damage due to erosion of the bank.
D. Drainage Easements shall be dedicated for all detention facilities.
4.18 Sustainable Development
The City encourages developments to implement sustainable designs, concepts, and practices on
site. The Engineer shall notify the City of the design intent and provide the necessary
information, data, and calculations on the construction plans. The following items are potential
concepts and designs that may be considered in a sustainable design. Concepts and designs not
included on this list may be proposed by the Engineer.
• Rainwater Harvesting
• Green Roofs
• Modular Porous Paver Systems
• Porous Concrete
• Extended Detention
• Bio Retention
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-39
• Reduction of impervious surfaces
• Preservation of natural drainage paths
The Engineer shall refer to published technical resources on the design of these sustainable
designs, concepts, and practices. Such technical resources may be found on the North Central
Texas Council of Governments’ (NCTCOG) storm water website or the Environmental
Protection Agency’s (EPA) website for Low Impact Development.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-40
Detention/Retention Pond Example
GIVEN: A 10 acre site is currently undeveloped and will be developed as a non-residential
use. The entire site is the drainage area for the proposed detention basin.
EXAMPLE
DETERMINE: Maximum release rate and required detention storage.
SOLUTION:
1.) Determine 100-year peak runoff rate for single family runoff (Q=C*I*A). This is the
maximum release rate from the site after development. (Any area within the drainage area not
being conveyed to the detention basin shall be accounted for in the calculation for the
maximum release rate.)
Existing Conditions: C = 0.3
Tc = 20 minutes
I100 = 6.88” / hour
A = 10 acres
Q100 = (0.3)(6.88)10=20.64 cfs
2.) Determine inflow Hydrograph for storms of various durations in order to determine
maximum volume required with maximum release rate calculated in step 1. (Incrementally
increase durations by 10 minutes until the duration of peak inflow is less than the maximum
release rate or where the required storage is less than the storage for the prior duration. The
prior duration storage shall be used for the required detention storage.)
Proposed Conditions: C = 0.90
Tc = 10 minutes
I100 = 8.74” / hour
A = 10 acres
Q100 = (0.90)(8.74)10 = 78.66 cfs
Check various duration storms:
10 minutes I=8.74; Q=0.9(8.74)10 = 78.66 cfs
20 minutes I=6.88; Q=0.9(6.88)10 = 61.96 cfs
30 minutes I=5.74; Q=0.9(5.74)10 = 51.65 cfs
40 minutes I=4.95; Q=0.9(4.95)10 = 45.59 cfs
50 minutes I=4.38; Q=0.9(4.38)10 = 39.41 cfs
60 minutes I=3.94; Q=0.9(3.94)10 = 35.43 cfs
70 minutes I=3.59; Q=0.9(3.59)10 = 32.27 cfs
80 minutes I=3.30; Q=0.9(3.30)10 = 29.68 cfs
90 minutes I=3.06; Q=0.9(3.06)10 = 27.53 cfs
Maximum Detention Storage Volume is determined by deducting the volume of runoff
released during the time of inflow from the total inflow for each storm duration:
10 minute storm
INFLOW = 10(78.66)60 sec/min = 47,196 cf
OUTFLOW = (0.5)20(20.64)60 sec/min = 12,392 cf
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 4 – Drainage Design Requirements May 2012 Page 4-41
STORAGE = INFLOW - OUTFLOW = 34,804 cf
20 minute storm
INFLOW = 20(61.96)60 sec/min = 74,354 cf
OUTFLOW = (0.5)30(20.64)60 sec/min =
STORAGE = INFLOW - OUTFLOW = 55,765 cf
18,588 cf
30 minute storm
INFLOW = 30(51.65)60 sec/min = 92,975 cf
OUTFLOW = (0.5)40(20.64)60 sec/min =
STORAGE = INFLOW - OUTFLOW = 68,190 cf
24,785 cf
40 minute storm
INFLOW = 40(44.59)60 sec/min = 107,006 cf
OUTFLOW = (0.5)50(20.64)60 sec/min =
STORAGE = INFLOW - OUTFLOW = 76,026 cf
30,981 cf
50 minute storm
INFLOW = 50(39.41)60 sec/min = 118,219 cf
OUTFLOW = (0.5)60(20.64)60 sec/min =
STORAGE = INFLOW - OUTFLOW = 81,042 cf
37,177 cf
60 minute storm
INFLOW = 60(35.43)60 sec/min = 127,541 cf
OUTFLOW = (0.5)70(20.64)60 sec/min =
STORAGE = INFLOW - OUTFLOW = 84,168 cf
43,373 cf
70 minute storm
INFLOW = 70(32.27)60 sec/min = 135,516 cf
OUTFLOW = (0.5)80(20.64)60 sec/min =
STORAGE = INFLOW - OUTFLOW = 85,947 cf
49,569 cf
80 minute storm
INFLOW = 80(29.68)60 sec/min = 142,485 cf
OUTFLOW = (0.5)90(20.64)60 sec/min =
STORAGE = INFLOW - OUTFLOW = 86,720 cf
55,765 cf
90 minute storm
INFLOW = 90(27.53)60 sec/min = 148,679 cf
OUTFLOW = (0.5)100 (20.64)60 sec/min =
STORAGE = INFLOW - OUTFLOW = 86,717 cf
61,961 cf
Required detention storage is 86,720 cf at the 80 minute storm duration.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 5 – Water & Wastewater Design Requirements May 2012 Page 5-1
SECTION 5 – WATER & WASTEWATER DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 5 – Water & Wastewater Design Requirements May 2012 Page 5-2
Section 5 – Water & Wastewater Design Requirements
5.1 Water System - General
A. The intent of the water system design requirements is to list minimum requirements for public
water distribution and transmission system facilities and appurtenances. Private fire service
mains shall also be designed according to these water system design requirements and the City’s
Fire Code and the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 24, Standard for the Installation
of Private Fire Service Mains and Appurtenances, latest revision.
B. Design criteria for all water systems shall comply with Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality (TCEQ) Chapter 290, Subchapter D (Rules and Regulations for Public Water Systems),
latest revision. Chapter 290 is included in Part I of Title 30 of the Texas Administrative Code.
C. Line sizes shall comply with the Water Distribution System Capital Improvement Plan.
D. Water mains shall be sized and extended through the limits of a development to serve adjacent
properties.
E. Dead end water mains are not allowed unless approved in writing by the Director of Engineering
Services; however, if approved, an automatic flushing device shall be provided (See 5.1.12).
Automatic flushing devices shall drain via a pipe system to the storm sewer system.
5.1.1 Water Main Location
A. Water mains 12” and smaller shall be installed 2’ from the back of the curb, as measured to the
centerline of pipe.
B. Water mains larger than 12” shall be installed at least 3’ from the back of curb as measured to the
centerline of pipe.
C. Water mains shall be designed to minimize bends and fittings and follow right-of-way or
centerline alignment curves at a uniform distance from the right-of-way or centerline.
D. Dead end water mains shall extend a minimum of 5’ beyond the edge of the pavement. If adjacent
to a fitting, extend a minimum of 20’ or one pipe joint beyond fitting.
5.1.2 Horizontal and Vertical Alignment
A. A clearance of 18” shall be maintained when crossing storm drain systems. Where minimum
clearance cannot be achieved, water mains shall be encased in 6” of concrete in accordance with
the standard detail.
B. Lines 16” and smaller shall have a minimum cover of 4’.
C. Lines larger than 16” shall have a minimum cover of 6’.
D. Waters mains shall be designed as straight as possible following the existing or proposed grade at
the minimum depth of cover. Bends shall be provided where vertical slope changes exceed 80%
of the manufacturer’s recommended joint deflection.
E. Excessive high points that trap air and restrict water flow shall be avoided.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 5 – Water & Wastewater Design Requirements May 2012 Page 5-3
5.1.3 Separation Distance between Water and Wastewater
A. The separation distance between water mains and wastewater mains, manholes or other
appurtenances is governed by Title 30 of the Texas Administrative Code, Part 1, Chapter 290,
Subchapter D, Rule 290.44(e)and Chapter 217, Subchapter C, Rule 217.53(d).
B. Water mains shall have a minimum separation distance of 9’ in all directions from wastewater
collection facilities. Separation distances shall be measured from the outside surface of each of
the respective facilities.
C. If the minimum separation distances cannot be achieved for parallel water and wastewater mains,
the separation distances may be reduced if the wastewater main has a pressure rating of 150 psi.
In these cases, the water main shall be placed above the wastewater main with minimum
separation distances of 4’ horizontally and 2’ vertically.
D. If the minimum separation distances cannot be achieved for crossing water and wastewater mains,
the separation distances may be reduced under two scenarios:
1. The wastewater main has a minimum pressure rating of 150 psi.
2. The water or wastewater main is cased for a minimum of 18’ with a casing pipe having a
minimum pressure rating of 150 psi.
Under each scenario, the water main shall be centered on the wastewater main crossing with a
minimum separation distance of 12”.
E. When water mains are designed to be closer than 9’ to wastewater manholes or cleanouts, the
water main shall be cased as described in section 5.1.3D above.
5.1.4 Average Daily Water Demands
Apart from project specific water demand and/or actual flow measurements, the following values
shall be used when calculating the average daily water demands:
Table 5.1 – Average Daily Water Demands
Land Use Design Calculation
Apartment • 3.0 persons/unit
• 230 gallons per person per day 690 gpd/unit
Residential/
Town Home/ Patio Home
• 3.5 persons/unit
• 230 gallons per person per day 805 gpd/unit
Hospital (Beds) • 720 gallons per day per bed 720 gpd/bed
Nursing Home or Other
Institution (Beds) • 240 gallons per day per bed 240 gpd/bed
Commercial/
Industrial/Office
• 1 person per parking space, or
• 1 person per 400 SF of building 50 gpd/person
School • 30 gallons per student/day 30 gpd/student
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 5 – Water & Wastewater Design Requirements May 2012 Page 5-4
5.1.5 Water Main Sizing
A. Water mains shall be sized in accordance with the Water Distribution System Master Plan.
B. The following criteria shall be used to size water mains.
1. Average daily water demands less than 80,000 gallons per day:
a. Single Family Residential
i. Water mains shall be a minimum of 8”.
ii. 12” water mains are required to serve the development and shall be located along
collector streets.
b. Multi-Family Residential
i. Water mains shall be a minimum of 8” and shall be extended to provide service to
adjacent properties.
ii. Water mains greater than 600’ in length or supplying more than one fire hydrant/fire
service line shall be 12”.
c. Commercial, Schools and Manufacturing
i. Looped 8” water mains may be used for fire hydrants located in parking lots and not
adjacent to buildings.
ii. Water mains greater than 1,000’ in length or supplying more than two fire
hydrants/fire service lines shall be a minimum of 12”.
2. Average daily water demands greater than 80,000 gallons per day shall submit the following
information:
a. Zoning
b. Area in acres
c. Type of Development
d. Number of units and/or building square footage
e. Exhibit with connection locations and proposed water main schematic
f. Projected Average Daily Water Demands
5.1.6 Water Main Materials
A. Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Pipe
1. PVC water mains from 4” to 8” in diameter shall be AWWA C900 DR14.
2. PVC water mains 12” in diameter shall be AWWA C900 DR18.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 5 – Water & Wastewater Design Requirements May 2012 Page 5-5
3. PVC water mains 16” in diameter and greater shall be AWWA C905 DR18.
B. Ductile Iron Pipe
Ductile iron water mains 16” in diameter and larger shall be in accordance with ANSI/AWWA
C151/A21.50 with a minimum pressure class of 150 psi. It shall be the Engineer’s responsibility
to determine whether a higher pressure class is required.
C. Fittings
All fittings shall be ductile iron and have mechanical restraints and thrust blocking.
5.1.7 Water Services
Minimum requirements for water services are as follows:
A. Minimum 1” meter and 1” services are required for all residential and commercial services. The
size necessary shall be selected based on design calculations of actual demands.
B. Twin meters in parallel are not permitted as meter size shall correlate to the line size. Bullhead
connections are not permitted.
C. Meters 3” and larger are required to be in a concrete vault.
D. Domestic or irrigation service connections shall not be allowed on a fire hydrant lead or fire
service line.
E. A domestic or irrigation service connection shall not exceed 50’ in length.
F. A fire service line shall be a minimum of 8”.
G. The water meter size shall be the same size as the service line.
H. For a water service requiring a vault, a minimum 6” water line shall be required off the water
main with a minimum 6” gate valve prior to reducing in size.
I. Meter boxes shall be placed within the right-of-way or in a dedicated water easement.
J. Meter boxes shall be protected from vehicular traffic with bollards. If not protected by bollards,
either a traffic-rated vault or curb is required.
K. Meters shall be placed generally in the center of residential lots according to the Standard Details.
L. Refer to Approved Material List for acceptable products.
5.1.8 Valves
A. Isolation Valves
1. Isolation valves shall be placed on or near street property lines.
2. Isolation valves shall not be over 600’ apart in residential and multi-family areas.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 5 – Water & Wastewater Design Requirements May 2012 Page 5-6
3. Isolation valves shall not be over 500’ apart in all other non-residential areas on lines 12” and
smaller. For lines 16” and larger, valves shall not be over 1000’ apart.
4. Two isolation valves shall be placed such that only one fire hydrant/fire fighting apparatus
and one fire sprinkler private service system is shut down at a time. No more than three
isolations valves shall be used to shut down the combined fire hydrant/fire fighting apparatus
and fire sprinkler system private service main.
5. Water mains supplying an automatic fire sprinkler system shall include isolation valves on
the private fire service main.
6. Isolation valves shall not be located in parking spaces.
7. In undeveloped areas, main line isolation valves shall be spaced every 1,200’ and adjacent to
fire hydrants.
B. Air Release Valves
1. The Engineer shall be responsible for locating and sizing air release valves in accordance
with AWWA Manual M51: Air-Release, Air/Vacuum & Combination Air Valve.
2. Air release valves shall be installed on water mains larger than 12”. Vent pipes shall
discharge air above grade and above 100-year floodplain elevation if applicable.
3. Air valves are not required on water distribution mains smaller than 12” where fire hydrants
and service connections provide a means for venting trapped air.
4. Air valve manholes shall not be located in parking spaces.
C. Blowoff Valves
1. Blowoff valves shall be provided on water mains 16” and larger, at low points and at isolation
valves where the water main slopes toward the valve.
2. Blowoff valves shall discharge to a drainage channel, creek, storm sewer or culvert.
5.1.9 Fire Hydrants
Fire hydrants shall be provided as recommended by the “GUIDE FOR DETERMINATION OF
REQUIRED FIRE FLOW” published by the Insurance Service Office. The following minimum
guidelines shall be met:
A. Fire hydrants shall be installed at a minimum of 10’ from the curb return
B. Fire hydrants shall be installed at a minimum of 2’ and a maximum of 6’ from the edge of
pavement on Thoroughfare Types D, E, and F and fire lanes.
on Thoroughfare Types
A, B, and C.
C. Fire hydrants shall be located at all main entrances and intersecting streets and fire lanes.
D. Fire hydrants shall be spaced every 1200’ along undeveloped roadways.
E. Fire hydrant leads exceeding 100’ shall be looped with a minimum 8” line.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 5 – Water & Wastewater Design Requirements May 2012 Page 5-7
F. Fire hydrants shall be provided every 500’ within residential developments as measured along the
route that a fire hose is laid by a fire apparatus.
G. The fire hydrant shall not be located in the sidewalk.
H. Fire hydrant valves shall be positioned to one side of the fire hydrant pumper nozzle.
I. Fire hydrants required to supplement water supply for automatic fire protection systems shall be
located within 100’ of the Fire Department connection for such system.
J. Additional requirements for fire hydrant installation adjacent to, and along fire lanes is as
follows:
1.
a. Fire hydrants shall be located every 300’ as measured along the route that a fire hose is
laid by a fire apparatus.
Multi-family
b. Fire hydrants shall be located outside the radius of the fire lane and at least 35’ from all
buildings.
c. A minimum of two fire hydrants shall be located within 500’ of the front of any building
as measured along the route that a fire hose is laid by a fire apparatus.
2.
a. Fire hydrants shall be located within 150’ of the main entrance.
Commercial
b. Fire hydrants shall be located outside the radius of the fire lane and at least 35’ from all
buildings.
c. A minimum of two fire hydrants shall be located within 300’ from the front of any
building as measured along the route that a fire hose is laid by a fire apparatus.
K. 6 inch water mains shall be installed such that not more than one hydrant will be between
intersecting lines.
L. 8” water mains shall be installed such that not more than two fire hydrants will be between
intersecting lines.
M. Fire hydrants on private property shall be located within easements and protected by curb stops or
bollards, the maintenance of which shall be the responsibility of the property owner. The property
owner is responsible for keeping the curb stops or bollards in place.
N. Fire hydrants on private property shall be accessible to the Fire Department at all times.
O. Fire hydrants location is subject to approval of Fire Department.
5.1.10 Connections to Existing Water Mains
A. Connections to 12” water mains and larger shall be made with a pipe a minimum of one size
smaller than the line being tapped.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 5 – Water & Wastewater Design Requirements May 2012 Page 5-8
B. The smallest pipe connection to water mains 20” and larger is 6”.
5.1.11 Backflow Prevention
Backflow prevention devices shall be required at the following locations in order to protect the public
water system from cross contamination:
A. Commercial property water service lines
B. Dedicated irrigation lines
C. Private fire service main supplying fire sprinkler systems
D. Multi-family residential water service lines
5.1.12 Automatic Flushing Valve
A. Automatic Flush Valves shall be placed on dead-end water mains. Water mains anticipated to be
extended in the future may be required to install an automatic flush valve, depending on the
timing of future work and the specific location.
B. Automatic Flush Valves shall drain via pipe to storm drain system.
C. Refer to Standard Detail for typical installation and Approved Material List for acceptable
products.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 5 – Water & Wastewater Design Requirements May 2012 Page 5-9
5.2 Wastewater System - General
A. Design criteria for all wastewater systems shall comply with TCEQ Chapter 217 (Design Criteria
for Domestic Wastewater Systems), latest revision. Chapter 217 is included in Part 1 of Title 30
of the Texas Administrative Code.
B. Wastewater main sizes shall comply with the Wastewater System Capital Improvement Plan.
C. Wastewater mains shall be sized and extended through the limits of a development to serve
adjacent properties.
5.2.1 Wastewater Main Location
A. Wastewater mains serving subdivisions and commercial developments shall be located under
street paving along the center of the street.
B. Wastewater mains shall not be located in alleys.
C. Wastewater mains located near open waterways shall follow the alignment of the waterway along
the high bank and be located a minimum of 15’ beyond the top of bank. Wastewater manholes
shall not be located in the flow line of an existing waterway.
D. No wastewater main shall be located inside the storm sewer system.
5.2.2 Horizontal and Vertical Alignment
A. Wastewater mains shall be designed as straight as possible between manholes.
B. Wastewater mains running parallel with public right-of-ways shall match change in street
direction. When streets have horizontal curvature, curved sewers are acceptable to maintain
parallel alignment.
C. Minimum cover for wastewater main shall be 4’.
D. In general, the minimum depth for a wastewater main to serve a given residential property with a
4” lateral shall be 3’ plus 2% times the length of the house lateral (the distance from the
wastewater main to the center of the house). Thus, for a house 135’ from the wastewater main,
the depth would be 3’ plus 2% x 135’ = 3.0 + 2.7 = 5.7’. The depth of the flow line of the
wastewater main should then be at least 5.7’ below the elevation of the ground at the point where
the service enters the house. Profiles of the ground line 20’ past the building line will be required
to verify that this criteria is met.
E. No vertical bends or vertical curves shall be allowed between manholes.
F. A parallel wastewater main shall be required for wastewater lateral connections on wastewater
mains deeper than 12’.
G. Wastewater mains shall be placed on such a grade that the velocity is not less than 2 fps or more
than 10 fps at design peak flow. The following table of values may be used:
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 5 – Water & Wastewater Design Requirements May 2012 Page 5-10
Table 5.3: Minimum and Maximum Grades for Wastewater Mains*
Size of Pipe
(inches)
Minimum Slope in
(Percent)
Maximum Slope in
(Percent)
8 0.33 8.40
10 0.25 6.23
12 0.20 4.88
15 0.15 3.62
18 0.11 2.83
21 0.09 2.30
24 0.08 1.93
27 0.06 1.65
30 0.055 1.43
33 0.05 1.26
36 0.045 1.12
39 0.04 1.01
>39 ** **
*The slopes were calculated using Manning’s Equation and a roughness coefficient
of 0.013.
**For lines larger than 39” in diameter, the slope shall be determined using the
following equation.
where:
V = velocity of flow in wastewater main (fps)
n = roughness coefficient of the wastewater main
R = hydraulic radius of the wastewater main (ft), which is equal to
the area of the flow divided by the wetted perimeter (R=A/P)
S = Slope of the hydraulic gradient (ft/ft)
5.2.3 Separation Distance between Wastewater and Water Mains
A. The separation distance between wastewater and water mains or other appurtenances is governed
by Title 30 of the Texas Administrative Code, Part 1, Chapter 217, Subchapter C, Rule 217.53(d).
B. Wastewater mains shall be installed in trenches separate from water mains.
C. Wastewater mains shall have a minimum separation distance of 9’ in all directions from water
mains. All separation distances shall be measured from the outside surface of each of the
respective facilities.
D. If the minimum separation distances cannot be achieved for crossing water and wastewater mains,
the separation distances may be reduced under two scenarios:
1. The wastewater main has a minimum pressure rating of 150 psi.
2. The water or wastewater main is cased for a minimum of 18’ with a casing pipe having a
minimum pressure rating of 150 psi.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 5 – Water & Wastewater Design Requirements May 2012 Page 5-11
Under each scenario, the water main shall be centered on the wastewater main crossing with a
minimum separation distance of 12”.
E. If the minimum separation distances cannot be achieved for crossing wastewater and water mains,
the separation distances may be reduced if the wastewater main has a pressure rating of 150 psi.
In these cases the wastewater main shall be cased for a minimum of 18’. The casing pipe shall be
centered on the water main crossing, be a minimum of two nominal pipe sizes larger than the
wastewater main and be sealed at each end with watertight non-shrink cement grout, or a
manufactured watertight seal. The minimum separation distance is 6”.
5.2.4 Wastewater Flows
If project specific wastewater flow projections or actual flow measurements are not available for
a development, the criteria in Table 5.4 shall be used to calculate average daily and peak
wastewater flows. This criteria meets or exceeds the minimum requirements as set by TCEQ in
Title 30 of the Texas Administrative Code, Part 1, Chapter 217, Subchapter C, Rule 217.32(a)(3).
Table 5.4 – Wastewater Flow Projections
Land Use Design Factors Average Daily
Wastewater Flows
Peak Wastewater
Flows*
Apartment • 3.0 persons/unit
• 102 gallons per person per day 306 gpd/unit 1,224 gpd/unit
Residential/
Town Home/
Patio Home
• 3.5 persons/unit
• 102 gallons per person per day 357 gpd/unit 1,428 gpd/unit
Hospital (Beds) • 200 gallons per bed per day 200 gpd/bed 800 gpd/bed
Nursing Home or
Other Institution
(Beds)
• 100 gallons per day per bed 100 gpd/bed 400 gpd/bed
Commercial/
Industrial/Office
• 1 person per parking space, or
• 1 person per 400 s.f. of building
• 20 gallons per day/person
20 gpd/person 80 gpd/person
School • 20 gallons per student/day 20 gpd/student 80 gpd/student
* Peak flow is based on a peaking factor of 4.0.
5.2.5 Wastewater Main Sizing
A. Although the Wastewater System Master Plan may be used as a guide for sizing wastewater
mains, sizing should be based on an engineering analysis of initial and future flow of the total
drainage area to be served.
B. Wastewater mains shall be sized to carry the ultimate peak flow at 100% of the full flow capacity
of the pipe. A peaking factor less than 4 may be considered for wastewater mains with diameters
24” and larger.
C. Pipe capacity shall be calculated using Manning’s equation. A roughness coefficient of 0.013
shall be used.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 5 – Water & Wastewater Design Requirements May 2012 Page 5-12
5.2.6 Wastewater Main Materials
A. Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Wastewater Pipe
1. PVC non-pressure rated gravity wastewater mains from 6” to 15” in diameter shall be SDR
35 (if less than 15’ deep) or SDR 26 (if 15’ or deeper) (ASTM D3034) .
2. PVC non-pressure rated gravity wastewater mains 18” in diameter and greater shall have a
minimum pipe stiffness of 46 psi or 115 psi and be manufactured in accordance with ASTM
F679 (solid wall).
3. PVC pressure rated gravity wastewater mains and force mains from 6” to 12” in diameter
shall be SDR 26 (ASTM D2241) with a minimum pressure rating of 160 psi.
4. PVC pressure rated gravity wastewater mains and force mains greater than 12” in diameter
shall be AWWA C905 DR25 with a minimum pressure rating of 165 psi.
5. PVC profile wall pipe will not be allowed.
B. Fiberglass (Glass-Fiber-Reinforced Thermosetting Resin) Pipe
1. Fiberglass non-pressure rated gravity wastewater mains 18” in diameter and greater shall be
in accordance with ASTM D3262 with a minimum pipe stiffness of 46 psi and Class “B-2”
embedment in accordance with NCTCOG Item 504.5 and Standard Drawing 3020.
2. Fiberglass pressure rated gravity wastewater mains and force mains 18” in diameter and
greater shall be in accordance with ASTM D3754 with a minimum pressure rating of 150 psi
and Class “B+” embedment in accordance with NCTCOG Item 504.5 and Standard Drawing
3020.
C. Vitrified clay pipe will not be allowed.
5.2.7 Wastewater Service Laterals
The sizes and locations of laterals shall be designated as follows:
A. Wastewater service laterals for single-family residential shall be a minimum of 4” in diameter.
Laterals shall be installed 10’ downstream from the center of the lot and have a minimum
separation distance of 10’ separation from the water service.
B. Wastewater service laterals for multiple units, apartments, local retail and commercial
developments shall be a minimum of 6” in diameter.
C. Wastewater service laterals for manufacturing and industrial shall be a minimum of 8”.
D. Manholes are required on 6” and larger wastewater service laterals where they connect to the
main line.
E. Wastewater service laterals shall not be attached to wastewater mains that are deeper than 12’.
Deep cut or drop connections are not be permitted.
F. Each building shall have only one wastewater service lateral, except duplexes which shall have
two wastewater service laterals independently attached to the main.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 5 – Water & Wastewater Design Requirements May 2012 Page 5-13
G. All mains installed for future developable areas shall include wastewater service laterals; the use
of boots will not be permitted.
H. All wastewater service laterals crossing water mains shall conform to the requirements of the
TCEQ Chapter 217, Subchapter C, Rule 217.53(d), latest revision, or Section 5.2.3 of this
standard.
5.2.8 Manholes and Cleanouts
A. Manholes shall be installed at all changes in grade and direction, and have a maximum spacing of
500’.
B. Spacing between a manhole and an upstream cleanout shall be a maximum of 250’. A cleanout
or manhole shall be located at the end of a wastewater main.
C. Manholes on curved wastewater mains shall be located at the P.C. or P.T. of the curve and have a
maximum spacing of 300’ along the curve.
D. Manholes shall be constructed of monolithic, cast-in-place concrete, precast concrete or
fiberglass.
E. Manholes shall be concentric type unless otherwise approved by the Director of Engineering
Services.
F. Drop manholes shall be required when the inlet pipe flow line elevation is more than 24” above
the outlet pipe flow line elevation. Drops shall be outside the manhole unless otherwise approved
by the Director of Engineering Services.
G. Manholes shall be sized as follows:
1. 4’ in diameter for 8”, 10”, and 12” pipe.
2. 5’ in diameter for 15”, 18”, 21”, 24” and 27” pipe.
3. 6’ in diameter for 30” and 36” pipe.
4. 5’ in diameter minimum for manholes deeper than 15’.
H. Where more than three manholes in sequence are to be bolted and sealed, every third manhole
shall be vented 2’ above the 100-year floodplain elevation or 10’ above the adjacent ground line,
whichever is higher. The Engineer shall provide the elevation of the 100-year floodplain on the
profile.
I.
J. Manholes shall not be located in parking spaces.
Construct manholes within 30’ of each end of wastewater mains that are installed by other than
open cut and within 30’ of each end of aerial crossings.
K. A manhole with pipes of different sizes must have the tops of the pipes at the same elevation and
flow channels in the invert sloped on an even slope from pipe to pipe.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 5 – Water & Wastewater Design Requirements May 2012 Page 5-14
5.2.9 Inverted Siphons
The use of an inverted siphon to avoid obstructions along the alignment of the wastewater main
requires approval by the Director of Engineering Services. Should an inverted siphon be necessary
the design shall include:
A. Two or more barrels (pipes).
B. A minimum pipe diameter of 6”.
C. The necessary appurtenances for convenient flushing and maintenance.
D. One upstream and one downstream of a manhole for cleaning equipment, inspection and flushing.
E. The siphon must be sized with sufficient head to achieve velocity of at least 3 fps at initial and
design flows.
F. The inlet and outlet shall divert the normal flow to one barrel.
G. The system shall be designed to allow any barrel to be taken out of service for cleaning.
H. The system shall be designed to minimize nuisance odors.
5.2.10 Wastewater Lift Stations
Subdivisions shall be laid out so that all wastewater mains will be gravity flow. The use of a
wastewater lift station must be approved by the Director of Engineering Services and the Director of
Public Works.
A. All wastewater lift stations shall be designed in accordance with TCEQ Chapter 217, Subchapter
C.
B. The Engineer shall prepare an engineering design report for the wastewater lift station.
C. The lift station shall be connected to the City Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
(SCADA) system. The Owner shall pay all costs associated with the SCADA including all labor,
equipment, materials, and programming of the City’s computer and testing. The SCADA
equipment installed shall conform to the City’s standard specifications for Computerized
Monitoring and Control Specifications for Wastewater Lift Stations.
D. Control panels shall have heaters and exhaust fans, CT for reading amperage, HOA switch, and
an amp overload reset button on the outside of the panel.
E. All lift stations shall include a bioxide injection system for odor control.
F. The bioxide tank shall have a concrete foundation.
G.
H. Lift stations with two or more wet wells shall include a sluice gate between each wet well.
If carbon filters are required, the housing shall be painted per the approval of the Director of
Engineering Services.
I. Each pump shall have two guide rails.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 5 – Water & Wastewater Design Requirements May 2012 Page 5-15
J. Pumps shall be controlled by floats.
K. Pumps shall include hydraulic mixed flush valves.
L. For triplex pump stations, all three pumps are required to have swinging check valves, breakers,
starters and floats for emergency situations.
M. All lift stations shall include a landscaping and irrigation plan that shall be approved by the City’s
landscape architect.
N. All lift stations shall include an 8’ tall tubular steel fence with 16’ slide gate.
O. A 2” blow off with an isolation valve and RPZ shall be installed next to the vault opposite the
control panel.
5.2.11 Force Mains
A. Use white-colored pipe material whenever available.
B. 12” and smaller pipe shall be PVC ASTM D2241 SDR 26, or as determined by the Engineer.
C. Pipes larger than 12” shall be PVC AWWA C905 DR 18 or as determined by the Engineer and
approved by the Director of Engineering Services.
D. Minimum size for force mains is 6”.
E. Plug valves shall be installed every 1,000’ of force main
5.2.12 Dumpster Enclosure Drains
A. Dumpster enclosures serving commercial sites that will need to have the enclosure washed out
shall provide a connection to the sanitary sewer system.
B. Connection shall provide a water-tight sealed cover that can be removed to drain enclosure during
periodic cleaning.
C. Dumpster enclosure shall be constructed to prevent parking lot stormwater runoff from entering
enclosure area.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 5 – Water & Wastewater Design Requirements May 2012 Page 5-16
5.3 Reclaimed Water System - General
A. Design criteria for all reclaimed water systems shall comply with TCEQ Chapter 210 (Use of
Reclaimed Water), latest revision. Chapter 210 is included in Part I of Title 30 of the Texas
Administrative Code.
B. Line sizes shall comply with the Reclaimed Water Distribution System Master Plan.
C. Reclaimed water mains shall be sized and extended through the limits of a development to serve
adjacent properties.
5.3.1. Reclaimed Water Main Location
A. Reclaimed water mains shall be located behind the curb outside of street paving.
B. Reclaimed water mains crossing under storm sewers shall follow the same criteria as water mains
in Section 5.1.2A.
5.3.2. Horizontal and Vertical Alignment
A. The horizontal and vertical alignment for the reclaimed water system shall follow the same
criteria as the water system in Section 5.1.2.
5.3.3. Separation Distance between Reclaimed Water and Other Systems
A. The separation distance for the reclaimed water and potable water main shall follow the same
criteria as the water system in Section 5.1.3.
B. The minimum horizontal separation distance between reclaimed water and wastewater mains
shall be 3’ outside to outside, with the reclaimed water main located at or above the wastewater
main.
C. Reclaimed water mains that parallel wastewater mains may be placed in the same benched trench.
D. Reclaimed water mains crossing wastewater mains shall follow the same criteria as water mains
in Section 5.1.3.
5.3.4. Reclaimed Water System Materials
A. Reclaimed water mains shall utilize the same pipe materials as water mains per Section 5.1.6.
B. All reclaimed water main pipe shall be manufactured in purple or encased in purple polyethylene
tubing.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 5 – Water & Wastewater Design Requirements May 2012 Page 5-17
5.4 Easements
A. In single-family residential developments, water, wastewater, and reclaimed water mains shall not
cross residential lots unless specifically approved by the Director of Engineering Services, in
which case the easement shall be located within a single lot and be a minimum of 15’ in width.
B. Water mains 24” and larger shall be located in an easement parallel and adjacent to the right-ofway.
C. All easements required by the City shall be dedicated by plat if within the platted boundary. If
outside the platted boundary, provide easement by separate instrument.
D. Site paving, such as, parking, fire lanes and access drives are allowed over utility easements with
an easement use agreement. <LINK>
E. The following minimum width exclusive utility easements are required when facilities are not
located within public rights-of-way:
1. Water mains 12” and smaller are to be located within the center of a minimum 15’ utility
easement.
2. Easement widths for water mains 16” and larger shall be a minimum of 20’ subject to the
approval of the Director of Engineering Services.
3. Wastewater mains with a depth up to 10’ are to be located in the center of a 15’ utility
easement.
4. Wastewater mains with a depth between 10’ and 20’ are to be located in the center of a 20’
utility easement.
5. Wastewater mains with a depth greater than 20’ are to be located in the center of a 30’ utility
easement.
F. Fire hydrants and automatic flushing valve located outside of public rights-of-way shall be
located within a 10’ x 10’ utility easement.
G. 2” and smaller meters serving multi-family residential and non-residential developments shall be
located within the right-of-way or in a minimum 5’ x 5’ utility easement or in the right-of-way.
H. 3” and larger meters shall be located within a minimum 10’ x 10’ utility easement outside the
right-of-way.
I. All water main appurtenances such as air release valves with vents must be contained within
utility easements with a minimum 3’ clearance from the edge of the easement.
5.5 Thrust Restraint
A. All pressurized water and wastewater mains shall be restrained against thrust forces due to change
in pipeline diameter or alignment in order to prevent joint separation or movement.
B. Thrust restraint shall be accomplished by concrete thrust blocks and restrained joints.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 5 – Water & Wastewater Design Requirements May 2012 Page 5-18
C. All valves, fittings and changes in elevation shall have concrete thrust blocks and restrained joints
installed.
D. Thrust blocking shall be Class “PA” concrete per NCTCOG Item 702.2.4.3 and be able to
withstand a minimum 200 psi test pressure with a minimum safety factor of 1.5 without
exceeding the soil bearing capacity.
E. Restrained joints lengths shall be calculated to withstand a minimum 200 psi test pressure with a
minimum factor of safety of 2.0.
F. The following technical references are available for calculating thrust restraint systems:
1. AWWA Manual M9: Concrete Pressure Pipe by AWWA, Latest Edition.
2. AWWA Manual M11: Steel Pipe – A Guide for Design and Installation by AWWA, Latest
Edition.
3. AWWA Manual M23: PVC Pipe – Design and Installation by AWWA, Latest Edition.
4. Thrust Restraint for Ductile Iron Pipe by Ductile Iron Pipe Research Association (DIPRA),
2006, or Latest Edition.
5. Thrust Blocking, National Fire Protection Association Standard 24, Standard for the
Installation of Private Fire Service Mains and Their Appurtenances, 2007 Edition
5.6 Pavement Cut and Repair
A. Water and wastewater and reclaimed water main improvements shall be designed to minimize the
impact to existing pavement, where feasible.
B. No pavement shall be cut unless approved in writing by the Director of Engineering Services.
Existing pavement cut, excavation and repair shall be in accordance with NCTCOG Item 402 and
NCTCOG Standard Drawings 3070A through 3070D.
C. Full panel concrete pavement replacement will be required if pavement must be cut.
5.7 Trenchless Construction
A. Launching and receiving pits for trenchless construction shall be a minimum of 5’ from the edge
of pavement.
B. The location, size and depth of the launching and receiving pits for trenchless construction shall
be evaluated during construction plan review.
C. Approved Methods
1. Horizontal Boring - Horizontal boring shall require a steel casing pipe with a minimum yield
strength of 35,000 psi and minimum wall thickness of (1/4”). Actual wall thickness shall be
designed based on a highway loading of HL-20, a maximum deflection of 5% and a
minimum factor of safety of 2.0.
2. Pipe Jacking - Pipe shall be designed to withstand all jacking forces with a factor of safety of
2.0 during construction.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 5 – Water & Wastewater Design Requirements May 2012 Page 5-19
3. Tunneling
5.8 Crossings
A. Highway Crossings
1. The design of water and wastewater mains within a state highway must be in compliance with
all applicable requirements of the Texas Department of Transportation (TXDOT), unless a
variance is approved by TXDOT. The following reference applies: Title 43 of the Texas
Administrative Code, Part 1, Chapter 21, Subchapter C – Utilities Accommodation
2. Water and wastewater mains shall be located so as to avoid or minimize the impact to future
highway projects and improvements, to allow other utilities in the right-of-way, and to permit
access to water and wastewater mains and other utility facilities for their maintenance with
minimum interference to highway traffic
3. New water and wastewater mains crossing a highway shall be installed at approximately 90°
to the centerline of the highway,
4. New water and wastewater mains located longitudinally along a highway shall be designed
parallel to the right-of-way.
5. All water and wastewater crossings shall be encased with steel casing pipe in accordance with
Section 5.7C(1) Horizontal Boring, or approved equal. Casing pipe shall be extended to the
right-of-way line
6. Water valves, manholes and other appurtenances shall not be placed in the pavement or
shoulder of highway.
7. Water main crossings shall include a valve on each side of the highway crossing.
8. Individual service meters shall be placed outside the limits of the right-of-way.
B. Railroad Crossings
1. The design of water and wastewater mains within railroad right-of-way must be in
compliance with the requirements of the appropriate railroad authority. The designer should
determine which railroad company right-of-way is being crossed and obtain their utility
accommodation policies prior to beginning the design. The following references may be
applicable:
a. Utility Accommodation Policy by Burlington Northern Santa Fe (BNSF), Latest Edition.
b. American Railway Engineering & Maintenance Association (AREMA), Latest Edition.
2. New water and wastewater mains crossing a railroad shall be installed at approximately 90°
to the centerline of the railroad.
3. New water and wastewater mains located longitudinally along a railroad shall be designed
parallel to the right-of-way. No main shall be located closer than 25’ from the centerline of
the track.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 5 – Water & Wastewater Design Requirements May 2012 Page 5-20
4. All water and wastewater crossings shall be encased with steel casing pipe in accordance with
Section 5.7C(1) Horizontal Boring, or approved equal. Casing pipe crossing railroad tracks
shall be designed to withstand E80 railroad loadings and shall extend to the right-of-way
lines.
5. Water valves, manholes, meters and other appurtenances shall be placed outside the limits of
the right-of-way.
6. Water main crossings shall include a valve on each side of the railroad crossing.
C. Creek Crossings
1. All water and wastewater mains crossing under a flowing stream or semi-permanent body of
water such as a marsh or pond shall be encased with concrete or steel casing pipe in
accordance with Section 5.7C(1) Horizontal Boring, or approved equal.
2. Wastewater main crossings shall include a manhole on each side of the creek crossing beyond
the top of creek bank.
3. Water main crossings shall include a valve beyond the top of creek bank on each side.
4. Water mains installed under and across creeks or ditches shall be designed according to the
following:
a. Water mains with less than 4’ of cover shall be protected by Class PC concrete
encasement a minimum of 10’ past the top of the embankment on each side.
b. Trench backfill under creeks and ditches shall consist of flowable backfill in accordance
with NCTCOG Item 504.2.3.4.
c. Rock bottom creeks and ditches shall include a 6” concrete cap at the surface in
accordance with NCTCOG Item 504.5.2.14 and Standard Drawing 3060.
d. Bank stabilization shall be required at all crossings and shall consist of a pervious
armored surface to resist scour and shear forces on all disturbed areas.
D. Elevated Crossings
1. Elevated crossings for water and wastewater mains should be avoided.
5.9 Corrosion Protection
A. Corrosion protection should be considered on all metal water and wastewater mains that are 16”
diameter or greater.
B. Corrosion investigation of metal pipeline sites shall include:
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 5 – Water & Wastewater Design Requirements May 2012 Page 5-21
Conditions Requiring Corrosion Protection System
Soil Characteristics Conditions Requiring
Corrosion Protection System
Chloride >500 ppm
Sulfate >2,000 ppm
Soil pH = 5.5 or >8.5
Soil/Water Resistivity <2,000 ohm-cm
C. External and internal protective coating shall be required.
D. To prevent galvanic corrosion for all metal pipes, provide isolating joints by using insulating kits
or other means in the following locations:
1. Changes in pipeline materials
2. Connections to existing piping, i.e. old and new piping, including taps
3. Laterals from transmission mains
4. Valve to metal pipe
5. Metallic casing spacer to RCCP, PCCP, DI or Steel pipe
E. All metal pipes that are 16” and larger shall be designed to be electrically continuous through
joint bonding wires, or welded joints and shall install corrosion test stations at a maximum
spacing of 1,000’.
F. All water and wastewater mains requiring a corrosion protection system shall be designed by a
NACE certified professional engineer.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 6 – Landscaping Design Requirements March 2012 Page 6-1
SECTION 6 – LANDSCAPING DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 6 – Landscaping Design Requirements May 2012 Page 6-2
Section 6 – Landscaping Design Requirements
6.01 General
A. The purpose of this section is to provide additional requirements and standards to address
landscaping requirements only within the medians of major and minor thoroughfares
1.
. Refer
to the following ordinances and documents:
Zoning Ordinance, Section 2.05 - Special Zoning Districts
2. Zoning Ordinance, Section 4.01 – Tree Preservation Requirements
3. Zoning Ordinance, Section 4.02 – Landscape Requirements
B. Landscape construction plans shall be prepared and sealed by a Landscape Architect licensed to
practice Landscape Architecture within the State of Texas.
C. Requirements for landscaping within the parkways are contained in the Zoning Ordinance,
Section 4.02.
6.02 Landscape Requirements within the Median
Concrete Pavers or
Stamped Concrete
where median < 6' wide
Grass
only*
Grass
only
Trees 35'
Apart
Unrestricted
Plantings
varies varies varies 100' 50'
50' 100' varies 100' 50'
Grass
only
Unrestricted
Plantings
Trees 35' apart Grass
only
50' 50'
Trees or
shrubs**
Trees or
shrubs**
Trees 35' apart
Matchline
Matchline
Trees or
shrubs**
50'
All landscaping (except mowed grass) shall be
setback 6' from face of curb.
* Where median is between 6' and 12' wide
** Trees 35' apart or shrubs less than 2' high
FIGURE 6.1: Typical Median Landscaping
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 6 – Landscaping Design Requirements May 2012 Page 6-3
A. Landscaping that is located within the median of a thoroughfare shall meet the requirements
shown in Figure 6.1.
B. Refer to Section 2.07 (Thoroughfare Design Requirements) for corner visibility and sight line
triangles with regards to landscaping and other obstructions.
C. A minimum of 4” (or 6” in rock) suitable loam topsoil shall be furnished and installed in the areas
behind the curbs.
D. Only mowed grasses are permitted within 6’ of the existing or future face of curb unless approved
by the Director of Engineering Services and Director of Parks and Recreation.
E. Irrigation shall be provided in accordance with the Irrigation Design Standards (Section 7 of the
Engineering Standards).
F. Median tree spacing shall be 35’ (typical) apart center-to-center of tree trunk generally located in
the center of the ultimate median.
G. Trees shall be planted at least 4’ from the outside edge of a pipeline.
H. The City has final approval for all tree placements.
I. Trees overhanging walks and parking shall have a minimum clear trunk height of 7’. Trees
overhanging public street pavement drive aisles and fire lanes shall have a minimum clear trunk
height of 14’.
J. Trees and planting areas shall not be installed on slopes steeper than 3:1.
K. Landscaping shall be located so that pedestrians can walk along the parkway whether a paved
sidewalk is provided or not.
L. Sod shall be placed to cover the first 4’ behind the curbs of the median area and 2’ behind the
curb along the parkway along all public roadways in accordance with the City Technical
Specifications.
M. Areas not required to be sodded shall be seeded after properly preparing the ground as designated
on the plans and in accordance with City Technical Specifications.
N. Conduit for street lighting and irrigation shall be generally located as shown in Figure 6.2 to
accommodate trees, street lights and irrigation within the roadway median.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 6 – Landscaping Design Requirements May 2012 Page 6-4
FIGURE 6.2: Conduit for Street Lighting and Irrigation
O. Trees within 200’ from the nose of a median shall have foliage trimmed to at least 10’ above the
ground.
P. Beyond a point 200’ from the nose of the median, tree foliage should be trimmed to at least 6’
from ground.
6.03 Approved Plant Materials
A. Refer to the online Approved Material List for approved plant materials for median planting.
Other species may be utilized with approval from the City’s Parks and Recreation Department.
Artificial plants are prohibited.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 7 – Irrigation Design Requirements May 2012 Page 7-1
SECTION 7 – IRRIGATION DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 7 – Irrigation Design Requirements May 2012 Page 7-2
Section 7 – Irrigation Design Requirements
7.01 General
A. The purpose of this section is to provide additional requirements and standards to address
irrigation requirements within the medians of major and minor thoroughfares
1.
. Refer to the
following ordinances and documents:
Irrigation Ordinance (HB 1656)
2. Water Management Plan
3. Zoning Ordinance, Section 4.02 – Landscape Requirements
7.02 Roadway Irrigation Requirements
A. Irrigation system shall be designed and installed to minimize runoff onto paved surfaces.
Overspray on streets and walks are prohibited.
B. Private irrigation system mainlines, valves, or control wires located within the City’s right-of-way
shall be maintained by the adjacent property owner.
C. The bore depth under streets, drive aisles, and fire lanes shall allow 2’ minimum from the bottom
of paving to the top of the sleeve, or greater if required to clear other utilities
D. All irrigation piping and boxes shall be purple in color.
E. A separate water meter is required for irrigation.
F. ET controllers shall be installed on AC power.
G. A ball valve is required on the upstream side of control valve and shall be located in a jumbo box.
H. Backflow prevention devices are required for all irrigation systems.
I. Provide a section valve to regulate pressure in the irrigation system.
J. Check valves are required where elevation differences will cause low-head drainage.
K. PVC water lines shall be Pressure Rated Class 200, DR 21.
L. Minimum main line pipe size shall be 1-1/4”.
M. Minimum lateral line pipe size shall be 3/4”.
N. System shall deliver a minimum residual pressure of 30 pswi at the spray head and 50 pswi for
rotors.
O. Each valve shall irrigate a landscape zone containing plant materials with similar water
requirements and similar site, slope and soil conditions.
P. Where drip systems are to be used, they shall be designed to provide water uniformly from subgrade
PVC piping.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 7 – Irrigation Design Requirements May 2012 Page 7-3
Q. Trees shall be irrigated with one bubbler each with a separate valve
R. Irrigation heads shall comply with the following:
1. Multi-stream multi-trajectory rotor heads
2. Low precipitation with 0.7DU or greater
3. Selected and spaced for maximum distribution and uniformity.
4. Matched precipitation rates on each zone.
5. Have spring retracted pop-up operation.
6. Installed on green 6” cut off riser.
7. Adjust heads to ensure uniform coverage and to prevent overspray.
8. Shall be installed a minimum of 6” from back of curb and in accordance with current TCEQ
regulations.
9. Connect all MSMTR or equivalent heads with bull head connection.
S. Feeder laterals and mainlines shall be located as close to the center of median as feasible.
T. Refer to the Approved Materials List for Median Right-of-Way Irrigation Equipment
7.03 Additional Irrigation Design Requirements within Roadway
A. Two 4” PVC conduits shall run from 2’ behind the back of curb from median nose to median
nose, extending beyond the limits of hardscape (concrete median nose, pavers, etc). Two 4” PVC
conduits shall also run from median to parkway as needed to provide water and power to the
median. The end of the conduits shall be clearly marked with a sawcut.
B. No swing pipe or flex pipe allowed in medians.
C. Wiring shall include six 14 gauge (minimum) wires.
D. Refer to Section 6.02, Landscape Requirements within the Median for additional information on
location of conduits for street lighting and irrigation in relation to tree planting.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 8 – Environmental Requirements May 2012 Page 8-1
SECTION 8 – ENVIRONMENTAL REQUIREMENTS
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 8 – Environmental Requirements May 2012 Page 8-2
Section 8 – Environmental Requirements
8.01 General
The Owner must provide proof of compliance with applicable local, state, and federal
environmental regulations upon request by the City.
8.02 Storm Water Management Plan (SWMP) – Permanent Controls
A. General Requirements
A Storm Water Management Plan (SWMP) shall be prepared for all developments in accordance
with the Subdivision Ordinance. The SWMP shall be developed and coordinated with the site
drainage plan and may be shown on the same sheet. The SWMP shall identify permanent site
features and controls that will be constructed with the project to minimize and mitigate the
project’s long-term effects on storm water quality and quantity.
The SWMP should also be coordinated with the landscaping plan to prevent conflicts and ensure
compatible land use.
B. Site Development Controls (Permanent)
It is the responsibility of the engineer to design permanent controls that address site specific
conditions using appropriate design criteria for the North Central Texas region. Refer to
NCTCOG iSWM Technical Manual for current recommended practices. Some of the
factors to be considered when evaluating and selecting controls for a development are as
follows:
• Effect of the development on runoff volumes and rates
• Potential pollutants from the development
• Percent of site treated by the control
• On-site natural resources
• Configuration of site (existing waterways, topography, etc.)
The following are some examples of permanent controls:
• Preservation of natural creeks
• Site specific stormwater controls
• Vegetated swales
• Preservation of the 100-year floodplain
• Detention ponds
• Retention ponds
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 8 – Environmental Requirements May 2012 Page 8-3
8.03 Texas Construction General Permit (CGP)
Construction activities that discharge storm water runoff into or adjacent to any surface water of
the state are regulated by the state of Texas under the Construction General Permit (CGP)
(TXR150000). The governing agency is the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
(TCEQ). Construction activities are regulated according to the area of land disturbed.
For sites that disturb five or more acres, or are part of a larger common plan of development that
will disturb five or more acres, and meet the definition of an operator, the following applies:
Large construction activities
• Prepare and implement a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SW3P)
• Post a Site Notice
• Submit a copy of the Site Notice to the MS4 Operator
For sites that disturb five or more acres, and meet the definition of a primary operator, the
following applies:
• Prepare and implement a SW3P
• Submit a Notice of Intent (NOI) to TCEQ
• Post the NOI and Site Notice
• Submit a copy of the NOI to MS4 Operator
For sites that disturb at least one but less than five acres, or are part of a larger common plan of
development that will disturb at least one, but less than five acres and meet the definition of an
operator, the following applies:
Small construction activities
• Prepare and implement a SW3P
• Post a Site Notice
• Submit a copy of the Site Notice to the MS4 Operator
Sites that disturb less than one acre and that are not part of a larger common plan of development
that would disturb one or more acres, are not required to have coverage under the general permit.
Refer to the General Permit definitions for Operator and Primary Operator. Additional
information on the Texas Construction General Permit can be found at the following link:
http://www.tceq.texas.gov/permitting/stormwater/
8.04 Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SW3P)
One of the requirements of the Construction General Permit is to develop an SW3P. The purpose
of the SW3P is to provide guidelines for minimizing sediment and other pollutants that may
originate on the site, from flowing into municipal storm systems, or jurisdictional waters during
construction. The plan must also address the principal activities known to disturb significant
amounts of ground surface during construction.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 8 – Environmental Requirements May 2012 Page 8-4
The storm water management controls included in the SW3P should focus on providing control of
pollutant discharges with practical approaches that use readily available techniques, expertise,
materials, and equipment. The SW3P must be implemented prior to the start of construction
activity.
A. Construction Controls
Structural and non-structural controls may be used for controlling pollutants for storm water
discharges from small and large sites. Structural controls shall comply with details and
specifications in the latest edition of the NCTCOG iSWM Technical Manual and these standards.
When the NCTCOG Manual and these standards are in conflict, these standards shall govern.
The following are acceptable temporary controls for use during construction:
• Minimizing the area of disturbance
Non-Structural
• Preserving existing vegetation
• Silt fence
Structural
• Inlet protection
• Rock check dams
• Stabilized construction entrances
• Sediment traps
• Vegetated buffer strips
• Temporary detention structure
• Rock check dams
• Hydromulch
Suggested construction controls can be found on the NCTCOG iSWM website.
It is the responsibility of the design engineer to select and design appropriate construction
controls for each site. If the most appropriate control is not shown in the iSWM Technical
Manual, the design engineer shall submit calculations and references for design of the control to
the Department of Engineering Services for review and approval.
B. Waste and Hazardous Material Controls
Covered containers shall be provided for waste construction materials and daily trash. Hazardous
materials shall be stored in a manner that prevents contact with rainfall and runoff. Onsite fuel
tanks and other containers of motor vehicle fluids shall be placed in a bermed area with a liquidtight
liner or be provided with other secondary containment and spill prevention controls.
The SW3P shall require federal, state and local reporting of any spills and releases of hazardous
materials greater than the regulated Reportable Quantity (RQ) and reporting to Engineering
Services of all spills and releases to the storm drainage system.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 8 – Environmental Requirements May 2012 Page 8-5
C. Temporary Stabilization
Portions of a site that have been disturbed, but where no work will occur for more than 21 days
shall be temporarily stabilized as soon as practicable, and no later than 14 days, except when
precluded by seasonal arid conditions, or prolonged drought.
Temporary stabilization shall consist of providing a protective cover, designed to reduce erosion
on disturbed areas. Temporary stabilization may be achieved using temporary seeding, soil
retention blankets, hydro-mulches and other techniques that cover 100 percent of the disturbed
areas until either final stabilization can be achieved or until further construction activities take
place.
Perimeter controls such as silt fence, vegetated buffer strips or other similar perimeter controls
are intended to act as controls when stabilization has not occurred. Perimeter controls may
remain in place during temporary stabilization.
D. Final Stabilization
Final stabilization consists of soil cover such as vegetation, geo-textiles, mulch, rock, or
placement of pavement. For stabilizing vegetated drainage ways, sod or seeded soil retention
blankets shall be used. Hydromulch will not be allowed in vegetated swales, channels or other
drainage ways.
The plan for final stabilization shall be coordinated with permanent controls in the SWMP and
with the landscaping plan, if applicable.
E. Notice of Intent (NOI)
If applicable, copies of the NOI shall be sent to the Engineering Services Department at least 2
days prior to construction.
F. TCEQ Site Notice
A signed copy of the Construction Site Notice shall be posted at the construction site in a location
where it is readily viewed by the general public during all construction activity.
G. Notice of Termination (NOT)
All parties that submitted a NOI shall submit a NOT within 30 days after final stabilization is
established. When the owner of a residential subdivision transfers ownership of individual lots to
builders before final stabilization is achieved, the SW3P shall include controls for each individual
lot in lieu of final stabilization. These controls shall consist of stabilization of the right-of-way
and placement of structural controls at the low point of each individual lot or equivalent measures
to retain soil on each lot during construction. Additionally, the builder must submit a valid NOI
before an NOT can be submitted by the owner.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 8 – Environmental Requirements May 2012 Page 8-6
H. Inspection and Maintenance during Construction
The owner shall construct all controls required by the SW3P. The owner shall have qualified
personnel inspect the controls at least every two weeks during construction and within 24 hours
after a storm event of 0.5 inches, or greater. Alternately, inspections may be performed every 7
days with no additional inspections after rain events.
Certified inspection reports shall be retained as part of the SW3P. Within seven days of the
inspection, controls identified as damaged or deteriorated shall be repaired or replaced, as
appropriate. controls shall also be routinely cleaned to maintain adequate capacity.
Changes or additions shall be made to the controls within 7 days to prevent discharges from the
site. The owner shall implement procedures to remove discharged soil from all portions of the
storm drainage system including streets, gutters, inlets, storm drain, channels, creeks, ponds, etc.
Notes requiring the inspection and maintenance shall be placed on SW3P drawings. The SW3P
shall identify the responsible party for inspecting and maintaining each control. If no party is
identified, each owner and operator that submitted a NOI for the site shall be fully responsible for
implementing all requirements of the SW3P.
I. Construction and Maintenance
The owner shall construct all permanent controls and is responsible for maintenance of the
controls. When the control falls within a drainage easement, the plat or separate instrument
dedicating the easement shall include a statement of the owner’s responsibility for maintenance.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 9 – Structural Design Requirements May 2012 Page 9-1
SECTION 9 – STRUCTURAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 9 – Structural Design Requirements May 2012 Page 9-2
Section 9 – Structural Design Requirements
9.01 General
A. The Design Engineer of record shall bear the sole responsibility for meeting the engineering
standard of care for all aspects of the design and providing a design that’s required by the sitespecific
conditions and intended use of the facilities.
B. For the purposes of this section of the Engineering Standards, the following items shall be
considered structures: bridges, foundations, retaining walls (structural and gravity), headwalls and
wingwalls, culverts, slopes and embankments, and screening walls.
C. The City’s review of any structural design is limited to determining whether the construction
plans are in general compliance with the City’s Master Plans and Engineering Standards. The
City’s review and release of the construction plans does not represent that the City has reengineered
or verified the engineering of the proposed improvements.
D. The structural design must be signed and sealed by a structural engineer or civil engineer
competent in structural engineering licensed in the State of Texas. The Design Engineer is
responsible for all engineering and recognizes that specific site circumstances or conditions may
require improvements constructed to exceed minimum standards contained in the City’s
Engineering Standards. The Design Engineer is responsible for the applicability and accuracy of
the construction plans and specifications.
E. Walls shall be permitted and constructed in accordance with all requirements of these
Engineering Standards. Third-party inspections shall be performed during construction, and
reports provided to the City. A third-party shall certify wall was constructed in general
compliance with the City-approved plans and specifications, and a certification shall be provided
to the City.
9.02 Code Requirements
A. All structural design shall comply with the City’s currently adopted version of the International
Building Code.
B. The design and construction of structural concrete for buildings and where applicable in nonbuilding
structures shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the current version of
“Building Code Requirements for Structural Concrete (ACI 318)” as published by the American
Concrete Institute.
C. Placing reinforcing steel in reinforced concrete structures shall be provided in accordance with
the requirements of the current version of the “ACI Detailing Manual (ACI 315)” as published by
the American Concrete Institute.
D. The design and construction of concrete tanks, reservoirs, and other structures commonly used in
water and wastewater treatment works where dense, impermeable concrete with high resistance to
chemical attack is required shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the current
version of “Environmental Engineering Concrete Structures (ACI 350)” as published by the
American Concrete Institute. This code places special emphasis on structural design that
minimizes the possibility of cracking and accommodates vibrating equipment and other special
loads. ACI 350’s minimum requirements for proportioning of concrete, placement, curing, and
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 9 – Structural Design Requirements May 2012 Page 9-3
protection against chemicals shall be met or exceeded. The design and spacing of joints shall also
meet or exceed the minimum requirements of ACI 350.
E. The design and construction of roadway bridges shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of the current version of the “Standard Specifications for Highway Bridges” as
published by the American Association of State and Highway Transportation Officials
(AASHTO).
F. Concrete exposed to sulfate-containing solutions or soils shall be made with sulfate-resisting
cement. The concrete shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of ACI 318 Section
4.3. Table 4.3.1 lists the appropriate types of cement, the maximum water-cementitious material
ratios, and the minimum specified compressive strengths for various exposure conditions.
Table 4.3.1 - ACI 318 Section 4.3
Sulfate
exposure
Water soluble sulfate
(SO4) in soil, percent
by weight
Sulfate (SO4) in
water, ppm Cement Type
Maximum watercementitious
materials
ratio, by weight,
normalweight aggregate
concrete*
Minimum fc’,
normalweight and
lightweight aggregate
concrete, psi*
Negligible 0.00=SO4<0.10 0=SO4<150 ? ? ?
Moderate? 0.10=SO4<0.20 150=SO4<1500
II, IP(MS), P(MS),
I(PM)(MS),
I (SM)(MS) 0.50 4000
Severe 0.20=SO4=2.00 1500=SO4=10,000 V 0.45 4500
Very severe SO4>2.00 SO4>10,000 V plus pozzolan‡ 0.45 4500
*When both Table 4.3.1 and Table 4.3.2 are considered, the lowest applicable maximum w/cm and highest applicable minimum fc’ shall be used.
?Seawater
‡Pozzolan that has been determined by test or service record to improve sulfate resistance when used in concrete Type V cement.
G. ASTM test method C 1012 can be used to evaluate the sulfate resistance of mixtures using
combinations of cementitious materials.
1. In addition to the proper selection of cement, other requirements for durable concrete exposed
to concentrations of sulfate are essential, such as, low water-cementitious material ratio,
strength, adequate air entrainment, low slump, adequate consolidation, uniformity, adequate
cover of reinforcement, and sufficient moist curing to develop the potential properties of the
concrete.
H. More stringent requirements may be required for unusual designs or specific site conditions. The
codes cannot replace sound engineering knowledge, experience, and judgment.
I. For any structure, the City or the structural engineer may require the quality of materials and
construction to be higher than the minimum requirements as stated in the codes.
9.03 Geotechnical Performance Specifications
A. Field investigation, geotechnical testing, and geotechnical engineering shall be performed in
accordance with the standard of care taking into account local experience and conditions. The
geotechnical recommendations shall establish the minimum design criteria upon which the
Design Engineer can rely. However, based on the Design Engineer's experience and engineering
judgment, if the Design Engineer is compelled to use more conservative geotechnical design
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 9 – Structural Design Requirements May 2012 Page 9-4
criteria for his/her structural design, that is the Design Engineer’s prerogative. In no case shall the
Design Engineer use geotechnical design criteria less conservative than the geotechnical
engineer's recommendations.
B. ROW Permit must be obtained prior to performing any boring within the City’s right-of-way.
C. The complexity of geological conditions and the type, length, and width of structure will
determine the number and locations of test holes required. The following should be considered by
the Design Engineer in coordination with the geotechnical engineer: Depth of test hole, location
of proposed grade relative to existing grade, channel relocations and/or channel widening, scour,
foundation loads, foundation types.
D. Locate the test holes in an accessible area. Avoiding overhead power lines and underground
utilities where possible, avoid steep slopes and standing or flowing water. Identify test hole
locations on the plans.
E. Provide a complete soil and bedrock classification and log record for each test hole, including all
pertinent information to complete the standard log. Location and surface elevation shall be shown
on the boring logs.
F. Perform the appropriate field and laboratory tests necessary to determine the soil shear strength
for proper soil evaluation and geotechnical design criteria. The geotechnical engineer shall
consider the short-term and long-term conditions. In addition, special attention is required when
testing highly plastic clays. Tests of these soil types shall be performed at a slow enough rate such
that any excess pore water pressure is dissipated, or in a manner that measures pore water
pressure.
G. Ground water elevations shall be included as part of the data acquisition. Site conditions may
require the installation of piezometers to establish a true groundwater surface elevation and
method of monitoring water surface fluctuations
H. Minimum boring requirements are as follows:
1. Slopes and Embankments including Bridge Approaches. Obtain soil borings for cuts
greater than 10’ or embankments taller than10’. The exploration shall include the following:
a. The soil under future embankments. Advance borings to a depth at least equal to the
embankment height or 20’, whichever is greater, unless a greater depth is recommended
by the geotechnical engineer.
b. Soil in proposed cuts. Advance borings to a depth of at least 15’ below the bottom of the
proposed cut, unless a greater depth is recommended by the geotechnical engineer.
2. Bridges
a. In general, drill test holes 10’ to 15’ deeper than the probable top elevation of the bridge
foundation.
b. Test holes near each abutment of the proposed structure plus a sufficient number of
intermediate holes to determine depth and location of all significant soil and rock strata.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 9 – Structural Design Requirements May 2012 Page 9-5
c. Major stream crossings (over channels more than 200’ wide) require borings in the
channel. A site inspection by the driller or logger is necessary to evaluate site
accessibility and special equipment needs.
d. Minor stream crossings over channels less than 200’ wide shall provide a boring on each
bank as close to the water’s edge as possible. If boring information varies significantly
from one side of the channel to the other, a boring in the channel may be required by the
Director of Engineering Services.
e. Grade Separations. If the borings indicate soft surface soils (fewer than 10 blows per
foot), additional borings and testing shall be required for the design of the bridge
approach embankments.
3. Retaining Walls Obtain soil borings for walls taller than 3-ft
a. Obtain soil borings at 200’ spacing unless site conditions or the design engineer requires
closer spacing. A greater spacing may be allowed by the Director of Engineering Services
only if recommended in writing by the geotechnical engineer of record.
.
b. Fill Walls
c.
. For spread footing walls and MSE walls, the depth of the boring shall be a
minimum of as deep as the wall height depending on the wall type and existing and
proposed ground lines. The minimum boring depth is 10’ below the bottom of the
proposed wall unless rock is encountered (see Section 9.03.H.4). Extend borings at least
5’ into rock for fill walls unless additional depth is recommended by the geotechnical
engineer.
Cut Walls
d. Provide additional testing for taller walls, walls on slopes, or walls on soft founding strata
as necessary, or recommended by the geotechnical engineer of record, to completely
evaluate wall stability.
. For drilled shaft walls, tied-back walls, and soil and rock nail walls, the depth
of the boring is based on the proposed ground line. Cantilever drilled shaft walls require
the depth of boring to extend the anticipated depth of the shaft below the cut, which is
typically between one and two times the wall height unless additional depth is
recommended by the geotechnical engineer of record. Borings for soil nail and rock
nailed walls need to be advanced through the material that is to be nailed. The minimum
boring depth is 15’ below the bottom of the proposed wall. Borings for proposed cut
walls may need to penetrate rock significant distances depending on the depth of the cut
and wall height.
4. Borings Encountering Rock
a. Based on the geotechnical engineer's experience and engineering judgment, if rock is
encountered the minimum boring depths specified above may be reduced but only at the
direction of the geotechnical engineer.
9.04 Bridge Design
A. The structural engineer shall be responsible for selecting the appropriate bridge foundation. The
engineer shall consider the following factors in that selection:
1. Design load. The magnitude of the design load dictates the required size of the foundation.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 9 – Structural Design Requirements May 2012 Page 9-6
2. Geotechnical engineering recommendations. The strength and depth of subsurface formations
determine the type of foundation chosen. In general, drilled shafts are well suited to areas
with competent soil and rock, and is the preferred foundation type subject to concurrence of
the geotechnical and structural engineers’ concurrence. Alternative foundation types require
approval in writing by the Director of Engineering Services.
3. Corrosive conditions. Salts, chlorides, and sulfates are detrimental to foundations. Where
these conditions exist, the Design Engineer shall take preventative measures. Use sulfateresistant
concrete as defined in these Engineering Standards as required.
B. The structural engineer shall use the geotechnical investigation recommendations as minimum
design criteria. If in the structural engineer’s judgment, the structural design needs to be based
upon more conservative geotechnical design criteria, the structural engineer shall provide the
more conservative design.
C. Disregard surface soil in the design of drilled shaft foundations. The disregarded depth is the
amount of surface soil that is not included in the design of the foundation due to potential erosion
from scour, future excavation, seasonal moisture variation (shrinkage and swelling), lateral
migration of waterways, and recommendations of the geotechnical investigation.
D. Drilled shaft capacity relies upon penetrating a specific stratum a specified depth. The plans shall
provide a note instructing the contractor and field personnel of the penetration requirement. The
plans shall identify the specific type of material to be penetrated and the minimum penetration
depth. The plan may allow for the drilled shaft to be shortened if the founding stratum is
encountered at a shallower depth, and it requires the shaft to be lengthened if the founding
stratum is not encountered at the expected elevation.
When the founding stratum is present at or near the surface, the structural engineer shall consider
the load-carrying capacity along with the stability of the superstructure on the foundation. For
these conditions, a minimum drilled shaft length shall be specified on the plans and the drilled
shaft will not be allowed to be shortened from plan length, but it may be lengthened if the
founding stratum is not encountered at the expected elevation.
E. Bridge foundations for new bridges over waterways require a scour analysis. A scour analysis
shall be conducted in accordance with the following:
1. TxDOT guidelines in “Evaluating Scour at Bridges” (HEC-18).
2. Abutment scour does not need to be calculated. However, abutments shall be protected
against potential scour through use of flexible revetment, where possible or hard armoring.
3. Design bridge foundations to withstand the scour depths for either the 100-year flood or
smaller flood if it will cause scour depths deeper than the 100-year flood.
4. Check the bridge foundations against the scour depth associated with the 500-year flood. This
flood event is considered an extreme event and the factor of safety on the bridge foundations
shall be greater than or equal to 1.
9.05 Retaining Wall Design
A. The Design Engineer is responsible for ensuring that the retaining wall selected for a given
location is appropriate. The retaining wall selection process shall consider the following:
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 9 – Structural Design Requirements May 2012 Page 9-7
1. Height. Any retaining wall exceeding 3-ft. in height measured from the top of foundation
and/or pier to the top of wall shall be engineered. The structural design shall be provided in
accordance with the geotechnical recommendations and minimum design criteria provided in
Section 9.03.
2. Geometry. Determine applicability of wall type - cut, cut/fill, or fill – based on geometry, site
constraints, existing and proposed topography, and wall alignment and location. Identify
available ROW and any necessary ROW or easements to accommodate the proposed
improvements and the access necessary to accommodate access for maintenance. Identify
location and type of existing and proposed utilities and drainage structures.
3. Economics. Evaluate the total installed cost of the wall and consider long-term maintenance
requirements. Identify necessary excavation requirements (including shoring), required utility
adjustments and costs, project schedule, construction phasing requirements, and these effects
on the wall design and construction.
4. Stability. The Design Engineer is responsible for the global stability of the wall. Evaluate all
walls to ensure that the minimum applicable factors of safety are a least met (see Section
9.05.C), if not exceeded depending on the Design Engineer’s judgment. When possible, avoid
placing walls on slopes. A slope in front of the wall dramatically reduces the passive earth
pressure (resistance), increasing the chance for wall failure. Additionally a slope in front of
the wall will have a significant effect on global stability of the wall and embankment in
which it resides. For situations where the walls above a slope cannot be avoided, a rigorous
slope stability analysis shall be required in accordance with these Engineering Standards.
5. Constructability. Determine whether walls are near water or subject to inundation or
groundwater. Identify access limitations for equipment both during and after construction.
Ensure adequate horizontal and vertical clearances are provided.
6. Drainage. Design the wall to prevent the build-up of hydrostatic pressure behind the wall. If
conditions warrant, the City may require the wall design to withstand full hydrostatic pressure
load. The wall design shall consider potential deleterious short and long term effects of water
inundation including scour and rapid draw down.
7. Aesthetics. Ensure that aesthetic treatments of walls complement the retaining wall and does
not interfere with the functionality of the wall. Detailed consideration shall be given to
aesthetic treatments of retaining walls that involve landscaping. Additionally, the wall’s
drainage system design shall avoid potential compromise of the wall aesthetics because of
water related damages.
8. Loading. Design loads shall be in accordance with these Engineering Standards (for building
code references, see Section 9.02), including construction loads and surcharge loads from
slopes, structures, and vehicles.
B. Analyze and design walls following accepted geotechnical engineering industry standards for the
City of Frisco area and in accordance with these Engineering Standards. In analysis, use earth
pressures that follow the requirements of the project’s geotechnical investigation specifically
addressing the retaining wall design requirements for the project’s specific location.
C. The Design Engineer must ensure that the retaining wall system is appropriate for its location and
application. The Design Engineer shall design for all potential modes of wall system failure;
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 9 – Structural Design Requirements May 2012 Page 9-8
including, sliding, overturning, bearing pressure, global stability, and structural capacity of the
wall itself. The design of the retaining wall shall meet the following minimum factors of safety:
a. Sliding: 1.5
b. Overturning: 2.0
c. Bearing Pressure: 3.0
d. Global Stability: 1.5
D. Avoid perching wall on slopes steeper than 8H:1V. When walls must be placed on slopes steeper
than 5H:1V, or the retaining wall height or the combined wall and slope heights exceed 8-ft., the
geotechnical engineer shall conduct a short-term and long-term global stability analysis using
applicable soil strength characteristics, geometry, and loading conditions (including load
surcharge, hydrostatic, etc.). The Design Engineer is responsible for the design of the wall
system, including its global stability.
E. A series of two or more walls built in tiers shall be considered a single wall in height for the
purposes of conforming to these Engineering Standards when the base of the upper tier is set back
from the base of the lower tier less than two times the height of the lower tier wall.
F. If TxDOT standard sheets pertaining to cast-in-place spread footing structural retaining walls are
utilized, the Design Engineer shall ensure that the actual wall geometry and loading conditions
are applicable to the standard wall design selected. The Design Engineer shall ensure that
interruptions to the wall stem or footing reinforcement by openings, utilities, geometric changes
or curved sections of the wall do not compromise the design and performance of the wall. No
TxDOT standard wall design shall be modified unless the Design Engineer designs, draws, and
seals the modified standard.
G. TxDOT standard sheets pertaining to cast-in-place spread footing walls provide a choice between
high pressure (HP) and low pressure (LP) footings. Selection by the Design Engineer is a function
of the loading, geometry, and allowable soil pressures. TxDOT standard sheets pertaining to
cast-in-place spread footing walls are developed based on the wall being drained, and the
design parameters for foundation and retained soils of a cohesion factor of zero, a friction
factor of 30 degrees, and a unit weight of 120 pounds/cubic foot. Give special consideration to
the site-specific geotechnical requirements and whether a TxDOT standard wall design is
applicable. Also give special consideration to walls subject to potential inundation.
9.06 Slope Stability Design Criteria
A. All slopes exceeding 8-ft. in height with a steepness of 4H:1V or greater, regardless of soil type,
cut, or fill, shall be evaluated for global stability for both the short-term and the long-term
conditions. Additionally, any known areas of existing fill, deleterious material, or soft soils which
have a height over 4 feet or slope angle greater than 6H:1V shall be evaluated for global stability
for both the short-term and the long-term conditions. Specific site conditions may require
evaluation for additional types of slope failure, such as bearing capacity, settlement, shear, and
undercutting. Calculations pertinent to the analysis shall be submitted with the construction
drawings when required by the City.
B. Use the following data to analyze global stability of a slope:
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 9 – Structural Design Requirements May 2012 Page 9-9
1. Geometry (cross section and loading conditions);
2. Location of the water table;
3. Soil/rock stratigraphy; and
4. Soil/rock properties (unit weight, Atterberg Limits, undrained and drained shear strength).
C. For global stability of a slope, the minimum factor of safety of 1.5 is required unless the
geotechnical engineer recommends a higher value.
9.07 Screening Wall Design Criteria
A. Screening Walls shall meet the minimum requirements included in the Subdivision Ordinance,
Section 8 and the Zoning Ordinance, Section 4.03 – Screening Standards. <LINK>
B. An opening designed to allow for storm water drainage shall be provided unless it has been
determined by the Director of Engineering Services that no drainage problems are anticipated.
The opening shall be a uniform 2” high the full length between columns.
C. All screening walls shall be designed by a Professional Engineer licensed in the State of Texas.
Signed, sealed and dated plans shall be submitted to the City for review and permitting.
9.08 Excavation Support
A. Trench excavation protection shall be used for the installation of linear drainage or utility
facilities that result in trenches deeper than 5’. Such trench protection includes vertical or sloped
cuts, benches, shields, support systems, or other systems providing the necessary protection in
accordance with Occupational Safety Heath Administration (OSHA) Standards and
Interpretations, 29 CFR 1926, Subpart P, “Excavations.”
B. Temporary special shoring is used for installations of walls, footings, and other structures that
require excavations deeper than 5’. Temporary special shoring is designed and constructed to
hold the surrounding earth, water, or both out of the work area. It provides vertical or sloped
cuts, benches, shields support systems, or other systems to provide the necessary protection in
accordance with the approved design. Unless a complete design for temporary special shoring
systems are included in the plans, the contractor is responsible for the design of the temporary
special shoring system. The Contractor must submit to the City, for informational purposes only,
the design calculations and details sealed by a Professional Engineer licensed in the State of
Texas before constructing the shoring. The design of the shoring must provide protection in
accordance with Occupational Safety Heath Administration (OSHA) Standards and
Interpretations, 29 CFR 1926, Subpart P, “Excavations.”
9.09 Construction Plans
A. Constructions drawings and technical specifications for all structural
1. Design engineer’s seal, date, signature, and Texas Board of Professional Engineers (TBPE)
firm registration number;
construction shall include
the following:
2. Name and date of issue of the codes and supplements to which the design conforms;
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 9 – Structural Design Requirements May 2012 Page 9-10
3. Name and date of the project-specific geotechnical engineering report upon which the Design
Engineer relied;
4. Live load and other loads used in the design, including surcharge loads and potential
exposure to storm water inundation. Specifically identify the applicable loads and their load
factors;
5. Identification of geotechnical investigation and report to which the design conforms
(including report name and number (if applicable), date of issuance, engineering firm name
and address, firm TBPE firm registration number, and name of geotechnical engineer of
record).
6. Where plans indicate compacted soil, provide compaction specification.
7. Specified compressive strength of concrete at stated ages or stages of construction for which
each part of the structure is designed.
8. The design shall specifically address construction loading and sequencing. Service loads shall
not be applied until the concrete has reached its minimum specified compressive strength or
the structure is adequately shored to withstand the service loads;
9. Drainage system (if applicable), including material specification, diameter, daylight point,
and outfall connection detail (if applicable), granular material (if applicable) specification,
filter fabric material specification and installation requirements, and weepholes (if
applicable), including material type, diameter, and spacing;
10. Size and location of all structural elements, reinforcement, and anchors;
11. Identification of shop drawing requirements for fabrication, bending, and placement of
concrete reinforcement. Provide bar schedules, stirrup and tie spacing, diagrams of bent bars,
and arrangement of concrete reinforcement. Provide additional details for reinforcement of
openings in concrete walls and slabs. Shop drawings shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of the technical specifications and submitted to the City for review and
approval.
12. Provisions for dimensional changes resulting from creep, shrinkage, and temperature;
13. Details of all contraction, isolation joints, or expansion joints and the appropriate spacing
specified;
14. Anchorage length of reinforcement and location and length of lap splices (if applicable);
15. Type and location of mechanical splices of reinforcement (if applicable). Welding of
reinforcement shall not be permitted unless approved by the Design Engineer and the
Director of Engineering Services;
16. The technical specifications for concrete mixtures shall be provided in accordance with the
following:
a. Concrete for roadway pavement and related facilities (i.e. driveways, sidewalks, ramps,
etc.) shall be in accordance with the City’s technical specification 321313-Concrete
Pavement;
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 9 – Structural Design Requirements May 2012 Page 9-11
b. Cast-in-place concrete applicable to TxDOT standard designs for storm drainage culverts
and related structures, retaining walls, manholes, vaults, as well as bridges, shall be in
accordance with the City’s technical specification 033105-Concrete Structures-Cast-in-
Place (TxDOT). Otherwise, concrete for cast-in-place structures shall be in accordance
with the City’s technical specification 033100-Concrete Structures Cast-in-Place (City);
and
c. Precast concrete applicable to precast pipes, TxDOT standard designs for storm drainage
culverts and related structures, manholes, vaults, as well as bridges, shall be in
accordance with the City’s technical specification 034105-Concrete Structures-Precast
(TxDOT). Otherwise, concrete for precast structures shall be in accordance with the
City’s technical specification 034100-Concrete Structures-Precast (City);
17. Responsibility for maintenance of the structure shall be clearly noted on the plans. The plans
shall clearly reference a structure maintenance plan and schedule. The maintenance plan shall
clearly identify any drainage system required to relieve hydrostatic pressure on the structural
system and ensure that it remains fully functional throughout the life of the structure; and
18. Sight visibility triangles (where applicable).
B. Retaining wall
1. Plan view. The plan view shall include location of soil borings, surface and subsurface
drainage structures and utilities that could be affected by wall construction.
plans shall also include the following information:
2. Elevation view. The elevation view shall include a profile of the existing ground line along
the wall alignment
3. Estimated quantity table. Include the estimated quantity table for each retaining wall type.
The table should contain the area of wall (for payment) and linear footage of railing (if
applicable).
, proposed finished grade at face of wall, limits of wall payment (if
applicable), top of wall profile, soil boring log shown at the correct elevation and scale, wall
rail if applicable, drainage structures and utilities as noted above. Unless noted otherwise and
approved by the Director of Engineering Services, wall quantities shall be based upon the
surface area of the wall from the top of wall to the bottom of wall. The bottom of wall is
defined as the proposed finished grade at the face of the wall. The bottom of wall shall not be
measured from the top of footing unless the top of footing is the proposed finished grade at
the face of the wall.
4. Typical section. The typical section shall include a cross section with wall dimensions and
showing the relationship of the wall to the roadway, property line, or controlling adjacency,
control point(s) for horizontal and vertical alignment (typically the top outermost corner of
the wall), indication of maximum slope on top of and in front of the wall, location of
proposed finished grade, railing type, flume, and mow strip, etc. if applicable.
5. General notes. The general notes shall include a note stating the required minimum
embedment depth of the footing (minimum typically 1’), a note stating that the wall quantity
shall be measured for payment between the top of wall and “x” ft. below finished grade,
railing shop drawing requirements (if applicable), references to all standard sheets (if
applicable) for pertinent information, and any other pertinent information regarding wall
design and construction.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 9 – Structural Design Requirements May 2012 Page 9-12
C. Spread Footing Retaining Wall
1. If TxDOT retaining wall standards are used, provide the panel design designation (for
example, LC-10-32) for each wall panel corresponding to the appropriate cast-in-place spread
footing wall standard sheet. The designation includes a reference to the controlling standard
drawing, design height, and panel width.
plans shall also include the following:
2. Location of expansion and allowable construction joints (assuming 32’ panels, every third
joint is typically designated as an expansion joint).
3. Set bottom of wall (top of footing) horizontal and stepped to meet minimum embedment
depth criteria. Distance from one step to the next is typically greater than 12”. Provide bottom
of wall elevations for all panels.
4. Include the appropriate TxDOT standard sheets pertaining to cast-in-place spread footing
walls if applicable. Otherwise provide typical section details including a cross section with
dimensions and reinforcement layout and callouts.
5. If TxDOT standard sheets pertaining to cast-in-place spread footing walls are not applicable
to the design, a custom structural wall design shall be provided. The general notes shall
specifically identify the applicable concrete specification, the requirement that no service
loads shall be imposed until after the concrete has reached its specified minimum
compressive strength, and that shop drawing submittals shall be required for fabrication,
bending, and placement of concrete reinforcement.
D. Screening Wall
1. The title shall include the legal name of the property on which the wall is being constructed;
plans shall include the following information (in addition to the information
included under 9.09A):
2. A plan view of the wall showing its location, limits, and stationing;
3. Wall material specification;
4. Mortar specification (if applicable).
5. A profile of the wall including grades for the top of the concrete mow strip, adjacent top of
curb, sidewalk and finished floor of proposed and/or existing adjacent slabs;
6. Elevation view of a typical column;
7. Elevation view of the wall;
8. Mow-strip detail;
9. Drainage clearance under wall (uniform 2”);
10. Steel tensile strength;
11. Concrete compressive strength; and
12. Wind load calculations
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 9 – Structural Design Requirements May 2012 Page 9-13
13.
E. Gravity Retaining Walls plans shall also include the following:
1. Wall height, including batter requirements;
2. Wall material specification;
3. Base embedment depth and width requirements, including key depth if applicable;
4. Wall thickness at bottom and top of wall;
5. Mortared zone requirements (if applicable), including zone thickness and the specification to
mortar on all sides and no voids;
6. Non-mortared zone requirements (if applicable), including zone thickness and the
specification that stones must fit tightly; and
7. Clay cap, including material specification and dimension requirements.
F. Calculations pertinent to the design of any and all walls shall be submitted with the construction
drawings when required by the City.
G. All wall construction plans and specifications submitted to the City for review must include a
permit application submittal.
9.10 Construction Inspection and Certification
A. A permit is required for the construction of any wall as defined in these Engineering Standards.
B. Third-party inspections shall be performed during construction, and reports provided to the City.
The inspections and reports shall be performed at the following stages of construction (at a
minimum):
a. Sub-base preparation geotechnical testing
b. Pre-pour / sub-base / footing:
i. Drilled shaft drilling and concrete placement (if applicable); and
ii. Forming of footing, beam, placement of reinforcement (if applicable)
c. Wall construction;
d. Backfill placement - geotechnical testing
e. Drainage system construction (if applicable); and
f. Final completion
C. A third-party shall certify wall construction inspections were performed at the prescribed stages
of construction in accordance with Section 9.10.B. The inspection reports and final certificate of
compliance shall be submitted to the City and include the following:
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 9 – Structural Design Requirements May 2012 Page 9-14
a. Specific reference to the City-approved plans and specifications for the wall;
b. Specific reference to the address and/or legal description for the wall construction
location;
c. Specific reference to the name and date of the project-specific geotechnical
engineering report;
d. A certification letter signed and sealed by a licensed professional engineer in the
State of Texas, that includes a statement that the wall system was constructed in
general compliance with the geotechnical design criteria identified in the plans and
specifications and the City-approved construction plans and specifications.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 10 – Survey Requirements May 2012 Page 10-1
SECTION 10 – SURVEY REQUIREMENTS
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 10 – Survey Requirements May 2012 Page 10-2
Section 10 – Survey Requirements
10.01 General
1. In the interpretation and application of the provisions in these survey requirements, it is
the intention of the City that the principals, standards and requirements provided herein
shall be minimum standards for the projects involving survey, and where other
Ordinances of the City are more restrictive, such Ordinances shall control, as they exist or
may be amended. Refer to the Frisco Survey MonumentMetadata
2. Frisco Survey Monument Map
3. Frisco Survey Monument Sketches
10.02 Survey Markers and Monumentation
A. Markers
Markers consisting of minimum 3/8" diameter steel rods at least 24" long with caps identifying
responsible surveying firm or RPLS number shall be placed at all:
1. Lot and block corners (wherever a lot line bearing changes);
2. Intersection points of alley and block lines;
3. Curve and tangent points along block, lot and right-of-way lines within the subdivision; and
4. Right-of-way dedications.
B. Monuments
Monuments shall be installed and three dimensional coordinates noted on the Plat. Coordinates
shall be established using the City’s Monumentation System and using the City’s Combined
Scale Factor.
C. Subdivision Monumentation
At least two Markers shall be placed at property corners in addition to at least two Monuments at
opposing ends of the property.
D. Capital Improvements Project Monuments
Found existing right-of-way monuments, survey markers, or property corners, and proposed
monuments shall be shown on the construction drawings and located by station and offset, right
or left from the control line, base line or center line, or by northing and easting.
E. If new construction will damage, destroy, or alter existing survey markers, monuments, or
property corners, they must be re-set prior to final acceptance.
F. Electronic Submittal Requirements
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Section 10 – Survey Requirements May 2012 Page 10-3
The City requires the submittal of CAD files for all plats within the City of Frisco for
incorporation into the City’s GIS system. The Engineer must provide Grid Coordinates (State
Plane) or Surface Coordinates with Scale Factor. The electronic files shall include the following:
1. Two Monuments (with three-dimensional coordinates);
2. Markers at a minimum of two property corners (with three-dimensional coordinates);
3. Parcel boundaries; and
4. Right-of-way and easement dedications.
10.03 Final Plat Acceptance
A. Prior to Final Plat Acceptance, all required Monuments must be found and re-set if damaged
during construction.
1. The Surveyor will provide two Monuments acceptable to the Cityand establish grid
coordinates for the monuments in reference to the City of Frisco GPS Monuments.
2. Elevations will be established on the two monuments on the vertical datum in reference to the
City of Frisco GPS Monuments.
3. The three dimensional coordinates in grid coordinates established for these monuments will
be clearly shown on the face of the plat. A note shall be added to the plat specifying the grid
coordinates are not for design purposes.
4. The plat shall hold grid bearings and shall not be from an assumed north.
5. All distances shown on the plat will be surface distances.
6. Refer to Development Application Handbook for required language on plats.
7. In order to ensure that all necessary easements are reflected on the Final Plat, a preliminary
inspection should be completed after all construction work has been done before the Final
Plat is submitted for approval.
Version 6/19/12
GN – General Notes May 2012
GN
GENERAL NOTES
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
GN – General Notes May 2012 Page 1
GN – General Notes
Overview
The following General Notes are shall apply to all construction projects, public or private. The Owner’s
Engineer may supplement the General Notes with project-specific notes with City approval.
General Notes for All Construction Activities
1. All construction, testing, and materials shall be in accordance with the City’s current standards,
details, and specifications.
2. Testing and inspection of materials shall be performed by a commercial testing laboratory approved
by the City. Contractor shall furnish materials or specimens for testing, and shall furnish suitable
evidence that the materials proposed to be incorporated into the work are in accordance with the
specifications.
3. Contractor shall notify the City at least 48 hours prior to beginning any construction.
4. Contractor is responsible for obtaining all necessary permits and approvals prior to beginning any
construction. Contact ROW Inspection division of Public Works at 972-292-5820 for a permit to
work within City ROW.
5. Contractor must keep available on-site at all times approved construction plans and copies of any
required permits along with the current versions of the following references: City of Frisco
Engineering Standards, NCTCOG specifications, TxDOT specifications, TxDOT standard drawings.
6. All shop drawings, working drawings or other documents which require review by the City shall be
submitted by the Contractor sufficiently in advance of scheduled construction to allow no less than 14
calendar days for review and response by the City.
7. The Contractor shall be responsible for all required construction surveying and staking and shall
notify the City of any discrepancies prior to proceeding with any work.
8. Contractor shall be responsible for protecting all survey markers including iron rods, property
corners, or survey monuments within the limits of construction and outside ROW during
construction. Any survey markers disturbed during construction shall be replaced by the Contractor at
no cost to the City.
9. Contractor shall provide a construction schedule with weekly progress reports.
10. Contractor is responsible for keeping streets and driveways adjacent to the project free of mud and
debris at all times. Contractor shall clean up and remove all loose material resulting from construction
operations. The Contractor shall take all available precautions to control dust.
11. The existence and locations of the public and franchise utilities shown on the drawings were obtained
from available records and are approximate. The Contractor shall determine the depth and location of
existing underground utilities prior to excavating, trenching, or drilling and shall be required to take
any precautionary measures to protect all lines shown and / or any other underground utilities not of
record or not shown on the plans. The Contractor shall be responsible for contacting all public
agencies and franchise utilities 48 hours prior to construction. (Dig-Tess 1-800-344-8377) The
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
GN – General Notes May 2012 Page 2
Contractor may be required expose these facilities at no cost to the City. The Contractor will be
responsible for damages to utilities if the damage is caused by negligence or failure to have locates
performed.
12. The Contractor shall be responsible for any damage to existing facilities or adjacent properties during
construction. Any removal or damage to existing facilities shall be replaced or repaired to equal or
better condition by the Contractor.
13. Contractor shall be responsible for furnishing and installing all temporary and permanent traffic
control in accordance with the minimum requirements of the latest revision of the Texas Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices (TMUTCD) and TxDOT Barricade and Construction Standards.
14. Contractor shall not impede traffic on existing streets, driveways, alleys, or fire lanes open to the
public. In the event the construction work requires the closure of an existing street, alley, or fire lane,
the Contractor shall request the road closure through the City Traffic Division 972-292-5400 a
minimum of 48 hours in advance of the requested closure. Closureswill not be allowed prior to 9:00
a.m. or after 3:30 p.m., Monday through Friday unless otherwise approved by the City.
15. Contractor shall not store materials, equipment or other construction items on adjacent properties or
right-of-way without the prior written consent of the property owner and the City.
16. Temporary fencing shall be installed prior to the removal of existing fencing. Temporary fencing
shall be removed after proposed fencing is approved by the City. All temporary and proposed fencing
locations shall be subject to field revisions as directed by the City.
17. Unusable excavated material, or construction debris shall be removed and disposed of offsite at an
approved disposal facility by the Contractor at his expense.
18. Contractor shall avoid damage to existing trees. When necessary, trees and shrub trimming for
construction shall be performed by certified tree worker or under the direction of a registered
landscape architect or certified arborist.
19. Erosion control devices shall be installed on all projects prior to beginning construction and shall be
maintained throughout the project in a condition acceptable to the City.
20. Contractor shall locate and protect all existing landscape irrigation systems. Damage to existing
irrigation systems and landscape materials shall be restored to equal or better condition at no cost to
City.
21. It is the Contractor’s responsibility to maintain a neat and accurate record of construction for the
City’s records.
General Notes for Paving
1. All paving construction, testing, and materials, including concrete, reinforcement, jointing, and
subgrade preparation and treatment shall be in accordance with the City’s current standards, details,
and specifications unless otherwise noted.
2. Absolutely no earthwork, lime application, or other preparation of the subgrade for paving of streets,
alleys, or fire lanes shall be initiated without authorization from the City. The City will authorize the
subgrade work in preparation for paving after utility trench backfill testing has been completed and
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
GN – General Notes May 2012 Page 3
verified to meet the City requirements.
3. Contractor is responsible for ensuring all pedestrian work meets or exceeds the current American with
Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG) and the Texas Accessibility Standards (TAS).
The Contractor shall remove and replace any constructed or installed items not meeting the current
ADAAG and TAS requirements at no additional cost to the City.
General Notes for Traffic Signals and Street Lighting
1. All traffic signal and street lighting construction, testing, and materials shall be in accordance with the
City’s current standards, details, and specifications unless otherwise noted. All electrical work shall
be in accordance with the most current National Electrical Code, City and TxDOT specifications and
standards.
2. Contractor shall notify the Traffic Department (Tracy Nichols) at least 7 business days prior to any
work, provide a construction schedule with weekly progress reports, and notify the Traffic
Department at least 48 hours prior to signal turn-on.
3. Contractor shall coordinate electrical services with the City and either ONCOR or COSERV
representatives (according to their respective area).
4. Contractor shall coordinate with the electric company to de-energize any overhead or underground
power lines. Any cost associated with de-energizing the power line and/or any other protective
measures required shall be at no cost to City.
5. The Contractor shall coordinate with the appropriate utility company and TxDOT/NTTA (if within
TxDOT/NTTA ROW) prior to beginning erection of poles, luminaries and structures located near any
overhead or underground utilities.
6. Proposed concrete foundation and conduit alignment shall be staked by the Contractor and approved
by the City prior to installation.
7. Contractor shall contact the City (Tracy Nichols) for inspection prior to pouring any concrete
foundation and digging for conduit runs at least 48 hours in advance (between 8 am – 5pm).
8. Contractor shall have a qualified IMSA Level II or a TRF453 certified technician on the project site
to place the traffic signals in operation.
9. Electrical work shall be performed by certified persons in accordance with the requirements of the
contract and may be rejected as unsuitable for use due to poor workmanship. The required electrical
certification course is available and is scheduled periodically by TEEX. Alternatively, the Contractor
may purchase an entire course for their personnel to be held at a time and location of their choice as
negotiated through TEEX. For more information, contact: TEXAS ENGINEERING EXTENSION
SERVICE (TEEX), TxDOT ELECTRICAL SYSTEM COURSE, (979) 845-6563.
10. The Contractor shall not place pedestrian crosswalk and stop bar pavement markings until signal is
operational.
11. All lighting poles, fixtures, and arms which are removed shall be delivered to the City Public Works
facility (11300 Research Road, Frisco, Texas 75034) by the Contractor and will remain the property
of the City. Contact the Traffic Department at least 24 hours in advance of delivery.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
GN – General Notes May 2012 Page 4
12. During the 30-day traffic signal test period, Contractor shall respond to and diagnose all trouble calls
with qualified personnel within a reasonable travel time from a Dallas address, but not more than two
(2) hours maximum. Contractor shall repair any malfunctions of signal equipment supplied by
Contractor on the project. A local telephone number (not subject to frequent changes) where trouble
calls are to be received on a 24-hour basis shall be provided to the City by the Contractor.
Appropriate repairs shall be made within 24 hours. The Contractor s keep a record of each trouble
call reported in the logbook provided by the City and shall notify the City of each trouble call. The
error log in the malfunction management unit (MMU) shall not be cleared during the 30-day test
period without the approval of the City.
13. Texas State Law, Article 1436C, makes it unlawful to operate equipment or machines within 10-feet
of any overhead electrical lines unless danger against contact with high voltage overhead lines has
been effectively guarded against pursuant to the provisions of this Article. When construction
operations require working near an overhead electrical line, the Contractor shall contact the
owner/operator of the overhead electrical line to make adequate arrangements and to take necessary
safety precautions to ensure that all laws, electrical line owner/operator requirements and standard
safety practices are met.
General Notes for Storm Drain
1. All storm drain construction, testing, and materials shall be in accordance with the City’s current
standards, details, and specifications unless otherwise noted.
2. Contractor shall submit a Trench Safety Plan prior to the Pre-Construction Meeting.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
GN – General Notes May 2012 Page 5
General Notes for Water and Wastewater
1. All water and wastewater construction, testing, and materials shall be in accordance with the City’s
current standards, details, and specifications unless otherwise noted.
2. Contractor shall submit a Trench Safety Plan prior to the Pre-Construction Meeting.
3. Contractor shall not operate existing valves. Contact the City’s Public Works Department to request
valve changes.
General Notes for Landscaping
1. All landscaping construction, installation, testing, and materials shall be in accordance with the City’s
current standards, details, and specifications unless otherwise noted.
2. Where transplanting or tree removal is required Contractor must apply for a Tree Permit prior to
obtaining a grading permit or scheduling the pre-construction meeting. Contact Development
Services Landscape Architect for Tree Permit.
3. Prior to obtaining a grading permit or scheduling the pre-construction meeting, all tree markings and
protective fencing must be installed by the Contractor and be inspected by the City’s Landscape
Architect.
4. All trees which are to remain on site shall be protected with a 4’ tall brightly colored plastic fence
placed at the drip line of the trees.
5. Trees to be removed may be chipped and used for mulch on site or hauled off-site. Burning of
removed trees, stumps, or foliage requires written approval by the Fire Department.
6. Plant materials shall not impede or obstruct vision or route of travel for vehicular, pedestrian, or
bicycle traffic along City right-of-way, visibility easements, sidewalks or other easements.
7. No signs, wires, or other attachments other than those of a protective nature shall be attached to any
tree to remain on site.
General Notes for Irrigation
1. All irrigation construction, installation, testing, and materials shall be in accordance with the City’s
current standards, details, and specifications unless otherwise noted.
2. A permit from the Building Inspection Division is required for each irrigation system.
3. Contractor shall notify the Parks Department of any modification to the existing system.
4. Contractor shall schedule a meeting with the Parks Department to coordinate work prior to any
demolition or removal of existing irrigation and prior to any installation of new irrigation.
5. Contractor shall locate and protect all existing landscape irrigation systems. Damage to existing
irrigation systems and landscape materials shall be restored to equal or better condition at no cost to
City.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
GN – General Notes May 2012 Page 6
6. Contractor shall program each controller zone based on sprinkler type, plant variety, soil
characteristic, slope and solar orientation as designated on the plans. The Contractor shall coordinate
with the City Parks Department for approval of the controller settings.
7. Contractor shall be responsible for coordinating with franchise utility provider to provide power to
each irrigation controller. Contractor shall have underground power lines installed from power source
up to the controller. Contractor shall meet controller specifications for power requirements.
8. Contractor shall set a temporary controller to establish landscape. Once landscape is established,
Contractor shall contact the City’s Parks and Recreation Department for assistance on installation of
Inter Spec controller.
General Notes for Erosion Control & Stormwater
1. Steel posts shall not be used to install erosion control measures within City ROW.
2. No equipment shall be cleaned on-site, or other liquids deposited and allowed to flow overland or
subterranean within the limits of the critical root zone of trees that remain on site. This includes paint,
oil, solvents, asphalt, concrete, concrete equipment wash water, mortar of similar materials.
3. Asphalt bags shall be placed at construction entrances to prevent curb damage.
4. Geotextile fabric shall be placed on subgrade prior to stone placement for construction entrances.
Version 6/19/12
TS – Technical Specifications
TS
TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS
Version 6/19/12
TS – Technical Specifications
Technical Specifications
Table of Contents
Spec No. Description Date
015813 Project Sign May 2012
DIVISION 01 – General Requirements
017113 Mobilization May 2012
017416 Dust Control May 2012
024100 General Site Preparation May 2012
DIVISION 02 – Existing Conditions
032100 Reinforcing Steel May 2012
DIVISION 03 - Concrete
032200 Welded Wire Fabric May 2012
033100 Concrete Structures – Cast-in-Place (City) May 2012
033101 Drilled Shaft Foundation May 2012
033105 Concrete Structures – Cast-in-Place (TxDOT) May 2012
033106 Concrete Retaining Walls (TxDOT) May 2012
034100 Concrete Structures – Precast (City) May 2012
034105 Concrete Structures – Precast (TxDOT) May 2012
071300 Moisture Barrier May 2012
DIVISION 07 – Thermal and Moisture Protection
260500 Electric Conductor May 2012
DIVISION 26 - Electrical
260501 Electrical Service May 2012
265619 Luminaire Pole May 2012
265620 Luminaire Fixture May 2012
270500 Conduit May 2012
DIVISION 27 - Communications
312316 Unclassified Street Excavation May 2012
DIVISION 31 - Earthwork
312317 Unclassified Channel Excavation May 2012
312323 Select Fill May 2012
312413 Embankment May 2012
312500 Temporary Erosion, Sedimentation, and Water Pollution
Prevention and Control May 2012
313419 Geotextile May 2012
313600 Gabions and Gabion Mattresses May 2012
313700 Riprap May 2012
321112 Moisture Treated Subgrade May 2012
DIVISION 32 –Exterior Improvements
321113 Lime Treatment May 2012
321116 Flexible Subbase or Base (Crushed Stone/Concrete) May 2012
Version 6/19/12
TS – Technical Specifications
321123 Sand Bedding May 2012
321126 Asphalt Base Course May 2012
321133 Portland Cement Treatment May 2012
321216 Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement May 2012
321313 Concrete Pavement May 2012
321314 Rolling May 2012
321373 Joint Sealant May 2012
321400 Concrete Pavers May 2012
321613 Concrete Curb and Gutter May 2012
321645 Driveway Approach May 2012
321650 Reinforced Concrete Sidewalk May 2012
321655 Barrier Free Ramp May 2012
321660 Concrete Median Nose May 2012
321665 Reinforced Concrete Header May 2012
321723 Pavement Markers and Markings May 2012
321725 Prefabricated Pavement Marking (with Warranty) May 2012
328000 Irrigation System May 2012
329113 Fertilizer May 2012
329119 Topsoil May 2012
329223 Turfgrass Planting May 2012
329300 Tree, Shrub, and Groundcover Planting May 2012
329600 Removal, Protection and Replacement of Trees, Shrubbery,
Plants, Sod and Other Vegetation May 2012
330131 Wastewater and Manhole Testing May 2012
DIVISION 33 - Utilities
330132 Television Inspection for Wastewater Mains May 2012
330510 Trenching, Backfilling and Compaction May 2012
330523 Trenchless Utility Installation May 2012
331113 Ductile Iron Pipe and Fitting May 2012
331114 PVC Pipe for Water Distribution May 2012
331213 Water Service Connections May 2012
331216 Air Valves for Potable Water Systems and Wastewater Force Mains May 2012
331217 Resilient Seated Gate Valves May 2012
331218 Butterfly Valves May 2012
331219 Fire Hydrants May 2012
331240 Polyethylene Encasement May 2012
331245 Tapping Sleeves for PVC and Ductile Iron Pipe May 2012
331260 Mechanical Restraint for PVC and Ductile Iron Pipe May 2012
333109 Wastewater Lateral Connections May 2012
333110 PVC Pipe for Gravity Wastewater Mains May 2012
333115 Pressure Rated PVC Pipe for Gravity Wastewater Mains May 2012
333130 Centrifugally Cast Fiberglass Reinforced Pipe for Gravity
Wastewater Mains May 2012
333913 Wastewater Manhole Frames and Covers May 2012
333914 Cast-in-Place Concrete Manholes May 2012
333915 Precast Concrete Manholes May 2012
333916 Fiberglass Manholes May 2012
334113 Reinforced Concrete Pipe May 2012
334200 Reinforced Box Culvert May 2012
334913 Storm Sewer Manhole May 2012
Version 6/19/12
TS – Technical Specifications
334914 Headwalls and Wingwalls May 2012
334915 Safety End Treatment May 2012
334920 Standard and Recessed Curb Inlets and Other Inlets May 2012
344113 Installation of Highway Traffic Signal May 2012
DIVISION 34 - Transportation
344125 Vehicle and Pedestrian Signal Heads May 2012
344130 Traffic Signal Cable May 2012
344135 Ground Box May 2012
344140 Temporary Traffic Signal May 2012
344150 Small Roadside Sign Supports and Assemblies May 2012
347113 Barricades, Signs, and Traffic Handling May 2012
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Project Sign 015813-1
SECTION 015813
PROJECT SIGN
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish, install, and
maintain Project Sign.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. City of Frisco Standard Detail for Project Sign.
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
A. Contractor may contact Southwest Signs & Graphics, Frisco, Texas at (972) 335-0234 or
other City approved manufacturer.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 INSTALLATION
A. The Contractor shall coordinate with the City regarding the location prior to installation. The
City shall provide on-site inspection of the installation.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. This Item will be measured on a per Each (EA) basis.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. All work performed and materials furnished in accordance with this Item and measured as
provided under MEASUREMENT will be paid for at the unit bid price for “Project Sign” in
accordance with the City of Frisco’s Standard Detail for Project Sign. This price is full
compensation for all material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to
furnish and install Project Sign.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Mobilization 017113-1
SECTION 017113
MOBILIZATION
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
The work under this section of the specification shall include the establishment of offices and
other facilities on the project site and the movement of personnel, construction equipment, and
supplies to the project site or to the vicinity of the project site to enable the Contractor to begin
work on the other contract items that will be performed by the Contractor. This Item also includes
all costs associated with bonding and insurance.
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
Not used.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
Not used.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. This Item will be measured on a Lump Sum (LS) basis as the work progresses.
B. The maximum bid amount for this Item shall be 5% of the total amount bid for the project.
4.02 PAYMENT
Partial payments of the bid for Mobilization will be as follows. The adjusted contract amount for
construction items as used below is defined as the total contract amount less the bid for
Mobilization.
A. When 1% of the adjusted contract amount for construction items is earned, 50% of the
mobilization lump sum bid will be paid. Previous payments under this Item will be deducted
from this amount.
B. When 5% of the adjusted contract amount for construction items is earned, 75% of the
mobilization lump sum bid will be paid. Previous payments under this Item will be deducted
from this amount.
C. When 10% of the adjusted contract amount for construction items is earned, 90% of the
mobilization lump sum bid will be paid. Previous payments under this Item will be deducted
from this amount.
D. When 50% of the adjusted contract amount for construction items is earned, 100% of the
mobilization lump sum bid will be paid. Previous payments under this Item will be deducted
from this amount..
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Dust Control 017416-1
SECTION 017416
DUST CONTROL
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary for Dust Control in
accordance with Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 203.8.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 203.8
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 203.8.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 INSTALLATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 203.8.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. This Item shall not be measured as a separate contract Item.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. The work performed and materials furnished in accordance with this Item will not be paid for
directly but will be subsidiary to pertinent Items.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification General Site Preparation 024100-1
SECTION 024100
GENERAL SITE PREPARATION
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All materials, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary for the preparation of
the project site not covered elsewhere in accordance with Public Works Construction
Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 203.
B. This Section also includes:
1. Protecting existing vegetation to remain.
2. Removing existing vegetation.
3. Clearing and grubbing
4. Demolition
5. Removal of all items within the limits of construction not specifically noted to remain.
1.01 REFERENCES
A. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 203.1, 203.2, and 203.3
1.02 PROJECT CONDITIONS
A. Traffic: Minimize interference with adjoining roads, streets, walks, and other adjacent
occupied or used facilities during site-clearing operations.
1. Do not close or obstruct streets, walks, or other adjacent occupied or used facilities
without permission from City and authorities having jurisdiction.
2. Provide alternate routes around closed or obstructed traffic ways if required by Owner
or authorities having jurisdiction.
B. Salvaged materials: Carefully remove items indicated to be salvaged and store as directed
by the City.
C. Utility Locator Service: Notify utility locator service for area where Project is located
before site clearing.
1. Call DigTESS at 1-800-344-8377
2. Contact City’s ROW Division of Public Works at 972-292-5820 for locates
D. Do not commence site clearing operations until temporary erosion and sedimentation control
measures are in place.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification General Site Preparation 024100-2
PART 2 – PRODUCTS
Not used
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 203.1, 203.2 and
203.3.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. This Item shall be measured on a Lump Sum (LS) basis, unless indicated otherwise and shall
include the removal of all items within the limits of construction not specifically called out
to remain.
B. Removal of existing pavement will be measured separately and paid for by the square yard
(SY), regardless of thickness and type. Concrete curb and gutter removal will not be
measured separately and is considered subsidiary to this item.
C. Removal of existing sidewalk and ramps will be measured separately and paid for by the
square yard (SY), regardless of thickness and type.
D. Removal of existing inlets, headwalls, manholes, etc. will be measured separately and paid
for per each (EA) inlet removed, regardless of the size of the existing inlet. Removal of
existing pipe will not be measured separately and is considered subsidiary to this item.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. All work performed and materials furnished in accordance with this Item will be paid for at
the unit bid price. This price is full compensation for all material, labor, equipment, tools
and superintendence necessary to complete the work.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Reinforcing Steel 032100-1
SECTION 032100
REINFORCING STEEL
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Reinforcing Steel in accordance with Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th
Edition, Item 303.2.9.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 303.2.9 and 303.2.11.
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 321313 – Concrete Pavement
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 303.2.9 and
303.2.11.
B. Specified reinforcing steel (#4 bars and larger) shall conform to the requirements of ASTM
A615, Grade 60.
C. Grade 40 reinforcing steel (#3 bars) will only be allowed in sidewalks or with approval of the
Director of Engineering Services.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 303.2.9 and
303.2.11.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. This Item will not be measured separately.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. This Item will not be paid separately, but considered subsidiary to pertinent Items.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Welded Wire Fabric 032200-1
SECTION 032200
WELDED WIRE FABRIC
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Welded Wire Fabric in accordance with Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th
Edition, Item 303.2.10.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 303.2.10 and 303.2.11.
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 313700 – Riprap
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 303.2.10.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 303.2.10 and
303.2.11.
B. Welded Wire Fabric is acceptable as reinforcement for concrete riprap of bridge abutments
only.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. This Item will not be measured separately.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. This Item will not be paid separately, but considered subsidiary to pertinent Items.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Concrete Structures –Cast-in-Place (City) 033100-1
SECTION 033100
CONCRETE STRUCTURES – CAST-IN-PLACE (CITY)
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Concrete Structures – Cast-in-Place (City) in accordance with Public Works Construction
Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 702.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 701.2 and 702
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 303.2 and 303.3.
B. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 701.2 and 702.
C. All concrete shall be sulfate resistant mixes. Mix Design must be submitted and approved by
the City at least 7 days prior to scheduled pour. The Contractor will be required to provide
tickets for all concrete drivers.
D. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 303.2.2 is hereby
modified to allow only Type I/II Portland Cement.
E. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 303.2.4 is hereby
modified to allow only Class F flyash.
F. Provide Class F or Class M concrete.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 701.2 and 702.
PART 4 –MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
A. Measurement and Payment shall be specified in the Contract Documents.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Drilled Shaft Foundation 033101-1
SECTION 033101
DRILLED SHAFT FOUNDATION
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Drilled Shaft Foundations (including Traffic Signal Poles or Street Light Poles).
1.02 REFERENCES
A. TxDOT Items 416, 420, 421, 440, and 448
B. TxDOT Standard Details included in the plans.
C. Traffic Signal and/or Street Lighting Plans.
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 344113 – Installation of Highway Traffic Signal.
B. Section 265619 – Luminaire Pole
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 416.
B. Type A concrete shall be used for non-reinforced foundations. Type C concrete shall be used
for reinforced foundations.
C. All concrete shall be sulfate resistant mixes. Mix design must be submitted and approved by
the City at least 7 days prior to scheduled pour. The Contractor will be required to provide
tickets for all concrete deliveries.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 INSTALLATION
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 416.
B. A 3/4 inch chamfer (beveled) shall be formed on the top edge of each pole foundation.
C. The Contractor shall probe before drilling foundations to determine the location of utilities
and structures. Foundations shall be paid for once regardless of extra work caused by
obstructions. Foundations shall not be placed within 3-feet of a water line or fire hydrant and
must be a minimum of 25-feet from all tree trunks unless otherwise directed by the City. If
any City or any other water utility is near a proposed pole foundation (within 3 feet), then the
Contractor will hand dig to uncover the water line and verify that the proposed pole
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Drilled Shaft Foundation 033101-2
foundation location is satisfactory. The Contractor shall be liable for all damages done, and
restoration to utilities as a result of their operations.
D. Contractor shall contact the City for inspection prior to pouring any concrete foundation and
digging for conduit runs at least 48 hours in advance (between 8 am – 5pm).
E. No poles shall be placed on foundations prior to 7 days following pouring of concrete.
F. Contractor shall clean up and remove all loose material resulting from construction
operations.
G. Top of foundation shall be 3 inches above the finished grade unless otherwise shown on the
plans and shall be formed or provided a smooth finish satisfactory to the City. Foundation
piers shall be drilled plum, the top of foundation poured level, and the top 3 inches of the
exposed foundation above finished grade shall have the sonotube removed.
H. Anchor bolts shall extend above the top of the foundation concrete as shown on anchor bolt
detail. Refer to manufacturer’s specifications for bolt circle dimensions and anchor bolt
specifications.
I. Anchor bolts, ground rod, all reinforcing and conduit shall be in place before pouring
concrete pier foundations. Foundations shall have one continuous concrete pour.
J. Contractor shall keep a record set of plans and mark any differences between the locations
shown in the plans and the as-built locations. This record set shall be provided to the City
time of acceptance of the work.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 416.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 416.
B. Foundations shall be paid for once regardless of extra work caused by obstructions.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Concrete Structures – Cast-in-Place (TxDOT) 033105-1
SECTION 033105
CONCRETE STRUCTURES – CAST-IN-PLACE (TxDOT)
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Concrete Structures - Cast-In-Place (TxDOT) in accordance with Texas Department of
Transportation Standard Specifications for Construction and Maintenance of Highways,
Streets, and Bridges Item 420.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. TxDOT Item 420
B. TxDOT and City Standard details, included in the plans.
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to TxDOT 420.2.
B. All concrete shall be sulfate resistant mixes. Mix design must be submitted and approved by
the City at least 7 days prior to scheduled pour. The Contractor will be required to provide
tickets for all concrete deliveries.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to TxDOT 420.3 and 420.4.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to TxDOT 420.5 or as indicated in the Contract Documents.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to TxDOT 420.6 or as indicated in the Contract Documents.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Concrete Retaining Walls (TxDOT) 033106-1
SECTION 033106
CONCRETE RETAINING WALLS (TxDOT)
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Concrete Retaining Walls (TxDOT) in accordance with Texas Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications for Construction and Maintenance of Highways, Streets, and Bridges
Item 423.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. TxDOT Item 423
B. TxDOT Standard Details included in the plans.
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to TxDOT 423.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to TxDOT 423.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to TxDOT 423 or as indicated in the Contract Documents.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to TxDOT 423 or as indicated in the Contract Documents.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Concrete Structures – Precast (City) 034100-1
SECTION 034100
CONCRETE STRUCTURES – PRECAST (CITY)
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Concrete Structures – Precast (City) in accordance with Public Works Construction
Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 702.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 701.2 and 702
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 701.2 and 702.
B. All concrete shall be sulfate resistant.
C. Provide Class F or Class M concrete.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 701.2 and 702.
PART 4 –MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
A. Measurement and Payment shall be specified in the Contract Documents.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Concrete Structures – Precast (TxDOT) 034105-1
SECTION 034105
CONCRETE STRUCTURES – PRECAST (TxDOT)
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Concrete Structures – Precast (TxDOT) in accordance with Texas Department of
Transportation Standard Specifications for Construction and Maintenance of Highways,
Streets, and Bridges Item 424.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. TxDOT Item 424
B. TxDOT Item 425
C. TxDOT Standard Details included in the plans.
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 424.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 424.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 424 or as indicated in the Contract Documents.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 424 or as indicated in the Contract Documents.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Moisture Barrier 071300-1
SECTION 071300
MOISTURE BARRIER
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Moisture Barrier.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Project’s Subgrade Investigation and Pavement Design Report (if available).
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 321112 - Moisture Treated Subgrade
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. The moisture barrier shall consist of a minimum 10 mil polyethylene sheeting. Covered with
at minimum 8 inches of lightly compacted soil.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 INSTALLATION
A. The moisture barrier shall be placed horizontally on the treated subgrade from the edge of
pavement extending a minimum 6 feet on either side of the pavement in a neat line after final
compaction unless indicated otherwise on the plans.
B. The barrier shall be covered with at least 8 inches of lightly compacted soil. Care should be
taken not to rip or tear the poly sheeting during placement of the cover fill.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. This Item shall be measured on a Square Yard (SY) basis.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. All work performed and materials furnished in accordance with this Item will be paid for at
the unit bid price for “Moisture Barrier.” This price is full compensation for all material,
labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to complete the work.
B. Payment for the 8 inches of lightly compacted soil shall be considered subsidiary to the
“Moisture Barrier” Item.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Electric Conductor 260500-1
SECTION 260500
ELECTRIC CONDUCTOR
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Electric Conductors for Traffic Signals and/or Street Lighting.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. TxDOT Item 620
B. TxDOT Standard Details included in the plans.
C. Traffic Signal Plans and/or Street Lighting Plans.
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 344113 – Installation of Highway Traffic Signal
B. Section 270500 – Conduit
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 620.
B. All electrical connectors for breakaway poles shall be breakaway (BUSSMAN HEBW,
LITTLEFUSE LEB, FERRAZ-SHAWMUT FEB, HMC FLOOD-SEAL SLK-MD or
approved equal) in accordance with the latest TxDOT RID standards. All electrical
connections for neutrals shall be breakaway and shall have a white colored marking and a
permanently installed solid neutral (BUSSMAN HET, LITTLEFUSE LET, FERRAZSHAWMUT
FEBN, HMC FLOOD-SEAL SDK-MD or approved equal).
C. A continuous bare or green insulated copper wire No.6 or larger shall be installed in every
conduit throughout the electrical and the traffic signals system in accordance with TxDOT
Item 680, the electrical details, and the current edition of the National Electrical Code. This
bare or green insulated copper wire shall be stranded for this project.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 INSTALLATION
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 620.
B. Where two or more conductors are present in one conduit or enclosure, the conductors shall
be identified as shown in the electrical details. If the identification tag with two plastic straps
is too large for the referenced conductors, a tag with a single plastic strap may be used if
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Electric Conductor 260500-2
approved by the city. In any case, each tag shall indicate circuit number, letter, or other
identification as shown in the plans.
C. Grounding conductors that share the same conduit, junction box, ground box or structure
shall be bonded together at every accessible point in accordance with the current edition of
the National Electric Code.
D. Electrical work performed by non-certified persons is not in accordance with the
requirements of the contract and may be rejected as unsuitable for use due to poor
workmanship. The required electrical certification course is available and is scheduled
periodically by TEEX. Alternatively, the Contractor may purchase an entire course for their
personnel to be held at a time and location of their choice as negotiated through TEEX. For
more information, contact: TEXAS ENGINEERING EXTENSION SERVICE (TEEX),
TxDOT ELECTRICAL SYSTEM COURSE, (979) 845-6563
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. This Item shall be measured on a Linear Foot (LF) basis for each single conductor, complete
in place. The length is the straight line distance between the ground boxes, foundations, or
pads.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. All work performed and materials furnished in accordance with this Item will be paid for at
the unit bid price for “Electric Conductor.” This price is full compensation for all material,
labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to complete the work.
B. This is a plans quantity measurement Item. The quantity to be paid is the quantity shown in
the Bid Form.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Electrical Service 260501-1
SECTION 260501
ELECTRICAL SERVICE
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All electrical service conductors, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to
furnish and install Electric Service.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. TxDOT Items 620 and 628
B. TxDOT Standard Details included in the plans.
C. Traffic Signal Plans and/or Street Lighting Plans.
D. Irrigation Plans.
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to TxDOT Items 620 and 628.
B. The electrical service enclosure shall have a powder-coated paint finish of RAL9017
(TRAFFIC BLACK) or City approved equal to match the color of the traffic signal pole
assemblies.
C. Electrical Service for Traffic Signals will be provided by the City. Contractor shall provide
and install electrical services for Street Lighting and Irrigation.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 INSTALLATION
A. All enclosure-mounted components shall be installed in the main service enclosure including
all lighting components and the main disconnect as required by the plans. The main
disconnect shall not be accessible from outside the main service enclosure.
B. All neutral wire shall be white insulated wire only.
C. The address for electrical service shall be obtained from the City of Frisco. The electrical
service for this project shall be billed in the name of City of Frisco.
D. If the Contractor is required to provide the service, the Contractor shall submit for approval
four (4) copies of catalog cut sheets for each of the following items: Electrical Service
Enclosure, Breakers, Lighting Contractor, Fuses, Terminal Blocks, Photocell and Socket, and
Lighting Arrestor.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Electrical Service 260501-2
E. The service enclosure shall be manufactured in a UL listed shop. It shall have a continuous
piano hinge with stainless steel pin along the side. An enclosure with the hinge along the top
of the box will not be acceptable. Service enclosures shall have no more than two (2) pieces
of dead front trim. All conduits entering the service enclosure shall be through the bottom of
the services enclosure.
F. For traffic signal installations with luminaries and illuminated street name signs (ILSN),
separate photocell and lighting contactor will be required for luminaries and ILSN (Total two
photocells and two lighting contactor).
G. Install in line fuses at all service connections.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. This Item shall be measured on a per Each (EA) electrical service installed or removed.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. All work performed and materials furnished in accordance with this Item will be paid for at
the unit bid price for as provided under measurement for “Electrical Service” in accordance
with TxDOT Item 628. This price is full compensation for all material, labor, equipment,
tools and superintendence necessary to complete the work.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Luminaire Pole 265619-1
SECTION 265619
LUMINAIRE POLE
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Luminaire Poles for City of Frisco standard street lighting.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Manufacturer’s Standard Details and Specifications for Luminaire Pole.
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 033101 – Drilled Shaft Foundation
B. Section 265620 – Luminaire Fixture
C. Section 260500 – Electric Conductor
D. Section 260501 – Electrical Service
E. Section 344135 – Ground Box
F. Section 347113– Barricades, Signs, and Traffic Handling
1.04 SUBMITTALS
A. Manufacturer’s Standard Details and Specifications.
B. The Contractor shall furnish four (4) sets of submittals of the carbon steel pole to the City.
These submittals shall be approved by the City before the Contractor begins work.
C. Prior to beginning fabrication, two (2) copies of the completed material identification form
shall be furnished to the City.
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. All materials furnished by the Contractor shall be new, UL-listed, meet NEMA, NEC,
AASHTO, and the Electrical Detail standard sheet requirements.
B. The lighting assembly pole shall be 29.5 feet in height. The pole shall be a round tapered 11
gauge steel shaft with hand hole. Poles shall include breakaway coupling system that
includes four couplings with associated hardware and a two piece aluminum skirt with
attachment hardware. The aluminum skirt finish match color and type of finish specified for
the light pole. The breakaway coupling system shall conform to current AASHTO standards
and shall be approved by FHWA for breakaway characteristics at impact speeds for 20 to 60
mph.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Luminaire Pole 265619-2
C. The assembly will contain either one or two bracket arms. The bracket arm shall be 4 foot in
length, have a 2 3/8 inch OD and have a 21 inch upsweep. Finish color and finish type shall
match that specified for the light pole.
D. Luminaire Poles shall be either one of the following types:
1. Valmont Industries, Inc. Twin Arm Catalog No. DS30-750A290-4D-FP with 30"x96"
concrete pier.
2. KW RTSU30-7.5-11-BLK-24S- BSC-1.0-SKT-NC
E. All Luminaire Poles shall have a powder-coated paint finish of RAL9017 (TRAFFIC
BLACK) unless otherwise directed by the City. All assemblies shall be hot dipped galvanized
to ASTM 123 and 153 specifications. Once galvanizing is completed, all exposed surfaces
shall be mechanically etched by blast cleaning to remove mill scale, impurities and nonmetallic
foreign materials. All surfaces visually exposed are to be coated with a Urethane or
Triglycidyl (TGIC) Polyester Powder to a minimum film thickness of 2.0 mils. The coating
shall be electrostatically applied and cured in a gas fired convention oven by heating the steel
substrate between 350 and 400 degrees Fahrenheit.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. The Contractor shall notify the Traffic Department (Tracy Nichols) at least 7 business days
prior to any work on this project and provide a construction schedule with weekly progress
reports.
B. The Contractor shall clean up and remove all loose material resulting from construction
operations.
C. All electrical work shall be in accordance with the most current National Electrical Code,
City and TxDOT specifications and standards.
D. The Contractor shall coordinate electrical services with the City of Frisco and either ONCOR
or COSERV representatives (according to their respective area).
E. Proposed street light pole foundations shall be staked by the Contractor and approved by the
City prior to installation.
F. Erection of poles, luminaries and structures located near any overhead or underground
utilities shall be accomplished using established industry and utility safety practices. The
Contractor shall consult with the appropriate utility company and TxDOT prior to beginning
such work.
G. All shop drawings, working drawings or other documents which require review by the City
and shall be submitted by the Contractor sufficiently in advance of scheduled construction to
allow no less than 14 calendar days for review and response by the City.
H. If any overhead or underground power lines need to be de-energized, the Contractor shall call
the electric company to do this work. Any cost associated with de-energizing the power line
and/or any other protective measures required shall be at the Contractor’s expense.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Luminaire Pole 265619-3
I. All lighting poles, fixtures, and arms which are removed with this project shall be delivered
to the City of Frisco Public Works facility (11300 Research Road, Frisco, Texas 75034) by
the Contractor and will remain the property of the City of Frisco.
J. Texas State Law, Article 1436C, makes unlawful the operation of equipment or machines
within 10-feet of any overhead electrical lines under danger against contact with high voltage
overhead lines has been effectively guarded against pursuant to the provisions of the article.
When construction operations require working near an overhead electrical line, the
Contractor shall contact the owner/operator of the overhead electrical line to make adequate
arrangements and to take necessary safety precautions to ensure that all laws, electrical line
owner/operator requirements and standard industry safety practices are met.
K. All materials and construction methods shall be in accordance with the details shown on the
plans, the requirements of this Item and the pertinent requirements of the following items:
a. TxDOT Item 616 “Performance Testing of Lighting Systems”
b. TxDOT Item 620 “Electrical Conductors”
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. This Item shall be measured on a per Each (EA) basis, complete in place.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. All work performed and materials furnished in accordance with this Item will be paid for at
the unit bid price for “Luminaire Pole.” This price is full compensation for all material, labor,
equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to complete the work.
B. Foundations shall be paid for once regardless of extra work caused by obstructions.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Luminaire Fixture 265620-1
SECTION 265620
LUMINAIRE FIXTURE
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Luminaire Fixtures for City of Frisco standard street lighting.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Manufacturer’s Standard Details and Specifications for Luminaire Fixture.
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 265619 – Luminaire Pole
B. Section 033101 – Drilled Shaft Foundation
C. Section 347113 – Barricades, Signs, and Traffic Handling
D. Section 260500 – Electric Conductor
E. Section 344135 – Ground Box
F. Section 260501 – Electrical Service
1.04 SUBMITTALS
A. Manufacturer’s Standard Details and Specifications.
B. The Contractor shall furnish four (4) sets of submittals of the aluminum decorative fixture to
the City. These submittals shall be approved by the City before the Contractor begins work.
C. Prior to beginning fabrication, two (2) copies of the completed material identification form
shall be furnished to the City.
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. All materials furnished by the Contractor shall be new, UL-listed, meet NEMA, NEC,
AASHTO, and the Electrical Detail standard sheet requirements.
B. Contractor shall provide luminaire fixtures. The luminaire fixture shall be a Hadco Profiler
PA31 Series or Kim Archetype AR Series or approved equal and operate at 480 volts.
Luminaire optics will produce an IESNA cutoff light distribution type as noted on the plans.
Luminaire shall be 8 inches high by 33.75 inches in width with a housing made of low-copper
die-cast aluminum alloy. Luminaire shall be able to mount on 2 3/8 inch OD bracket arm.
Finish shall be electrostatically applied thermoset polyester powdercoat color Traffic Black
(RAL9017).
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Luminaire Fixture 265620-2
C. Contractor shall provide luminaire fixtures. Unless otherwise noted in the plans, luminaire
fixtures shall be either:
1. KIM Lighting Catalog No. 2B/ARX/250PMH480/BL-P/HSF
2. HADCO C1210D LUMINAIRE (BLACK, TYPE X, 250W PMH, 480V)
D. Covers for the luminaire fixtures shall be a clear flat-glass insert.
E. The ballast shall be core and coil pulse start metal halide designed to operate 250 watt pulse
start metal halide lamps with 480 line volts.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to City of Frisco’s General Notes for Traffic Signals and Street Lighting.
B. All materials and construction methods shall be in accordance with the details shown on the
plans, the requirements of this Item and the pertinent requirements of the following items:
a. TxDOT Item 616 “Performance Testing of Lighting Systems”
b. TxDOT Item 620 “Electrical Conductors”
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. This Item shall be measured on a per Each (EA) basis, complete in place.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. All work performed and materials furnished in accordance with this Item will be paid for at
the unit bid price for “Luminaire Fixture.” This price is full compensation for all material,
labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to complete the work.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Conduit 270500-1
SECTION 270500
CONDUIT
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Conduit for Traffic Signals, Street Lighting, or Irrigation.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. TxDOT Item 618
B. TxDOT Standard Details included in the plans.
C. Traffic Signal Plans and/or Street Lighting Plans.
D. Irrigation Plans.
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 344113 – Installation of Highway Traffic Signals
B. Section 260500 – Electric Conductor
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 618.
B. All conduit underground for signals and street lighting shall be Schedule 40 white PVC
unless indicated otherwise. Conduit size shall be as shown in the plans.
C. Conduit above ground shall be 2 inch rigid metal, unless otherwise directed by the City.
Conduit size shall be as shown in the plans.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 INSTALLATION
A. Contractor shall secure permission from the proper authority and the approval of the City
prior to cutting into or removing any sidewalks or curbs, which may be required for
installation.
B. The locations of conduit and ground boxes are diagrammatic only and may be shifted with
City approval to accommodate field conditions.
C. A colored cleaner primer shall be used on all PVC to PVC joints before application of PVC
cement.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Conduit 270500-2
D. Conduit shall be placed under existing pavement by an approved boring method unless
otherwise directed by the City. Pits for boring shall not be closer than 2 feet from the edge of
the pavement unless otherwise directed by the City.
E. Water jetting will not be permitted.
F. When boring is used under pavement conduit installations, the maximum allowable over-cut
shall be 1 inch in diameter.
G. When conduits are bored, the vertical and horizontal tolerances shall not exceed 18” as
measured from the intended target point.
H. All conduit shall be installed at a minimum depth of 36” below grade measured from the
bottom of the concrete slab.
I. The use of pneumatically driven device for punching holes beneath the pavement (commonly
known as a “missile”) will not be permitted.
J. The Contractor shall install a non-metallic pull rope in conduit runs in excess of 50 feet.
K. When rigid metal conduit is exposed at any point and where rigid metal conduit extends into
ground boxes, the metal conduit shall be bonded to the grounding conductor with grounding
type bushings or by other UL listed grounding connectors approved by the City.
L. PVC conduit systems that snap or lock together without glue that are designed and UL listed
to be used for bored PVC electrical conduit applications will be allowed for bored PVC
schedule 40. No additional compensation will be paid to the Contractor when these specific
purpose conduit systems are substituted for this purpose.
M. Liquid-tight flexible metal (LTFM) conduit shall be used where the plans refer to flexible
metal conduit. Flexible metal shall not be permitted.
N. Contractor shall place duct seal at the ends of all conduits where conductors and/or cables are
present with a permanently soft, non-toxic duct seal that does not adversely affect other
plastic materials or corrode metals.
O. The conduit shall be installed in a trench free of rocks that would damage the conduit and
first 2 inches of backfill shall be free of rock.
P. All conduit shall start and end in a ground box, foundation, or at a transformer pad along with
a 1/4 inch polyline (pullstring) with a break strength of 500 pounds or greater.
Q. Each change of direction in the conduit run requires a ground box (pull box) unless it is less
than 20 feet to the end of the run or unless otherwise directed by the City.
R. Conduit shall be placed within an easement or street ROW. When placed in easements, the
location of the conduit shall be 30 inches off the lot lines to avoid being damaged by fence
post placement.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Conduit 270500-3
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. This Item shall be measured on a Linear Foot (LF) basis for each Conduit type and size,
complete in place. The length is the straight line distance between the ground boxes,
foundations, or pads.
B. The plan quantity will be determined through calculations and will be used for determining
final quantity amounts for payment purposes. Contract adjustments may be made if the actual
measured quantity varies by more or less than 5% of the total estimated plan quantity amount.
Either the City or the Contractor may initiate this adjustment. If the adjustment is requested
by the Contractor, the Contractor must obtain field measurements and calculations justifying
the revised quantity. If the adjustment is made by the City, the revised quantity will constitute
the final quantity which payment will be made.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. All work performed and materials furnished in accordance with this Item will be paid for at
the unit bid price for “Conduit,” of the size and type specified. This price is full compensation
for all material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to complete the work.
B. Flexible conduit will not be paid for directly but will be subsidiary to pertinent Items.
C. Rigid metallic conduit elbows 1" and larger that are required to be installed on conduit
systems will not be paid for directly but will be subsidiary to pertinent Items.
D. This is a plans quantity measurement Item. The quantity to be paid is the quantity shown in
the Bid Form.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Excavation (Roadway) 312316-1
SECTION 312316
EXCAVATION (ROADWAY)
PART 1 – GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Excavation (Roadway) in accordance with Texas Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications for Construction and Maintenance of Highways, Streets, and Bridges Item
110..
1.02 REFERENCES
A. TxDOT Item 110.
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 110.2.
B. All excavation shall be unclassified, and shall include the removal of all materials
encountered, regardless of their nature or the manner in which they are removed.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 110.2
B. Frequency of compaction testing shall not exceed one test for every three hundred linear feet
300’ spacing or less, alternating from left quarter point to center line to right quarter point of
the cross section width.
C. For density and moisture requirements of moisture treated excavation areas see Section
32112 Moisture Treated Subgrade.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 110.3 or as indicated in the Contract Documents.
B. The plan quantity will be determined through calculations and will be used for determining
final quantity amounts for payment purposes. Contract adjustments may be made if the actual
measured quantity varies by more or less than 5% of the total estimated plan quantity amount.
Either the City or the Contractor may initiate this adjustment. If the adjustment is requested
by the Contractor, the Contractor must obtain field measurements and calculations justifying
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Excavation (Roadway) 312316-2
the revised quantity. If the adjustment is made by the City, the revised quantity will constitute
the final quantity for which payment will be made.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 110.4 or as indicated in the Contract Documents.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Unclassified Channel Excavation 312317-1
SECTION 312317
UNCLASSIFIED CHANNEL EXCAVATION
PART 1 – GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Unclassified Channel Excavation in accordance with Public Works Construction Standards,
NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 203.5.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 203.5
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 203.5.
B. All excavation shall be unclassified, and shall include the removal of all materials
encountered, regardless of their nature or the manner in which they are removed.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 203.5.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 203.5.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. The plan quantity will be determined through calculations and will be used for determining
final quantity amounts for payment purposes. Contract adjustments may be made if the actual
measured quantity varies by more or less than 5% of the total estimated plan quantity amount.
Either the City or the Contractor may initiate this adjustment. If the adjustment is requested
by the Contractor, the Contractor must obtain field measurements and calculations justifying
the revised quantity. If the adjustment is made by the City, the revised quantity will constitute
the final quantity for which payment will be made.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Select Fill 312323-1
SECTION 312323
SELECT FILL
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to install Select Fill in
accordance with Texas Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for
Construction and Maintenance of Highways, Streets, and Bridges Item 132.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. TxDOT Item 132.
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 132.2 Type A.
B. Eagle Ford may not be imported to other areas.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 INSTALLATION
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 132.3.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. This Item shall not be measured as a separate contract Item unless noted otherwise.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. The work performed and materials furnished in accordance with this Item will not be paid for
directly but will be subsidiary to pertinent Items unless noted otherwise.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Embankment 312413-1
SECTION 312413
EMBANKMENT
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Embankment in accordance with Texas Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications for Construction and Maintenance of Highways, Streets, and Bridges Item
132.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. TxDOT Item 132.
PART 2 – PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 132.2 and as specified in the Contract Documents.
B. Eagle Ford may not be imported to other areas.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 132.3.
B. Frequency of compaction testing shall not exceed one test for every three hundred linear feet
300’ spacing or less ,alternating from left quarter point to center line to right quarter point for
every layer of embankment.
C. For density and moisture requirements of moisture treated embankments see Section 32112
Moisture Treated Subgrade.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Embankment will be measured by the cubic yard. The cubic yard will be measured in its final
position using the average end area methos. The volume is computed between the original
ground surface or the surface upon which the embankment is to be constructed and the lines,
grades, and slopes of the embankment. Shrinkage or swell factors will not be considered in
determining the calculated quanitities.
B. The plan quantity will be determined through calculations and will be used for determining
final quantity amounts for payment purposes. Contract adjustments may be made if the actual
measured quantity varies by more or less than 5% of the total estimated plan quantity amount.
Either the City or the Contractor may initiate this adjustment. If the adjustment is requested
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Embankment 312413-2
by the Contractor, the Contractor must obtain field measurements and calculations justifying
the revised quantity. If the adjustment is made by the City, the revised quantity will constitute
the final quantity which payment will be made.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. The work performed and materials furnished in accordance with this Item will be measured
as provided for at the unit price bid for “EMBANKMENT” of the compaction method and
type specified. The price is full compensation for furnishing embankment; hauling; placing,
compacting, finishing, and reworking; disposal of waste material; and equipment, labor,
tools, and incidentals.
B. No separate pay for sprinkling, rolling (including proof rolling).
C. Correction of soft spots in the subgrade will be at the Contractor's expense.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco Temporary Erosion, Sedimentation, and May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Water Pollution Prevention and Control 312500-1
SECTION 312500
TEMPORARY EROSION, SEDIMENTATION, AND
WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION AND CONTROL
PART 1 – GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish, install,
maintain and remove Temporary Erosion, Sedimentation, and Water Pollution Prevention and
Control in accordance with Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition,
Item 201
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 201
1.03 SUBMITTALS
A. The Contractor must provide a separate Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SW3P)
before the Notice to Proceed will be issued. The Erosion Control Plans included in the plans
will not be considered a SW3P. The SW3P shall comply with the regulations established by
the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ).
B. The Contractor is required to submit all appropriate forms and pay all fees, including the NOI
and NOT, as well as producing and submitting all inspection reports through the duration, as
required, to the TCEQ and the City. The Contractor will be responsible for submitting all
required forms and fees on behalf of the City, and shall submit two (2) copies of all NOIs and
proof of payment to the City prior to Notice to Proceed is issued.
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 201.
B. Where existing grasses are disturbed, restoration shall consist of equal or better permanent
vegetation. Provide a minimum of eight feet (8') of the appropriate seasonal seeded Curlex
adjacent to all street and fire lane curbs and four feet (4') adjacent to alleys. The use of
innovative products is encouraged, such as those made with composting materials, as long as
they are approved by the Director of Engineering Services and permanent vegetative
stabilization is established.
C. Twenty four (24") to thirty six (36") inches in width of rock riprap shall be placed along the
top and sides of the ground interface with all headwalls and end sections and street, alley, and
fire lane stub outs.
2.02 EQUIPMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 201.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco Temporary Erosion, Sedimentation, and May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Water Pollution Prevention and Control 312500-2
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 INSTALLATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 201.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 201.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 201.
B. Payment for the preparation of a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan shall be paid under
the line item – “Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan.”
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Geotextile 313419-1
SECTION 313419
GEOTEXTILE
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to install Geotextile in
accordance with Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 301.6
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 301.6
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 301.6.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 INSTALLATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 301.6.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. This Item shall not be measured as a separate contract Item.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. All work performed and materials furnished in accordance with this Item will be paid for at
the unit bid price for “Geotextile”. This price is full compensation for all material, labor,
equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to complete the work.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Gabions and Gabion Mattresses 313600-1
SECTION 313600
GABIONS AND GABION MATTRESSES
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Gabions and Gabion Mattresses in accordance with Texas Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications for Construction and Maintenance of Highways, Streets, and
Bridges-Item 459.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. TxDOT Item 459
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to TxDOT 459.2.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to TxDOT 459.3.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to TxDOT 459.4.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to TxDOT 459.5.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Riprap 313700-1
SECTION 313700
RIPRAP
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
RipRap in accordance with Texas Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for
Construction and Maintenance of Highways, Streets, and Bridges-Item 432.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. TxDOT Items 247, 420, 421, 431, 432, and 440.
B. City of Frisco’s Standard Details for Storm Sewer Curbed Flume.
C. TxDOT Standard Details included in the plans.
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 334915 – Safety End Treatments
B. Section 312316 – Unclassified Street Excavation
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to TxDOT 432.2. Riprap type (dry, grout, mortar) shall be specified in the plans.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to TxDOT 432.3.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to TxDOT 432.4. Replace the first sentence of TxDOT 432.4 with the following: “This
Item shall be measured by the square yard (SY) of material complete in place.”
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to TxDOT 432.5.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Moisture Treated Subgrade 321112-1
SECTION 321112
MOISTURE TREATED SUBGRADE
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary for the moisture
treatment of the subgrade in all areas to be paved.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Project’s Subgrade Investigation and Pavement Design Report (if available).
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 071300 - Moisture Barrier
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Not used.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Weathered shale material encountered within 8 feet below finish subgrade shall be
subexcavated to a depth of at least the depth of required moisture treatment and replaced with
on-site light brown or dark brown clays or other approved material.
B. Moisture treatment shall extend at least 4 feet beyond the edge of pavement and to the depth
as shown on the plans. The subgrade shall be moisture treated to a minimum of 3 percentage
points above optimum moisture content at a minimum of 95 percent standard Proctor (ASTM
D 698).
C. Frequency of compaction testing shall not exceed one test for every three hundred linear feet
300’ spacing or less ,alternating from left quarter point to center line to right quarter point for
every layer of moisture treatment.
D. Moisture treated lifts shall not exceed eighteen inches (18”) of thickness.
E. Any embankment that requires moisture conditioning treatment will be treated for the entire
height of the embankment.
F. Moisture treatment by injection is not an acceptable method to treat roadway subgrades.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Moisture Treated Subgrade 321112-2
A. This Item shall be measured on a per Square Yard (SY) basis.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. All work performed and materials furnished in accordance with this Item will be paid for at
the unit bid price for “Moisture Treated Subgrade.” This price is full compensation for all
material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to complete the work.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Lime Treatment 321113-1
SECTION 321113
LIME TREATMENT
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. This Item shall govern stabilization of the new or existing subgrade and shall consist of all
labor, equipment and material necessary to pulverize the subgrade clays or existing
pavements, add the specified percentage of hydrated lime, mix, mellow, remix and compact
the mixture as specified in this Item. The Contractor shall be responsible for making
allowances for subgrade bulking during stabilization to achieve design finished subgrade
elevation and meeting specified thickness. The finished Item shall be a compacted and
finished subgrade meeting the grades, thicknesses, lines and typical cross sections shown on
the plans and specifications and having:
1. Less than 1 percent swell when tested under a 200 psf stress (ASTM D 4546 / AASHTO
T 216).
2. A minimum pH of 12.4 (ASTM D 2976 / AASHTO T 289).
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Project’s Subgrade Investigation and Pavement Design Report (if available).
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 071300 – Moisture Barrier
B. Section 312316 – Unclassified Street Excavation
C. Section 321112 – Moisture Treated Subgrade
1.04 SUBMITTALS
A. At least 30 days prior to beginning lime stabilization work, the Contractor shall furnish the
City the following:
1. The proposed source and supplier of lime.
2. Description of the proposed construction equipment, construction methods, expected
production rates and planned sequence of lime stabilization of subgrade.
3. A lime/on-site soil mix design in accordance with Eades-Grim Method. Design shall
comply with the following requirements: 1) Minimum pH: 12.4 (ASTM D 2976/
AASHTO T 289) after completion of initial mixing with lime at ambient temperature. 2)
Swell Potential: Less than 1.0 percent, in accordance with ASTM D 4546 / AASHTO T
216 at 200 psf stress.
B. The approval of the lime-soil mix design shall be at the discretion of the City. Once the
design is approved in writing, the mix design shall be incorporated into these specifications
by reference.
C. During lime stabilization work, the Contractor shall furnish the following information to the
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Lime Treatment 321113-2
City at the end of each day:
1. Certified truck weight tickets of lime, delivered to or used at the site.
2. A summary of the amount of lime used each day, areas stabilized with lime and first
mixed, areas second mixed, completed, and areas with curing completed
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
All materials used in the construction shall meet the following requirements. In the event the
Contractor wishes to use materials not listed in this section, the Contractor shall submit to the
City a mix design data and proof of performance data as required by the City who shall review
the submittal and determine whether the materials will meet the design intent. No other materials
shall be used without the written permission of the City.
A. Lime - The lime shall meet the requirements of ASTM C977 / AASHTO M 216; contain at
least 92 percent calcium and magnesium oxide, and the rate of slaking test for moderate
reactivity per ASTM C110 / AASHTO T 232. All lime shall come from a single source, shall
be the same source as used in the design, and shall be subject to periodic testing to confirm
properties. Each shipment of lime shall be accompanied by a Certificate of Compliance
stating the conformance of the product to these specifications. Certificates shall be provided
to the City. In the event the Contractor changes lime sources, no work shall be done until the
City accepts, in writing, a new lime-soil mix design using the new lime source.
B. Water - Water used for slaking, mixing or curing shall be free of oil, salts, acid, alkali, sugar,
vegetable, or other deleterious substances which may cause damage to the finished product.
All water shall meet the material requirements AASHTO T 26. Known potable water may be
used without testing.
C. Soil - Subgrade soils used in the stabilization shall be of the same AASHTO or ASTM
classification and Plasticity Index range as used in the approved mix design. All organics,
roots and deleterious materials shall be removed from the area to be stabilized and shall be
wasted. The condition of the subgrade soils must be approved by the City prior to beginning
work.
D. Asphalt - Asphalt used to seal the surface of the lime stabilized subgrade shall be CSS1h or
other approved asphalt as approved by the City and shall conform to the requirements of
TxDOT Item 300, "Asphalts, Oils and Emulsions". Each shipment shall be accompanied by a
Certificate of Compliance stating the conformance of the product to these specifications
which shall be provided to the City.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Lime Treatment 321113-3
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 EQUIPMENT
The machinery, tools and equipment necessary for proper prosecution of the work on this Item
shall be on the project and approved by the City prior to beginning this Item. All machinery, tools
and equipment used shall be maintained in a satisfactory working condition.
A. Lime Storage - Lime shall be suitably stored in closed, weatherproof containers until
immediately before use. Storage bins, when used, shall be completely enclosed.
B. Lime Weight Verification - When lime is furnished in trucks, the weight of lime shall be
determined on certified scales or the Contractor shall provide a set of standard platform truck
scales at a location approved by the City. Scales shall conform to the requirements of TxDOT
Item 520, "Weighing and Measuring Equipment".
C. Slurry Equipment - Quick lime used to manufacture slurry on the project, or other location
approved by the City shall be slurried in agitated slurry tanks. The slurrying of Quick lime
must be handled in such a way as to not generate any dust hazardous to job personnel or to
the public or be potentially damaging to any adjacent property.
D. Distributor Trucks - The distributor truck used for slurry placing shall be equipped with an
agitator and a calibrated measuring device or as approved by the City and shall be in good
working order. The Contractor shall provide to the City the spread rate calibration (or other
acceptable means to calculate the spread rate) prior to use of the equipment.
E. Mixers - Mixers shall be of appropriate size and capacity so as not to delay the project and
shall be capable of pulverization to these specifications and mixing of the product.
F. Compaction Equipment - Finishing equipment shall consist of smooth steel wheel vibratory
compactors or pneumatic tired roller compactors having a minimum tire pressure of 90 psi.
Other types of compaction equipment may be approved at the sole discretion of the City.
3.02 CONSTRUCTION
The completed course shall be uniformly stabilized, free from cracks, loose or segregated areas,
of uniform density and moisture content, well bound for its full depth and shall have a smooth
surface.
A. Preparation of Subgrade - Prior to stabilization the subgrade shall be compacted and shaped
to conform to the typical sections, as shown on the plans with allowances made for bulking of
the subgrade. The subgrade shall be moisture treated to the lines and grades shown on the
plans and as provided for in the pavement design report. The minimum moisture content shall
be 3 percentage points above standard Proctor optimum (ASTM D698) with compaction to at
least 95%. If the Contractor elects to use a cutting and pulverizing machine that will process
the material to the plan depth, the Contractor will not be required to excavate to the secondary
grade or windrow the material. This method will be permitted only if a machine is provided
which will insure that the material is cut uniformly to the proper depth and which has cutters
that will plane the secondary grade to a uniform surface over the entire width of the cut. The
machine shall provide a visible indication of the depth of cut at all times.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Lime Treatment 321113-4
B. In lieu of using the cutting and pulverizing machine, the Contractor shall excavate and
windrow the material to expose the secondary grade to the typical sections, lines and grades
as shown on the plans and as established by the City.
C. Pulverization - The existing pavement or base material shall be pulverized or scarified so that
100 percent shall pass the one (1) inch sieve.
D. Application - The design percentage by weight or pounds per square yard of lime to be added
will be as shown on the plans and may be varied by the City if conditions warrant. Only two
application methods are acceptable; dry application of pebble quick lime or slurried hydrate
or quick lime. The rate of application shall be verified using the methods provided in ASTM
D 3155.
E. Dry quick lime shall be spread only on that area where the mixing operations can be
completed during the same working day. Slurried quick lime shall be spread and mixed
within 1 hour. Slurry exposed to the air for over 1 hour shall not be accepted.
F. Unless otherwise approved by the City, the lime operation shall not be started when the air
temperature is below 40° F and falling, but may be started when the air temperature is above
35° F and rising. The temperature will be taken in the shade and away from artificial heat.
Lime shall not be placed during periods of rain or when weather conditions in the opinion of
the City are not suitable. CAUTION: Use of quick lime can be dangerous. Users should be
informed of the recommended precautions in handling, storage and use of quick lime.
G. Double Application Method – When required, lime shall be applied using the double
application method. All other requirements and methods shall remain in force except as
follows. One-half the specified quantity of lime shall be applied, mixed and mellowed for at
least 3 days or longer as required by the approved mix design. The remaining lime shall be
applied, mixed, and mellowed for at least 3 days or longer as required by the approved mix
design.
H. Dry Placement - Pebble quick lime shall be distributed by a spreader approved by the City.
The lime shall be distributed at a uniform rate to achieve the mix design lime content and in
such a manner as to reduce the scattering of lime by wind. Lime shall not be applied when
wind conditions, in the opinion of the City, are such that blowing lime becomes objectionable
to adjacent property owners or dangerous to traffic. The material shall be sprinkled as
approved by the City.
I. Slurry Placement - Lime Slurry shall be delivered to the project in slurry form at or above the
minimum lime concentration as listed in the approved mix design. The residue or "stones"
remaining in the tank from the slurry procedure shall be spread uniformly over the length of
the roadway currently being processed, or wasted, unless otherwise approved by the City.
Slurry shall be of such consistency that it can be applied uniformly without difficulty.
J. Initial Mixing - The mixing procedure shall be the same for "Dry Placement" or "Slurry
Placement" as herein described. The soil and lime shall be thoroughly mixed by equipment
approved by the City. A minimum of 4 passes of the mixer is required. The soil and lime
mixture shall be brought to a moisture content at least four (4) percentage points above the
design optimum moisture content and shall be left to mellow for three (3) days or longer as
required by the approved mix design. The mixing shall continue until a homogeneous friable
mixture of material and lime is obtained. The mixture shall have a minimum pH 12.4
(additional lime shall be required to meet this specification).
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Lime Treatment 321113-5
Minimum passing 3/4" sieve: 100 percent
Minimum passing No. 4 sieve: 60 percent
The mixture shall be sprinkled and mixed during the mellowing process as required to assist
in the chemical reaction. Moisture contents shall remain above optimum for the entire
mellowing period.
Where measured sulfate level in the light brown clay of the Eagle Ford formation exceeds 0.5
percent (5000 ppm), or exceeds 2.5 percent (25,000 ppm) in the dark brown clay of the Eagle
Ford formation, a double lime application is required. The mellowing period shall be
extended for at least 5 days or as indicated in the mix design, whichever is longer.
K. Final Lime Mixing - After the required mellowing period the second lime application, if
required, shall be made. Upon approval by City, the material shall be uniformly mixed by the
approved methods. If the mixture contains clods, they shall be reduced in size by approved
pulverizing methods so that the remainder of the clods shall meet the following requirements
(visual observation, not testing, required):
Minimum passing 1" sieve: 100 percent
Minimum passing No. 4 sieve: 60 percent
At final mixing, the lime, water content and pH for each course of subgrade stabilization shall
conform to the following:
Lime: +1 percent above design percentage based on dry unit weight of soil
Water: +2 percentage points above optimum moisture content
pH: 12.4
Samples shall be taken at random locations by a qualified geotechnical testing laboratory
selected by the Contractor and approved by the City per the City-required testing schedule.
L. Compaction Methods - Compaction of the mixture shall begin immediately after the
requirements listed above are met. NOTE: Where double mixing is required by the mix
design, the required additional lime shall be added and the mixture shall be moisture
conditioned and pulverized.
Compaction shall continue until the entire depth of the mixture is uniformly compacted to a
minimum of 95 percent of standard Proctor density (ASTM D698) at a minimum of 2
percentage points above optimum moisture content.
All irregularities, depressions, or weak spots which develop as determined by the City shall
be corrected immediately by scarifying the areas affected, adding or removing materials as
required, and reshaping and recompacting by moisture conditioning and rolling. The surface
of the course shall be maintained in a moist, smooth condition, free from undulations, ruts
and cracking, until other work is placed thereon or the work is accepted.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Lime Treatment 321113-6
In addition to the requirements specified for density, the full depth of the material shown on
the drawings shall be compacted to the extent necessary to remain firm and stable under
construction equipment. After each section is completed, tests will be made by the
geotechnical testing laboratory and submitted to the City. If the material fails to meet the
density requirements, it shall be reworked to meet the requirements. Throughout this entire
operation, the shape of the course shall be maintained by blading, and the surface upon
completion shall be smooth and shall conform with the typical section shown on the drawings
and to the established lines and grades. Should the material, due to any reason or cause, lose
the required stability, density, and finish before the next course or pavement is placed, it shall
be recompacted and refinished at the entire expense of the Contractor. When shown on the
plans or approved by the City, multiple lifts will be permitted.
M. Finishing and Curing - After the final layer or course of lime-stabilized subgrade has been
compacted, it shall be brought to the required lines and grades in accordance with the typical
sections. The completed section shall then be finished by rolling with a pneumatic or other
suitable roller sufficiently light to prevent hair line cracking. The finished surface shall not
deviate by more than 0.04 feet (0.5 inch) from the actual finish grade. Any variations in
excess of this tolerance shall be corrected by the Contractor, at the Contractor's entire
expense immediately prior to placement of the next paving course, in a manner satisfactory to
the City.
The completed section shall be moist-cured until a non-yielding surface is obtained to support
construction traffic and the next layer of the pavement is constructed, as approved by the
City.
In the event the surface cannot be covered by the next layer of pavement or be kept moist, an
asphalt membrane shall be applied at the rate of 0.25 gallons per square yard. The Contractor
shall protect the membrane from traffic and contamination until the next layer of the
pavement system is placed. Additional testing may be required to verify moisture content as
determined by the City.
N. Reworking a Section - When a section is reworked within 72 hours after completion of
compaction, the Contractor shall rework the section to provide the required compaction.
When a section is reworked more than 72 hours after completion of compaction, the
Contractor shall add 25 percent of the specified percentage of lime.
O. Stormwater Control- Lime (concentrated or diluted) shall not be allowed to enter a storm
drain system or natural waterway. The lime shall be applied in a manner thsat prevents
puddling or runoff. Runoff will be considered a spill. Spills shall be immediately reported to
The City of Frisco Stormwater Inspector during City working hours or to the Fire Department
dispatcher during evening s and weekends. The spill site shall be neutralized, cleaned up, and
removed from the site. Washing down the spill is not allowed. This is subsidiary to the Lime
Treatment item, and no additional payment shall be made.
3.03 TOLERANCES
The following requirements shall apply to the finished lime stabilized subgrade:
A. Tolerance in Thickness - One measurement shall be taken at random locations by the
geotechnical testing laboratory on center of roadway at 300 feet spacing along each roadway
direction. When the measurement is not deficient by more than 0.5 inch from the plan
thickness, full payment will be made. When such measurement is deficient more than 0.5
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Lime Treatment 321113-7
inch and not more than 1.0 inch from the plan thickness, two additional measurements shall
be taken at random (typically, 25 feet either side of the deficient measurement) and used in
determining the average thickness. When the average of the 3 measurements is not deficient
by more than 0.5 inch from the plan thickness, full payment will be made. When the average
thickness is deficient by more than 0.5 inch, the entire area shall be reprocessed at the
Contractor's entire expense.
3.04 QUALITY CONTROL
A. The City may periodically require tests by the geotechnical testing laboratory to assist him or
her in evaluating the quality of work and Contractor performance. The Contractor shall assist
the City by excavating and backfilling shallow areas as necessary to take density tests.
B. Any constructed course which does not meet specification requirements shall be reworked, at
the Contractor's entire expense, to bring that work within specification requirements. The
City’s test shall be used in evaluating whether project meets specification requirements. The
following table provides minimum testing requirements:
TEST TYPE
TEST
STANDARD MINIMUM FREQUENCY OF TESTS
In-Place Soil Density
and Moisture Content
ASTM D 698
ASTM D 1556
ASTM D 2167
ASTM D 2922
ASTM D 2216
ASTM D 3017
One test for every 300 feet spacing or less along each
roadway direction, but no less than one test per day for
each roadway subgrade
pH
Eades and Grim
procedures
ASTM D 2976
One test per 600 feet spacing or less along each
roadway direction, but no less than test per day for each
roadway subgrade
Thickness
One test for 300 feet spacing or less along each roadway
direction, but no less than one test per day for each
roadway subgrade
Compressive Strength
ASTM D 558
ASTM D 1633
ASTM D 2166
(a) One test for 900 feet spacing or less along each
roadway direction, but no less than one test per day for
each roadway subgrade, sealed and cured at 100 degrees
F for 5 days (b) Strength not corrected for
length/diameter.
Pulverization Testing Tex-101-E, Part
III
One test for every 600 feet spacing or less along each
roadway direction, but no less than one test per day for
each roadway subgrade
Swell Potential ASTM D 4546
One test for every 900 feet spacing or less along each
roadway direction, but no less than one test per day for
each roadway subgrade
Note: The City may test any other property of the materials or lime-soil mixture in this Item at intervals or
occasions of his/her choosing.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Lime Treatment 321113-8
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. The Lime Stabilized Subgrade shall be measured by the Square Yard (SY) complete in place
and accepted for the thickness shown in the plans.
B. The Lime shall be measured by the Ton (TN) complete in place.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. The Lime Stabilized Subgrade shall be paid for at the unit contract price and shall be total
compensation for preparing the roadbed, for loosening, pulverizing, application of lime, water
content in the slurry mixture and mixing water; mixing, shaping, sprinkling, compacting,
finishing, curing and maintaining; for manipulations required; and for all labor, equipment,
fuels, tool, and incidentals necessary to complete the work, all in accordance with the plans
and specifications.
B. The Lime material shall be paid for at the unit contract price bid for Lime which price shall
be full compensation for furnishing the material; for all freight involved; for all unloading,
storing and handling; and for all labor, equipment, fuels, tools, and incidentals necessary to
complete the work.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco Flexible Subbase or Base May 2012
Standard Technical Specification (Crushed Stone/Concrete) 321116-1
SECTION 321116
FLEXIBLE SUBBASE OR BASE (CRUSHED STONE/CONCRETE)
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Flexible Subbase or Base (crushed stone/concrete) in accordance with Public Works
Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 301.1 and 301.5.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 301.1 and 301.5
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 301.1 and 301.5.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 301. And 301.5.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 301.1 and 301.5.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 301.1 and 301.5.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Sand Bedding 321123-1
SECTION 321123
SAND BEDDING
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to install Sand Bedding
in accordance with Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 504.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 504
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 504.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 INSTALLATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 504.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. This Item shall not be measured as a separate contract Item unless otherwise noted.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. The work performed and materials furnished in accordance with this Item will not be paid for
directly but will be subsidiary to pertinent Items.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Asphalt Base Course 321126-1
SECTION 321126
ASPHALT BASE COURSE
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Asphalt Base Course in accordance with Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG,
4th Edition, Item 302.8.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 302.3, 302.7, 302.8,
302.9, and 302.10
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 302.8.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 302.8.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 302.10.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 302.10.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Portland Cement Treatment 321133-1
SECTION 321133
PORTLAND CEMENT TREATMENT
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Portland Cement Treatment in accordance with Public Works Construction Standards,
NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 301.1 and 301.3.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 301.1 and 301.3
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 301.1 and 301.3.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 301.1 and 301.3.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 301.1 and 301.3.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 301.1 and 301.3.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Hot Mix Asphalt Pavement 321216-1
SECTION 321216
HOT MIX ASPHALT PAVEMENT
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install Hot
Mix Asphalt Pavement in accordance with Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG,
4thEdition, Item 302.9.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 302.2, 302.3, 302.7, and
302.10
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 302.9.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 302.9.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 302.10.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 302.10.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Concrete Pavement 321313-1
SECTION 321313
CONCRETE PAVEMENT
PART 1 – GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Concrete Pavement in accordance with Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th
Edition, Item 303.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 303
B. City of Frisco Standard Details for Concrete Pavement
1.03 SUBMITTALS
A. Submit mix design for each class of concrete.
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 303.2 and 303.3.
B. All concrete shall be sulfate resistant mix design.
C. Specified reinforcing steel (#4 bars and larger) shall be of domestic manufacture and shall
conform to the requirements of ASTM A615, Grade 60.
D. Grade 40 reinforcing steel (#3 bars) will only be allowed in sidewalks or with approval of the
Director of Engineering Services.
E. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 303.2.2 is hereby
modified to allow only Type I/II Portland Cement.
F. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 303.2.4 is hereby
modified to allow only Class F flyash.
G. Expansion joints in paving shall be redwood boards only.
2.02 EQUIPMENT
H. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 303.4.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Concrete Pavement 321313-2
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 INSTALLATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 303.5. and
303.8. Samples of all materials for testing shall be solely the responsibility and expense of
the Contractor.
B. Conform to City of Frisco’s Standard Details for Concrete Pavement.
C. Slip form pavement method shall be used for all public streets and alleys unless otherwise
approved by the Director of Engineering Services. Hand formed pavement method may be
used for turn lanes, deceleration lanes, driveway approach, or replacing a panel of public
street or alley pavement.
D. Curb shall be cast integral with paving unless otherwise approved by the City.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 303.9.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 303.9.
B. Monolithic curb shall be considered incidental to the work performed and materials furnished
in accordance with this Item, and will not be paid for directly but will be subsidiary to
Concrete Pavement unless otherwise specified in the plans and in the bid proposal.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Rolling 321314-1
SECTION 321314
ROLLING
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary for Rolling in accordance
with Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 301.1.2.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 301.1.2
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. TAMPING ROLLER
1. Tamping rollers shall consist of two (2) metal rollers, drums or shells of not less than
forty inches (40") in diameter, each not less than forty-two inches (42") in length and unit
mounted in a rigid frame in such a manner that each roller may oscillate independently of
another. Each roller, drum or shell shall be surmounted by metal studs with tamping feet
projecting not less than seven inches (7") from the surface and spaced not less than six
inches (6") nor more than 10 inches (10") measured diagonally center to center; and the
cross-sectional area of each tamping foot measured perpendicular to the axis of the stud,
shall be not less than five square inches (5") nor more than eight square inches (8"). The
roller shall be of the type that by ballast loading, the load on each tamping foot may be
varied uniformly from 125 p.s.i. of cross-sectional area. The load per tamping foot will
be determined by dividing the total weight of the roller by the number of tamping feet in
one row parallel to or approximately parallel to the axis of the roller.
2. The tamping roller shall be drawn by approved equipment of adequate tractive effort.
Power equipment used in embankment construction shall be the crawler type tractor.
Two (2) tamping rollers conforming to the above requirements, drawn by approved
equipment, shall be considered a roller unit.
B. TIRE ROLLER
1. Tire rollers shall consist of not less than nine (9) pneumatic-tired wheels, running on
axles in such a manner that the rear group of tires will not follow in the tracks of the
forward group of wheels, and mounted in a rigid frame, and shall be of a type suitable for
ballast loading. The distance between the front and rear axles shall be not less than five
feet (5') no more than 10 feet (10').
2. The front axle shall be attached to the frame in such a manner that the roller may be
turned in a minimum circle. The pneumatic tire roller shall have an effective rolling
width of approximately sixty inches (60"), and shall be ballast loaded so that the load
may be varied uniformly from not less than 100 p.s.i. of width of tire tread to 325 pounds
per inch of tire tread. The roller, under working conditions, shall provide a uniform
compression under all wheels. The total combined width of effective tire tread shall be
not less than eighty-five percent (85%) of the effective rolling width. The pneumatic tire
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Rolling 321314-2
roller shall be drawn by either an approved crawler type, a pneumatic tread tractor, or a
truck of adequate tractive effort; and the roller when drawn by either type of equipment
shall be considered a pneumatic tire roller unit. Power equipment for rolling on asphalt
shall be equipped with pneumatic tires.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. The embankment or base course shall start longitudinally at the sides and proceed toward the
center, overlapping on successive trips at least one-half (l/2) of the width of the pneumatic
tire roller unit. Alternate trips of the roller unit shall begin at the low sides and progress
toward the high sides.
B. The speed of the power roller and the tamping roller unit, unless otherwise directed by the
City, shall be between two (2) and three (3) miles per hour. The speed of the pneumatic tire
unit, unless otherwise directed by the City, shall be between four (4) and twelve (12) miles
per hour for asphalt surfacing work and between two (2) and six (6) miles per hour for all
other compaction work.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. This Item shall not be measured as a separate contract Item.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. The work performed and materials furnished in accordance with this Item will not be paid for
directly but will be subsidiary to pertinent Items.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Joint Sealant 321373-1
SECTION 321373
JOINT SEALANT
PART 1 – GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary for Joint Sealant in
accordance with Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item
303.5.4.7.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 303.2 and 303.5
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 303.2.12.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 INSTALLATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 303.5.4.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. This Item shall not be measured as a separate contract Item.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. The work performed and materials furnished in accordance with this Item will not be paid for
directly but will be subsidiary to pertinent Items.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Concrete Pavers 321400-1
SECTION 321400
CONCRETE PAVERS
PART 1 – GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary for Concrete Pavers in
accordance with Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 304.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 304
PART 2 – PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 304.
B. Colors for use in Frisco include Pavestone Frisco Maroon and Frisco Charcoal or approved
equivalent.
PART 3 – EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 304.
PART 4 – MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Item shall be measured complete in place per square-foot (SF) and in accordance with the
Contract Documents.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 304.
.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Concrete Curb and Gutter 321613-1
SECTION 321613
CONCRETE CURB AND GUTTER
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Concrete Curb and Gutter in accordance with Public Works Construction Standards,
NCTCOG, 4thEdition, Item 305.1.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 203.4, 303 and 305.1
B. City of Frisco’s Standard Detail for Concrete Curb and Gutter.
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 321313 – Concrete Pavement
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 303.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 203.4 and 305.1.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Concrete Curb and Gutter will not be measured separately unless indicated otherwise.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. All work performed and materials furnished in accordance with this Item will be paid for at
the unit bid price for “Concrete Curb and Gutter”. This price is full compensation for all
material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to complete the work.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Driveway Approach 321645-1
SECTION 321645
DRIVEWAY APPROACH
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Driveway Approach in accordance with Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th
Edition, Item 305.2.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items, 303, 305.1 and 305.2
B. City of Frisco’s Standard Details for Driveway Approaches
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 032100 – Reinforcing Steel
B. Section 321313 – Concrete Pavement
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 303 and 305.1.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items and 305.2.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. This Item shall be measured on a per Square Yard (SY) basis, specified by type (
Commercial, Residential), complete in place. Measurement shall start at the back of the
laydown curb and shall include the area of the curb radii as indicated in the Standard Details.
Curbs on driveways shall not be measured separately but shall be included as a part of the
driveway concrete.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. All work performed and materials furnished in accordance with this Item will be paid for at
the unit bid price for “Driveway Approach.” This price is full compensation for all material,
labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to complete the work.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Reinforced Concrete Sidewalk 321650-1
SECTION 321650
REINFORCED CONCRETE SIDEWALK
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Reinforced Concrete Sidewalk in accordance with Public Works Construction Standards,
NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 305.2.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 303, 305.1 and 305.2
B. TxDOT current Standard Details for Pedestrian Facilities
C. Current Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation (TDLR) and Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements.
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 032100 – Reinforcing Steel
B. Section 321313 – Concrete Pavement
C. Section 321655 – Barrier Free Ramp
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 303 and 305.1.
B. Welded Wire Fabric is not acceptable as reinforcement.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items and 305.2.
B. All Reinforced Concrete Sidewalk must be approved by TDLR prior to acceptance.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. This Item shall be measured on a Square Yard (SY) basis complete in place.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Reinforced Concrete Sidewalk 321650-2
4.02 PAYMENT
A. All work performed and materials furnished in accordance with this Item will be paid for at
the unit bid price for “Reinforced Concrete Sidewalk.” This price is full compensation for all
material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to complete the work.
B. Barrier Free Ramps shall be measured and paid for separately in accordance with Section
321655 – Barrier Free Ramp.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Barrier Free Ramp 321655-1
SECTION 321655
BARRIER FREE RAMP
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Barrier Free Ramps in accordance with Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th
Edition, Item 305.2.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 303, 305.1 and 305.2.
B. TxDOT and City Standard Details for Pedestrian Facilities.
C. Current Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation (TDLR) and Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements.
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 032100 – Reinforcing Steel
B. Section 311313 – Portland Cement Concrete
C. Section 321650 – Reinforced Concrete Sidewalk
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 303 and 305.1.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 305.2.
B. All Barrier Free Ramps must be approved by TDLR prior to acceptance.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. This Item shall be measured on a per Each (EA) basis, specified by type, complete in place.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Barrier Free Ramp 321655-2
4.02 PAYMENT
A. All work performed and materials furnished in accordance with this Item will be paid for at
the unit bid price for “Barrier Free Ramp.” This price is full compensation for all material,
labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to complete the work.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Concrete Median Nose 321660-1
SECTION 321660
CONCRETE MEDIAN NOSE
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Concrete Median Noses in accordance with Public Works Construction Standards,
NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 305.3.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 305.1, and 305.3.
B. City of Frisco’s Standard Detail for Monolithic Median Nose
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 032100 – Reinforcing Steel
B. Section 311313 – Concrete Pavement
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 305.3.
B. All median noses shall be monolithic in accordance with the City of Frisco’s Standard Detail
for Concrete Median Nose.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 305.3.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. This Item shall be measured on a per Each (EA) basis, specified by Type (1 or 2), complete in
place.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Concrete Median Nose 321660-2
4.02 PAYMENT
A. All work performed and materials furnished in accordance with this Item will be paid for at
the unit bid price for “Concrete Median Nose.” This price is full compensation for all
material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to complete the work.
Concrete Pavers within the medians shall be paid for separately.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Reinforced Concrete Header 321665-1
SECTION 321665
REINFORCED CONCRETE HEADER
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Reinforced Concrete Header in accordance with Public Works Construction Standards,
NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 305.4.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 303 and 305.4.
B. City of Frisco Standard Detail for Concrete Header
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 032100 – Reinforcing Steel
B. Section 321313 –Concrete Pavement
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 303.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 303.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. This Item shall be measured on a Linear Foot (LF) basis complete in place.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. All work performed and materials furnished in accordance with this Item will be paid for at
the unit bid price for “Reinforced Concrete Header.” This price is full compensation for all
material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to complete the work.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Pavement Markers and Markings 321723-1
SECTION 321723
PAVEMENT MARKERS AND MARKINGS
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Pavement Markers and Markings.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. TxDOT Items 666, 672, 677, and 678
B. City of Frisco’s Standard Details for Pavement Markers and Markings.
C. TxDOT Standard Details included in the plans.
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 347113 – Barricades, Signs, and Traffic Handling
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 666, 672, 677, and 678.
B. Refer to the City of Frisco’s Standard Details for Pavement Markers and Markings.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 INSTALLATION
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 666, 672, 677, and 678.
B. Each class of raised pavement marker shall be from the same manufacturer.
C. Contact City for approval of pavement marking layouts prior to installation.
D. Surface to which markers are to be attached by an adhesive shall be prepared by any method
approved by the City to ensure that the surface is free of dirt, curing compound, grease, oil,
moisture, loose or unsound pavement markings and any other material which would
adversely affect the adhesive bond.
E. Guides to mark the lateral location of pavement markings shall be established as shown on
the plans. The Contractor shall establish the pavement marking guides and the City will
verify the location of the guides.
F. The pavement markers shall be placed in proper alignment with the guides. The deviation rate
in alignment shall not exceed one (1) inch per 200 feet of roadway. The maximum deviation
shall not exceed two (2) inches nor shall any deviation be abrupt.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Pavement Markers and Markings 321723-2
G. Markers placed that are not in alignment of sequence, as shown on the plans or as stated in
this specification, shall be removed by the Contractor at the Contractor’s expense. Removal
shall be in accordance with TxDOT Item 677 “Eliminating Existing Pavement Markings and
Marker”, except for measurement and payment. Guides placed on the roadway for alignment
purposes shall not establish a permanent marking on the roadway.
H. Unless otherwise shown on the plans, the Contractor shall use the following adhesive
materials for placement of markers:
1. Epoxy adhesive for Class E markers.
2. Bituminous adhesive for Classes A, B, C, and D markers on bituminous pavements.
3. Epoxy adhesive for Class A, B, C, and D markers on Portland cement concrete
pavements.
I. Adhesive shall be applied in sufficient quantity to ensure that 100 percent of the bonding area
of the raised pavement markers shall be in contact with the adhesive.
J. Raised pavement markers, except Class E, shall be in contact with the pavement surface but
shall be seated on a continuous layer of adhesive.
K. Unless otherwise noted, adhesives shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturer’s
recommendations.
L. When bituminous adhesive is used, pavement and raised pavement marker temperature shall
be at least 40 degree F. The bituminous adhesive shall not be heated above 400 degree F. The
bituminous adhesive shall be agitated intermittently to ensure even heat distribution.
M. Epoxy adhesive shall be machine mixed.
N. Raised pavement markers shall be free of rust, scale, dirt, oil, grease, moisture, or
contaminants which may adversely affect the adhesive bond.
O. Raised pavement markers shall be placed immediately after the adhesive is applied and shall
be firmly bonded to the pavement. Adhesive or any other material that impairs functional
reflectivity will not be acceptable.
P. The roadway to be marked will remain open to traffic and the Contractor shall provide all
necessary warning and barricading to insure the safety of the workmen and traffic, and the
Contractor must insure proper maintenance of all warning and barricading devices at all
times. Construction, signing, channelizing devices, and markings shall conform to the current
Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (TMUTCD) at all times.
Q. A minimum of one lane in each direction shall remain open to through traffic at all times.
R. The Contractor shall conduct the installation so as to minimize the duration of restricted
traffic movements.
S. The Contractor shall apply pavement markers and markings during off-peak traffic hours
(9:00 am – 3:30 pm) or as directed by the City.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Pavement Markers and Markings 321723-3
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. This Item shall be measured on a Lump Sum (LS) basis complete in place or by Each (EA)
and Linear Foot (LF) as indicated in the plans.
B. The plan quantity will be determined through calculations and will be used for determining
final quantity amounts for payment purposes. Contract adjustments may be made if the actual
measured quantity varies by more or less than 5% of the total estimated plan quantity amount.
Either the City or the Contractor may initiate this adjustment. If the adjustment is requested
by the Contractor, the Contractor must obtain field measurements and calculations justifying
the revised quantity. If the adjustment is made by the City, the revised quantity will constitute
the final quantity which payment will be made.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. All work performed and materials furnished in accordance with this Item will be paid for at
the unit bid price for “Pavement Markers and Markings.” This price is full compensation for
all material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to complete the work.
Surface Preparation will not be paid for directly, but considered subsidiary to this Item.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Prefabricated Pavement Markings, etc 321725-1
SECTION 321725
PREFABRICATED PAVEMENT MARKINGS (WITH WARRANTY)
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Prefabricated Pavement Markings as indicated in the plans with a manufacturer’s warranty
bond for a 6 year period. The City will allow a Contractor provided warranty bond in lieu of
the manufacturer’s bond if all conditions of the manufacturer’s warranty including the
requirements of this Item are met. In such case, the Contractor is responsible for meeting the
warranty requirements. Use the form provided by the City. The City will allow substitution of
a contractor’s bond with a manufacturer’s bond after execution of the Contract prior to final
acceptance.
1.02 REFERENCES.
A. City of Frisco’s Standard Details for Pavement Markers and Markings.
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 347113 – Barricades, Signs, and Traffic Handling
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Contractor shall use 3M 270 Tape (or approved equal) for all directional arrows and
messages, and 3M 380 Tape for all longitudinal pavement markings and 12” channelization
lines as indicated in the plan. Approved equal pavement markings must meet the TxDOT
requirements of Type B markings in DMS-8240.
2.02 EQUIPMENT
A. Provide equipment as required or directed according to the following (The provider of the
warranty bond is responsible for providing equipment during the warranty period unless
otherwise shown on the plans.):
1. Preparation and Application. Use equipment designed for the pavement preparation and
application of the type of pavement marking material selected.
2. Colorimeter. Provide a colorimeter using 45°/0° geometry CIE, D65 Illuminant, 2°
standard observation angle meeting the requirements of ASTM E 1347, E 1348, or E
1349.
3. Retroreflectometer. Unless otherwise shown on the plans, provide a portable or mobile
retroreflectometer meeting the following requirements.
a. Portable Retroreflectometer. Provide a portable retroreflectometer that meets the
requirements of ASTM E 1710
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Prefabricated Pavement Markings, etc 321725-2
b. Mobile Retroreflectometer. Provide a mobile retroreflectometer that:
(1) is approved by the City and certified by the Texas Transportation Institute
Mobile Retroreflectomter Certification Program for project evaluation of
retroreflectivity
(2) is calibrated daily, before measuring retroreflectivity on any pavement stripe,
with a portable retroreflectometer meeting the following requirements:
ASTM E 1710, entrance angle of 88.76°, observation angle of 1.05°, and an
accuracy of ±15%;
(3) equires no traffic control when retroreflectivity measurements are taken and is
capable of taking continuous readings at or near posted speed.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 INSTALLATION
A. Contractor to ensure a manufacturer’s representative is present during installation of all
pavement markings
B. Prepare the pavement surface using controlled techniques that minimize pavement damage
and hazards to the traveling public. Apply the materials, according to the manufacturer’s
recommendations, using widths, colors, shapes, and at locations as shown on the plans.
C. Obtain approval for the sequence of work and estimated daily production. Use traffic control
as shown on the plans or as approved. Establish guides to mark the lateral location of
pavement markings as shown on the plans or as directed, and have guide locations verified.
Use material for guides that will not leave a permanent mark on the roadway. Apply
markings in alignment with the guides and without deviating for the alignment more than 1
in. per 200 ft. of roadway or more than 2 in. maximum
D. Remove all applied markings that are not in alignment or sequence as stated in the plans or as
stated in the specifications at the Contractor’s expense and in accordance with TxDOT Item
677, “Eliminating Existing Pavement Markings and Markers,” except for measurement and
payment
E. The City will conduct visual performance evaluations of the markings. For markings that do
not meet the City’s visual performance evaluation, the Contractor may present test results for
color (using a colorimeter), retroreflectivity (using a retroreflectometer), and durability (in
accordance with ASTM D 913) for the City’s use in making acceptance or rejection
decisions. For pavement markings not meeting performance requirements, repair or replace
until reevaluation shows the Pavement Markers and Markings meet the performance
requirements as approved by the City.
F. Written Acceptance. The City will provide written acceptance after the Contractor meets the
initial performance requirements. This written acceptance (see attached sample form) will
include the date, location, length, and type of pavement markings.
3.02 PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
A. Color. Provide pavement markings consisting of pigments blended to provide color
conforming to highway colors as shown in Table 1.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Prefabricated Pavement Markings, etc 321725-3
Table 1
Color Requirements
Federal 595 Color
Chromaticity Coordinates Brightnes
s
(Y)
1 2 3 4
x y x y X y x y
White 17855 .290 .315 .310 .295 .350 .340 .330 .360 60 min
Yellow 33538 .470 .455 .510 .489 .490 .432 .537 .462 30 min
Black 5 max
B. Retroreflectivity. Provide pavement markings for longitudinal markings meeting the minimum
retroreflectivity values listed in Table 2.
Table 2
Minimum Retroreflectivity Requirements
Color Retroreflectivity,
mcd/m2/lx, Min
White 120
Yellow 120
C. Durability. Provide pavement markings that do not lose more than 5% of the striping material in
a 1,000- ft. section of continuous stripe or broken stripe (25 broken stripes). Pavement markings
must remain in the proper alignment and location.
D. Performance Evaluation Procedures. Provide traffic control and conduct evaluations of color,
retroreflectivity, and durability as required or directed by the City.
1. Color. Measure color using 45°/0° geometry CIE, D65 Illuminant, 2° standard observation
angle in accordance with ASTM E 1347, E 1348, or E 1349.
2. Retroreflectivity. Unless otherwise shown on the plans, conduct retroreflectivity
evaluations of pavement markings with either a portable or mobile retroreflectometer.
Make all measurements in the direction of traffic flow, except for broken centerline on 2-
way roadways, where measurements will be made in both directions.
If using a portable retroreflectometer, take a minimum of 1 measurement every mile on
each series of markings (i.e., edgeline, center skipline, each line of a double line, etc.), at
locations approved by the City. If more than 1 measurement is taken, average the
measurements. For all markings measured in both directions, take a minimum of 1
measurement in each direction. If the measurement taken on a specific series of markings
within each mile segment falls below the minimum retroreflectivity values, take a
minimum of 5 more measurements at locations determined by the City within that mile
segment for that series of marking. If the average of these 5 measurements falls below the
minimum retroreflectivity requirements, that mile segment of the applied markings does
not meet the performance requirement.
If using a mobile retroreflectometer, review the results to determine deficient sections and
deficient areas of interest. These areas do not meet the performance requirements.
3. Durability. Measure durability in accordance with ASTM D 913 for marking material loss
and visual inspection for alignment and location. Conduct evaluations at locations
approved by the City.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Prefabricated Pavement Markings, etc 321725-4
3.03 WARRANTY REQUIREMENTS
A. Each warranty period is for 6 yr. and starts the day after written acceptance.
B. The marking warrantor is responsible for meeting the Performance Requirements for the
duration of the warranty period.
C. During the warranty period, the City will conduct periodic visual performance evaluations of
the pavement markings. For retroreflectivity the City will use Tex-828-B, “Determining
Functional Characteristics of Pavement Markings.” The warrantor may be present during these
evaluations. For areas, which, in the opinion of the City have a questionable visual evaluation,
the warrantor may replace the pavement markings or may conduct a performance evaluation for
the performance requirement in question, conduct retroreflectivity evaluations using either
portable or mobile retroreflectometer unless otherwise indicated in the Contract Documents.
The warrantor is responsible for traffic control when conducting performance evaluations.
D. The warrantor will replace pavement markings that fail to meet the color, retroreflectivity, or
durability performance requirements during the warranty period, and must replace the pavement
markings that fail to meet the performance requirements within 30 days of notification.
E. All replacement pavement markings must meet the materials and performance requirements of
this specification.
F. The end of the warranty period does not relieve the warrantor from the performance deficiencies
requiring corrective action identified during the warranty period.
G. The City may exclude pavement markings from the replacement provisions of the warranty
period, provided the City determines that the failure is a result of outside causes rather than
defective material. Examples of outside causes are extreme wear at intersections, damage by
snow or ice removal, and premature pavement failure.
H. Provide a contact person, address and telephone number for notification of needed pavement
markings replacement.
I. Each class of raised pavement marker shall be from the same manufacturer.
J. The pavement markers shall be placed in proper alignment with the guides. The deviation rate
in alignment shall not exceed one (1) inch per 200 feet of roadway. The maximum deviation
shall not exceed two (2) inches nor shall any deviation be abrupt.
K. Unless otherwise noted, adhesives shall be applied in accordance with the manufacturer’s
recommendations.
L. The roadway to be marked will remain open to traffic and the Contractor shall provide all
necessary warning and barricading to insure the safety of the workmen and traffic, and the
Contractor must insure proper maintenance of all warning and barricading devices at all times.
Construction, signing, channelizing devices, and markings shall conform to the current Texas
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (TMUTCD) at all times.
M. A minimum of one lane in each direction shall remain open to through traffic at all times.
N. The Contractor shall conduct the installation so as to minimize the duration of restricted traffic
movements.
O. The Contractor shall apply pavement markers and markings during off-peak traffic hours (9:00
am – 3:30 pm) or as directed by the City.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Prefabricated Pavement Markings, etc 321725-5
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. This Item shall be measured on a Lump Sum (LS) basis complete in place or by Each (EA)
and Linear Foot (LF) as indicated in the plans.
B. The plan quantity will be determined through calculations and will be used for determining
final quantity amounts for payment purposes. Contract adjustments may be made if the actual
measured quantity varies by more or less than 5% of the total estimated plan quantity amount.
Either the City or the Contractor may initiate this adjustment. If the adjustment is requested
by the Contractor, the Contractor must obtain field measurements and calculations justifying
the revised quantity. If the adjustment is made by the City, the revised quantity will constitute
the final quantity which payment will be made.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. All work performed and materials furnished in accordance with this Item will be paid for at
the unit bid price for “Prefabricated Pavement Marking” of the color, shape, and width This
price is full compensation for all material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence
necessary to complete the work. Surface Preparation will not be paid for directly, but
considered subsidiary to this Item.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Irrigation System 328000-1
SECTION 328000
IRRIGATION SYSTEM
PART l - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. Provide complete Irrigation System as shown on plans as described herein.
1.01 REFERENCES
A. Refer to City of Frisco’s Approved Material List.
1.02 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 329223 - Turfgrass Planting
B. Section 329300 - Tree, Shrub, and Groundcover Planting
l.03 QUALITY ASSURANCE
A. Substitutions:
1. Time: Submit substitution request in writing seven (7) days prior to bid opening.
2. Required Submittal Material:
a. Sample proposed substitute sprinkler.
b. Manufacturer's data of sprinkler, discharge rates (GPM), minimum allowable
operating pressure, maximum allowable spacing and distance of throw.
c. Detailed pressure loss computations if proposed differ from those specified.
d. If proposed substitute require a change in head and piping layout as designed, submit
detailed drawings showing design changes and proposed layout.
3. Approval: Approval of proposed substitute will not relieve responsibility for providing a
system that will operate according to intent of originally designed system.
B. Installer:
1. Irrigator licensed in State with 5 years minimum continuous experience installing
systems of this size and complexity must supervise installation.
2. Complete mainline installation with personnel that have successfully installed equipment
and materials as specified on at least three other projects equal in scope.
C. Testing: Perform required testing under observations of Owner. Give 48 hours notice that
such tests are to be conducted.
D. Assembly Procedures:
1. Do not alter design hydraulics by installing additional tees or elbows unless approved by
Owner.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Irrigation System 328000-2
2. Prior to start of construction; confirm the static water pressure in writing to Owner. If
static pressure differs from pressure shown on drawings, do not start work until notified
to do so, in writing, by the Owner.
1.04 REFERENCES: The following ASTM designations apply:
A536 Ductile Iron Fittings
D2241 Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Plastic Pipe (SDR-PR)
D2672 Bell-End Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Pipe
D2464 Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Plastic Pipe Fittings, Threaded, Schedule 80
D2466 Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Plastic Pipe Fittings, Socket Type, Schedule 40
D2467 Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Plastic Pipe Fittings, Socket Type, Schedule 80
D2564 Solvent Cements for Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Plastic Pipe and Fittings
D2287 Flexible Poly Vinyl Chloride (PVC) Plastic Pipe
F656 Poly Vinyl Chloride (PVC) Solvent Weld Primer
C213 AWWA Dual Compression Gasket Seal Fittings
D2855 Making Solvent - Cemented Joints with Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Pipe and
Fittings
F477 Ductile Iron Fitting Gaskets
1.05 SUBMITTALS
A. Product Data: Submit seven (7) copies of manufacturer's specifications and literature for all
specified materials.
B. Project Record Documents:
1. Comply with Contract Documents and requirements.
2. Locate by written dimension, routing of mainline piping, remote control valves and quick
coupling valves. Locate mainlines by single dimensions from permanent site features
provided they run parallel to these elements. Locate valves, intermediate electrical
connections, and quick couplers by two dimensions at approximately 70 degrees to each
other provided they are within 50 feet of a permanent site feature. Valves, electrical
connections and quick couplers beyond 50 feet must be located by triangulation using
three dimensions from building corners, walk intersections or similar junctures.
3. When dimensioning is complete, transpose work to mylar reproducible tracings. Owner
will provide tracings.
4. Submit completed tracings prior to final acceptance. Mark tracings "Record Prints
Showing Significant Changes". Date and sign plans.
5. Provide three complete operation manuals and equipment brochures neatly bound in a
hard back three-ring binder. Include any warranties and guarantees extended to the
Contractor by the manufacturer of all equipment. Include seven (7) executed copies of
“Guarantee for Landscape Irrigation System”.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Irrigation System 328000-3
GUARANTEE FOR LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION SYSTEM
We hereby guarantee that the landscape irrigation system we have furnished and installed is free from
defects in materials and workmanship, and the work has been completed in accordance with the plans and
specifications, ordinary wear and tear and unusual abuse or neglect expected. We agree to repair or
replace any defects in material or workmanship, which may develop, and to repair or replace any damage
resulting from the repairing or replacing of such defects at no additional cost to the Owner. We shall
make such repairs or replacements within a reasonable time, as determined by the Owner, after receipt of
written notice. In the event of our failure to make such repairs or replacements within a reasonable time
after receipt of written notice from the Owner, we authorize the Owner to proceed to have said repairs or
replacements made at our expense. We will pay the costs and charges therefore upon demand. This
guarantee shall remain in effect for a period of two (2) years from the date of Final Completion, as
determined by the Owner or the Owner’s Representative.
PROJECT:
LOCATION:
SIGNED:
COMPANY:
ADDRESS:
PHONE: ( ) -
DATE OF ACCEPTANCE: / /
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Irrigation System 328000-4
1.06 COORDINATION
A. Complete sleeve installation (not otherwise provided) in coordination with paving and other
concrete pours.
B. Coordinate to ensure that electrical power source is in place.
C. Coordinate system installation with work specified in other Sections and coordinate with
landscape installer to ensure plant material is uniformly watered in accordance with intent
shown on Plans.
1.07 WARRANTY AND MAINTENANCE
A. Extend to Owner any warranties and guarantees provided by manufacturer of equipment
used.
B. Warranty materials and workmanship for a minimum of two years after final acceptance.
C. Include repair of backfill settlement, packing the earth firmly around the heads, quick
couplers, and valve boxes.
D. Limit warranty to repair and replacement of defective materials or workmanship, including
repair of backfill settlement.
1.08 CONNECTION TO DOMESTIC WATER SUPPLY
A. Complete connection to water supply in accordance with governing codes and regulations.
B. Provide and pay for any required permits.
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 DEFINITIONS
A. Sprinkler Mains: Piping from water source to operating valves. Hydrant lines and quick
coupling valves (QCV) are considered sprinkler mains.
B. Lateral Piping: Piping from operating valves to sprinkler heads.
2.02 POLYVINYL CHLORIDE PIPE
A. Polyvinyl Chloride Pipe (hereinafter referred to as PVC pipe) shall be manufactured in
accordance with the product standards as follows:
1. Mainline Piping-PVC, Schedule 40 - solvent weld joints
2. Lateral Piping-PS-22-70, SDR-21, Class 200 - solvent-weld joints
3. Marking and Identification: Permanently marked with the following information:
manufacturer’s name, pipe size, type of pipe and material, SDR Number, Commercial
Standard Number, and NSF (National Sanitation Foundation) Seal.
4. Purple pipe required for all irrigation maintained by the City (medians, etc).
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Irrigation System 328000-5
2.03 PIPE FITTINGS:
A. PVC Sch. 40, as manufactured by the Lasco Company, or approved equal.
B. All PVC fittings shall be of the same material as the PVC pipe specified and be compatible
with the PVC pipe furnished.
C. Use only solvent recommended by the manufacturer of the PVC pipe and the manufacturer of
the PVC fittings.
2.04 COPPER PIPE AND FITTINGS:
A. Pipe: Type "M", hard, straight lengths, of standard size and dimensions.
B. Fittings: Cast brass or wrought copper sweat-solder type.
2.05 VALVE WIRING:
A. Single conductor copper type UF wire with 4/64 in. vinyl insulation U.L. approved for direct
underground burial in 30 volt AC or less service.
B. Valve wiring to controllers: Fourteen- (14) minimum (heavier if required based on length of
run).
C. Ground wiring from electric valves to controllers: Twelve- (12) gauge minimum (heavier if
required based on length of run)
2.06 FLEXIBLE PVC NIPPLES: Lawn heads: Nominal ½" x 12" long flexible PVC.
2.07 SWING JOINT ASSEMBLY: Nipples for fixed copper risers, nominal ½" x 4" long.
2.08 PVC NIPPLES:
A. High-Pop Shrub Head: ½” dia. Unitized O-Ring Assembly. Lasco #T5-32-212
B. Rotary Spray Head: ¾” dia. Unitized O-Ring Assembly. Lasco #T7-32-212
2.09 MATERIALS LIST: Refer to plans.
2.10 MAINLINE SHUT-OFF VALVES:
A. Four inch (4") and larger: Cast iron bodied, bronze fitted gate valves with gasket type pipe
connections and a 200 W.O.G. rating. Valve stems shall be fit with square operating nuts of
standard size. Manufacturer - Kennedy #597X or approved equal.
B. Three inch (3") and smaller: Plastic bodied, ball valves with threaded connections and an
ASTM standard F-1970 pressure rating. Manufacturer – Colonial TUBV or approved equal.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Irrigation System 328000-6
2.11 DRAIN VALVES:
A. Bronze bodied globe valves with rubber seats and threaded IPS pipe connections with a 125
W.O.G. rating. Valve stems shall be equipped with a round wheel handle.
B. Manufacturer: Nibco or approved equal.
2.12 QUICK COUPLER VALVES AND KEYS:
A. Valves: One-inch (1") bronze bodied valves with a rubber seat and locking vinyl cover.
B. Keys: Bronze construction with 1” MIP x ¾” FIP threads.
C. Manufacturer: RAINBIRD 44LRC or approved equal.
2.13 REINFORCEMENT STAKES: Galvanized steel pipe 1-inch diameter, Sch. 40. Secure to QCV
with stainless steel worm gear clamps.
2.14 ROTARY HEADS: At the discretion of the City of Frisco, multi-stream multi-trajectory rotary
nozzles, oscillating stream nozzles, bubbler systems, drip systems and rotor heads shall be
installed on all irrigation systems. The city reserves the right to require efficient irrigation
products where suitable.
A. High impact plastic gear driven rotary heads with a 3/4" IPS connection. Head shall have
interchangeable nozzles. Nozzle as specified on plans.
B. Manufacturer: Hunter PGP or approved equal.
2.15 SPRAY HEADS:
A. Pop-up spray heads, 4" or 12" pop-up assembly as shown with a poly carbonate body.
Nozzles shall be efficient technology nozzles such as multi-stream multi-trajectory rotary
nozzles, oscillating stream nozzles or other nozzles with a minimum precipitation rate of
1inch per hour and .7 minimum distribution uniformity Refer to plans for size.
B. Manufacturer: Hunter MP Rotator, Toro Precision Series, and RAINBIRD Rotary nozzles.
Series or approved equal.
2.16 ELECTRIC VALVES:
A. Normally closed glass filled nylon body valve with a Buna N reinforced diaphragm fitted
with a 24 volt, ¼ amp solenoid in a waterproof housing and pressure regulating module.
B. Manufacturer: RAINBIRD PEB-PRS-B. Refer to plan for size or approved equal.
2.17 VALVE BOXES:
A. Electric Valves:
1. 12 in. x 17 in. x 12 in. deep plastic valve box with locking lid and extensions as required.
2. Manufacturer: Ametek or approved equal.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Irrigation System 328000-7
B. Quick Coupling Valves:
1. 10 in dia. x 12 in. deep plastic valve box with extensions as required.
2. Manufacturer: Ametek or approved equal.
C. Backflow Preventer:
1. Jumbo plastic valve box with locking lid and extensions as required.
2. Manufacturer: Ametek or approved equal.
D. Meter Boxes for Reclaimed Water:
1. Regular Box: 17” x 30” x 18” Purple Box w/ Purple Locking AMR Lid
a. Top: D1730-18-PBody, Series D1730, 17” x 30”
b. Base: D1730-18-PKSPSM, Series D1730, 17” x 30”
c. Lid: D1730-KSPSM-LID, Series D1730, 17” x 29 ½”
2. Jumbo Box: 26” x 15” x 14” Purple Locking AMR Lid
a. Top: DFW65C-14 PBody, Series 65C, 26” x 15” x 14”
b. Base: DFW65C-14-PKSPSM, Series 65C, 26” x 15” x 14”
c. Lid: DFW65C-PKSPSM-Lid, Series 65C, 26 7/8” x 15 ¼”
3. Manufacturer: DFW Plastics or approved equal.
4. Purple Plastic Locking Lid:
a. Plastic lid shall be purple solid through and have a key locking mechanism.
b. Lid shall be spring loaded with brass locking mechanism with standard brass key.
Manufactured by Midland Mfg. Co. or Approved Equal.
c. Lid shall have “RECLAIM WATER” and manufacturer’s name and logo molded into
the lid. Font: Standard Fadal CNC Font with 1” characters x .150” deep.
d. Lid shall seat securely and evenly inside the box and shall not overlap the top edge of
the box. Tread Dimensions: .188” x . 938” x .150”.
e. Lid shall be molded with grid pattern in an effort to provide skid resistance.
f. Lid shall have an AMR Slide Mount molded into the lid. Mount to be molded on
underside of lid and off center for placements of an AMR transponder.
5. Purple Plastic Body
a. Body of box shall be purple and have crush resistant ribbing along outside of box.
b. Body shall have a flange around the lid opening to prevent settling and aide in
adjustment to grade.
c. Body shall have one pipe slot on each end of the body measuring 4”x9”.
2.18 WIRE SPLICES:
A. Valve Wiring: Waterproof type connectors with plastic housing and non-settling sealant.
B. DBY by 3M Company, King One Step wire connector, or approved equal.
2.19 RAIN/FREEZE SENSOR:
A. Wireless Rain/Freeze Sensor with transmitter and receiver.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Irrigation System 328000-8
B. Attach to top of 2" galvanized pipe 10 foot above grade and 2 feet below grade set in
concrete.
C. Paint pipe semi gloss black.
D. Manufacturer: RAINBIRD or approved equal.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 INSPECTION:
A. Examine areas and conditions under which irrigation sprinkler system is to be installed.
B. Verify that interfacing work specified elsewhere is complete.
C. Notify Owner in writing of conditions detrimental to proper and timely completion of Work.
D. Do not proceed until conditions are satisfactory.
3.02 INSTALLATION:
A. General:
1. Compliance: Complete installation in strict accordance with manufacturer's
recommendation, which shall be considered a part of these specifications.
2. Stake location of each sprinkler for approval of Owner before proceeding. Do not exceed
manufacturer's maximum spacing limits.
3. Piping Layout: Piping layout is diagrammatic. Route piping around trees and shrubs to
avoid damage to plantings. Do not dig within balls of newly planted trees and shrubs.
4. Discrepancies:
a. Point out any discrepancy between the plans and the field conditions that may affect
uniform coverage. Do not proceed until any design change made necessary by such
discrepancy is approved by Owner.
b. Should such changes create extra cost, approval for extra compensation shall be
obtained in writing by Owner before commencing work.
c. Should such changes create savings in cost, a written reduction in the contract price
shall be approved in writing by Owner before commencing work.
B. Excavations: Excavations are unclassified and include earth, loose rock, or combinations, in
wet or dry state. Backfill trenches with material removed except if rock is encountered haul
this material off site, and backfill to ensure a minimum of 3 inches of rock free soil
surrounding pipe.
C. Water Meter and Backflow Prevention: Refer to plans.
3.03 PIPE INSTALLATION:
A. General: Width of trenches to be approximately twice as large as the pipe diameter.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Irrigation System 328000-9
B. Mainline and Lateral Piping: Install with 12 inches of soil cover over laterals and 24"
coverage over 8" mainline and 18" coverage over 6" and small mainline.
C. Trenching: Provide firm, uniform bearing for entire length of pipe to prevent uneven
settlement. Wedging or blocking of pipe is not permitted. Remove foreign matter from
inside of pipes before assembly. Keep inside of piping clean during and after layout of pipes.
D. Backfill: Water jet and compact to 90% to prevent after-settling. Hand rake trenches and
adjoining areas to leave grade in condition equal to before installation.
3.04 PVC PIPE AND FITTINGS ASSEMBLY:
A. Solvent: Use solvent and procedures recommended by manufacturer to make solvent-welded
joints. Thoroughly clean pipe and fittings before applying solvent.
B. PVC to Metal Connections: Use Teflon tape.
C. Threaded PVC Connections: Use threaded PVC adapters into which pipe may be welded.
Use Teflon tape on threads.
3.05 ELECTRICAL VALVES:
A. Provide valves in accordance with materials list and size according to plans.
B. Install valves in a level position in accordance with manufacturer's specifications.
C. Provide plastic valve box, centered over valve, flush with finish grade. Provide valve box
extensions as required.
D. Install 0.5 cubic feet washed pea gravel in bottom of valve box.
3.06 SPRINKLERS:
A. General: Provide in accordance with materials list with nozzle in accordance with plans.
Change nozzle degree and trajectory if wind conditions affect coverage. Receive approval
from the Owner prior to any change. Install heads adjacent to walks and curbs 2 inches clear
of paving.
B. High-Pop Shrub Heads: Provide nozzles as indicated in 2.15 twelve (12”) inch pop-up body.
Attach to lateral piping with ½” . . Firmly tamp soil around base plate and leave head plumb.
Underside of flange shall be set flush to 1" above finish grade.
C. Lawn Heads: Attach sprinklers to lateral piping with flex PVC pipe. Firmly tamp soil around
base plate and leave head plumb. Underside of flange shall be set flush to 1/4" above finish
grade in hydro seeded areas and 1" above finish grade in solid sodded areas.
D. Rotary Heads: Install as detailed on the plans on swing joints. Follow manufacturer's
assembly and installation procedure. Set heads flush with finish grade or sod.
3.07 QUICK COUPLING VALVES (QCV): Provide in accordance with materials list and as detailed
on plans. Stake with a 1" galvanized pipe.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Irrigation System 328000-10
3.08 WIRING:
A. Sprinkler Controls to Valves:
1. Conduit is not required for U.F. wire unless otherwise noted on plans. Tuck wire under
piping.
2. Make wire connections with waterproof connectors according to manufacturer's
recommendations.
3. Provide a separate wire from controller to each electric valve. Provide a common neutral
wire from controller to valves served by a particular controller.
4. Provide a 24 inch long wire coils at valves.
5. An expansion coil shall be provided every 200 feet, which consists of 10 wraps around a
1" PVC pipe or some other method approved by the Owner.
6. All valve wires from the same controller shall be bundled together every 10 feet with
plastic electrical tape.
B. Wire Testing:
1. Before any backfills are placed over the communication cable, test the wires with a
megger for wire installation resistance. Minimum insulation resistance to ground shall be
100K OHMS to ground. Any conductor not meeting this requirement hall be replaced
and retested.
2. After backfill is completed, retest the wires with a megger. The minimum acceptable
insulation resistance to ground on this test shall be 100K OHMS to ground. Replace and
retest any conductor not meeting this requirement.
3.09 TESTING:
A. Notify Owner to review work 48 hours prior to testing pipe and fittings for leaks.
B. Test mains for a period of four hours under static pressure. If leaks (or pressure drops) occur,
correct defect and repeat test.
3.10 FINAL ADJUSTMENT:
A. Make final adjustments of sprinkler system prior to Owner’s final inspection.
B. Flush system by removing nozzles from heads on ends of lines and operating system.
C. Adjust sprinklers for proper operation and proper alignment for direction of throw.
D. Adjust each section for operating pressure and balance to other sections by use of flow
adjustment on top of each valve. Correct operating pressure at last head of each section - 50
psi for rotary heads and 20 to 25 psi for spray heads.
E. Adjust nuzzling for proper coverage. Prevailing wind conditions or slopes may indicate that
arc of angle or trajectory of spray should be other than as shown on plans. Change nozzles to
provide correct coverage.
3.11 CLEANUP: Keep premises clean and neat.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Irrigation System 328000-11
PART 4 –MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
A. Measurement and Payment shall be specified in the Contract Documents.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Fertilizer 329113-1
SECTION 329113
FERTILIZER
PART 1 – GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Fertilizer in accordance with Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition,
Item 202.4.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 202.4
PART 2 – PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 202.4.
PART 3 – EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 202.4.
PART 4 – MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
A. The work performed and materials furnished in accordance with this Item will not be paid
for directly but will be subsidiary to pertinent Items.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Topsoil 329119-1
SECTION 329119
TOPSOIL
PART 1 – GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Topsoil in accordance with Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition,
Item 202.2.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 202.2
PART 2 – PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 202.2.
PART 3 – EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 202.2.
PART 4 – MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 202.2 unless
otherwise specified in the Contract Documents.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 202.2 unless
otherwise specified in the Contract Documents.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Turfgrass Planting 329223-1
SECTION 329223
TURFGRASS PLANTING
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. This work includes all labor, materials, and equipment for soil preparation, fertilization,
planting, and other requirements regarding Turfgrass Planting areas shown on the plans.
1.02 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 024100 - General Site Preparation
B. Section 328000 - Irrigation System
C. Section 329113 – Fertilizer
D. Section 329119 - Topsoil
1.03 SUBMITTALS
A. Delivery Receipts and Invoices: All delivery receipts and copies of invoices for materials
used for this work shall be subject to checking by the Owner and shall be subsequently
delivered to the office of the Owner.
B. Samples and Producers’ Specifications: Various samples, certificates, and specifications of
seed, fertilizer, sand, compost, other soil amendments, and other materials shall be submitted
for approval as required by subsequent sections of this specification.
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 TURFGRASS
A. Bermudagrass Seed: Turfgrass seed shall be “Cynodon dactylon” (Common Bermudagrass).
The seed shall be harvested within one (1) year prior to planting, free of Johnsongrass, field
bind weed, dodder seed, and free of other weed seed to the limits allowable under the Federal
Seed Act and applicable seed laws. The seed shall not be a mixture. The seed shall be hulled,
extra fancy grade, treated with fungicide, and have a germination and purity that will
produce, after allowance for Federal Seed Act tolerances, a pure live seed content of not less
than 85% using the formula: purity % times (germination % times plus hard or sound seed
%). Seed shall be labeled in accordance with U.S. Department of Agriculture rules and
regulations.
1. Certificate Submittal: Prior to planting, provide the Owner or his representative with the
State Certificate stating analysis of purity and germination of seed.
B. Sod: Turfgrass sod shall be “Cynodon dactylon” (Common Bermudagrass). Sod shall consist
of stolons, leaf blades, rhizomes, and roots with a healthy, virile system of dense, thickly
matted roots throughout the soil of the sod for a thickness not less than three-quarters (3/4”)
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Turfgrass Planting 329223-2
inch. Sod shall be alive, healthy, vigorous, free of insects, disease, stones, and undesirable
foreign materials and grasses. The grass shall have been mowed prior to sod cutting so that
the height of the grass shall not exceed two (2”) inches. Sod shall have been produced on
growing beds of clay or clay-loam topsoil. Sod shall not be harvested or planted when its
moisture condition is so excessively wet or dry that its survival will be affected. All sod is to
be harvested, delivered, and planted within a thirty-six (36) hour period of time. Sod shall be
protected from exposure to wind, sun, and freezing. If sod is stacked, it shall be kept moist
and shall be stacked roots-to-roots and grass-to-grass.
1. Dimensions: All sod shall have been machine cut to uniform soil thickness of one (1”)
inch plus or minus one-quarter (1/4”) inch. All sod shall be of the same thickness.
Rectangular sections of sod may vary in length, but all shall be of equal width and of a
size that permits the sod to be lifted, handled, and rolled without breaking. Broken pads
and torn, uneven ends will be unacceptable.
2.02 FERTILIZER
A. General: Fertilizer shall be a commercial product, uniform in composition, free flowing, and
suitable for application with approved equipment, Fertilizer shall be delivered to the site in
fully labeled original containers. Fertilizer which has been exposed to high humidity and
moisture has become caked or otherwise damaged making it unsuitable for use will not be
acceptable.
B. Initial Planting Application: Fertilizer for the initial planting application shall be of an
organic base containing by weight the following (or other approved) percentages of nutrients:
15-15-15 (N-P-K), also containing 10-15% sulphate and traces of iron and zinc as required
and approved by the Owner. At least 50% of the nitrogen component must be of a slowrelease
formulation such as area-based and plastic resin-coated fertilizers.
1. Specification Submittal: Submit a sample label or specification of the fertilizer proposed
to be used for the Owner’s approval.
C. Post Planting Application: Fertilizer for the post planting application will be a chemical base
fertilizer containing by weight the following percentages of nutrients: 21-0-0 (N-P-K)
ammonium sulphate or the nitrogen equivalent of 33-0-0 ammonium nitrate.
1. Specification Submittal: Submit a sample label or specification of the fertilizer proposed
to be used for the Owner's approval.
2.03 HYDRAULIC-MULCH MATERIALS
A. Refer to the Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG 4th Edition, Item 202.6.4.4.
B. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG 4th Editions, Item 202.6.4.4 is hereby
modified by excluding the compliance with NCTCOG Item 202.4 Fertilizer.
C. Fertilizer for hydraulic mulching will comply with requirements of this specification.
2.04 SOIL AMENDMENTS (Not required.)
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Turfgrass Planting 329223-3
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 GENERAL
A. All turfing operations are to be executed across the slope, parallel to finished grade contours.
3.02 SOIL PREPARATION
A. Contractor shall kill all vegetation prior to soil preparation.
B. Tillage: Tillage shall be accomplished to loosen the soil, destroy existing vegetation, and
prepare an acceptable seed/sprig/sod bed. All areas shall be tilled with a heavy duty disc or a
chisel-type breaking plow, chisels set not more than ten (10”) inches apart. Initial tillage shall
be done in a crossing pattern for double coverage, followed by a disc harrow. Depth of tillage
shall be five (5”) inches. A heavy duty rototiller may be used for areas to be planted with sod.
C. Cleaning: Soil shall be further prepared by the removal of debris, building materials, rubbish,
weeds, and stones larger than three-quarters inch ( 3/4") diameter.
D. Fine Grading: After tillage and cleaning, all areas to be planted shall be leveled, fine graded,
and drug with a weighted spike harrow or float drag. The required result shall be the
elimination of ruts, depressions, humps, and objectionable soil clods. This shall be the final
soil preparation step to be completed before the commencement of fertilizing and planting.
E. Rock Removal: During the soil preparation process, a “Rock Pick” or other approved piece of
machinery shall be used to gather surface stones as small as three-quarter (3/4”) inch in
diameter. The Contractor shall be responsible for the disposal of collected materials as waste
per “Clean Up” Paragraph 3.10.
3.03 FERTILIZING
A. Initial Planting Application: The specified fertilizer shall applied at the rate of (18) pounds
per one thousand (1,000) square feet (800 pounds per acre).
1. Timing: The initial planting application of fertilizer for seeded/sprigged areas shall be
applied after the soil preparation, but not more than two (2) days prior to turfgrass
planting. (Fertilizer shall be applied over sodded areas after planting, but not more than
two (2) days later.)
B. Post Planting Application: Thirty (30) days after planting, turfgrass areas shall receive an
application of 21-0-0 or 33-0-0 fertilizer at the rate of nine (9) pounds per one thousand
(1,000) square feet (400 pounds per acre).
1. Timing: The Owner or his representative will determine if it is too late in the growing
season for the post planting application. In the event that it is, the application shall be
made in the spring of the next year, or the cost of the application may become a credit
due to the Owner.
2. Post Planting Maintenance: See Paragraph 3.07. Areas without a uniform stand (complete
coverage) that must be maintained later than thirty (30) days after the initial planting shall
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Turfgrass Planting 329223-4
receive subsequent applications of fertilizer, as described above, every thirty (30) days
until a uniform stand is achieved.
3.04 PLANTING:
A. Seeding: Following soil preparation and initial fertilizing, apply Bermudagrass seed at the
rate of two (2) / three (3) pounds per one thousand (1,000) square feet (90/130 pounds per
acre) or ryegrass seed at the rate of eight (8) pounds per one thousand (1,000) square feet
(350 pounds per acre). Seed shall be uniformly placed with a Brillion seeder-cultipacker, or
the seed shall be broadcast uniformly, followed by rolling with a weighted lawn roller.
1. Timing: Bermudagrass shall not be seeded in planting periods other than the following
unless special permission is granted by the Owner: April 15 to June 15, and August 15 to
September 15.
2. Hydraulic Mulch (where required): Refer to Public Works Construction Standards,
NCTCOG 4th Edition, Item 202.6.4.4.
B. Solid Sodding: Prior to laying the sod, the planting bed shall be raked smooth to true grade
and moistened to a depth of four (4”) inches, but not to the extent causing puddling. The sod
shall be laid smoothly, tightly butted edge to edge, and with staggered joints. The sod shall be
pressed firmly into contact with the sod bed by rolling or by hand tamping with an approved
tamper so as to eliminate all air pockets, provide a true and even surface, and insure knitting
without displacement of the sod or deformation of the surfaces of sodded areas. Following
compaction, fine screened soil of good quality shall be used to fill all cracks between sods.
Excess soil shall be worked into the grass with suitable equipment and shall be well watered.
The quantity of fill soil shall be such that it will cause no smothering of the grass.
3.05 PROTECTION: No heavy equipment shall be moved over the planted lawn area unless the soil is
again prepared, graded, leveled, and replanted. It will be the responsibility of this Contractor to
protect all paving surfaces, curbs, utilities, plant materials, and any other existing improvements
from damage. Any damages shall be repaired or replaced at no cost to the Owner. This Contractor
will also locate and stake all irrigation heads, valve risers, etc., prior to beginning any soil
preparation work.
3.06 ESTABLISHMENT AND ACCEPTANCE: Regardless of unseasonable climatic conditions or
other adverse conditions affecting planting operations and the growth of the turfgrass, it shall be
the sole responsibility of the Contractor to establish a uniform stand of turfgrass as herein
specified. When adverse conditions such as drought, cold weather, high winds, excessive
precipitation, or other factors prevail to such an extent that satisfactory results are unlikely, the
Owner may, at his own discretion, stop any phase of the work until conditions change to favor the
establishment of turfgrass.
3.07 POST-PLANTING MAINTENANCE: Contractor shall begin maintenance immediately after
each portion of grass area is planted. All planted areas will be protected and maintained by
watering, weed control, and replanting as necessary for at least thirty (30) days after initial
planting and for as much longer as necessary to establish a UNIFORM STAND WITH
COMPLETE COVERAGE OF THE SPECIFIED GRASS. It is anticipated that a minimum of
one (1) mowing will occur before the grass areas are acceptable to the Owner. Only those areas
which are not completely covered with the specified grass at the end of thirty (30) days will
continue to be replanted and maintained by the Contractor until complete coverage and
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Turfgrass Planting 329223-5
acceptable results are achieved. The automatic irrigation system will be available for the
Contractor’s use. Any other water equipment deemed necessary by the Contractor will be
provided by the Contractor at his expense.
A. Watering: Use the automatic irrigation system to apply at least one-half (1/2”) inch of water
over the entire planted area every three (3) days. Contractor shall water thoroughly and
infrequently once grass is established to encourage deep root growth.
B. Mowing: Once grass is established the planted area shall be mowed at least once a week
during the growing season. Grass shall be mowed to a height of one (1”) inch and shall not
exceed four inches (4”) in height. Mowing during dormant season will be done as necessary.
C. Weed Control: No sooner than 45 days after grass has germinated any weed growth shall be
arrested by applying MSMA broadcasted over the entire planted area. Additional applications
of MSMA will be required to eliminate weed growth that continues to grow after the initial
application. MSMA will only be used during the growing season. All weed growth during the
dormant season will be controlled with spot applications of “Round-Up.” “Round- Up” will
not be used until the grass is totally dormant.
3.08 GRADING: All grading and placing of topsoil on any given area will be done prior to the
beginning of this work. It will be the Contractor’s responsibility to maintain the existing grades
and leave them in a true and even condition after planting turfgrass. Finish condition of turfgrass
will be such that sod sits flush with paving (topsoil 1” below paving) and such that drainage
grades and swales function and to not trap drainage on the paving.
3.09 EROSION CONTROL: Throughout the project and the maintenance period for turfgrass, it is the
Contractor’s responsibility to maintain the topsoil in place at specified grades. Topsoil and
turfgrass losses due to erosion will be replaced by the Contractor until establishment and
acceptance is achieved.
3.10 CLEAN UP: This Contractor shall remove any excess material or debris brought onto the site or
unearthed as a result of his turfgrass operations.
3.11 GUARANTEE: This Contractor shall guarantee all materials used for this work to be the type,
quality, and quantity specified.
PART 4 –MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
A. Measurement and Payment shall be specified in the Contract Documents.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Tree, Shrub, and Groundcover Planting 329300-1
SECTION 329300
TREE, SHRUB, AND GROUNDCOVER PLANTING
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. This work includes all final fine grading and minor leveling of planting areas, soil
preparation, and planting. Furnish all labor, materials, equipment and services required as
herein specified and indicated on the drawings. Refer to planting details on plans. NOTE:
Plant beds to be left 1” below adjacent paving and slabs after settling.
1.02 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 024100 - General Site Preparation
B. Section 328000 - Irrigation System
C. Section 329113 - Fertilizer
PART 2 – PRODUCTS
2.01 TOPSOIL
A. All planting bed topsoil shall be soil/compost mix as produced by Living Earth Technology
Co. , Dallas, Texas, or approved equal.
B. Submittal: Submit 1 gallon samples to Owner for Approval.
C. Existing topsoil may be used or amended if it meets the requirements for imported soil and is
approved by the landscape architect. Provide a minimum of one soil sample with
accompanying soil test report for each topsoil type found on the site.
2.02 COMMERCIAL FERTILIZER
A. Shall be organic base fertilizer containing the following minimum percentages of available
plant nourishment, by weight 5-10-5 (N-P-K), mixed nitrogen, not less than fifty (50%)
percent from an organic source and trace elements, Wacco brand or approved equal. Any
fertilizer which becomes caked or otherwise damaged, making it unsuitable for use, will not
be accepted.
B. Commercial fertilizer shall be a complete organic fertilizer, part of the element of which is
derived from organic sources. It shall be the type percentages and applied at the rate specified
in the soil analysis. Fertilizer shall be delivered mixed as specified in standard size bags,
showing weight, analysis, and name of manufacturer, and shall be stored in a weatherproof
storage place, and in such a manner that it will be kept dry and its effectiveness will not be
impaired.
C. Submittal: Submit labels to Owner for Approval.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Tree, Shrub, and Groundcover Planting 329300-2
2.03 SOIL AMENDMENTS (None required.)
2.04 MULCH
A. Shall be shredded cypress bark mulch.
B. Submittal: Submit a one (1) quart sample of proposed mulch for Owner approval.
2.05 ROOT ACTIVATOR (Not required.)
2.06 WATER: Water shall be available at the site via irrigation system. Water required in connection
with planting will be furnished and paid for by the Owner provided it is not used in a wasteful
manner. Any hose or other watering equipment shall be provided by the Landscape Contractor to
water planting areas until the job is accepted by the Owner.
2.07 PLANT MATERIALS
A. Plant Name and Location: The names and locations of all plants are noted on the drawings.
The nomenclature of all plant materials is per Standardized Plant Names, 1942 edition and
Manual of Cultivated Plants by L. H. Bailey. Plant materials not conforming to these two
references will be rejected by the Owner.
B. Quality and Size: All plant materials shall be first class representatives of their normal
species or variety unless otherwise specified. They shall have a habit of growth that is normal
for the species and shall be healthy, shapely, well-rooted, and vigorous. All plant materials
shall be free from insect pests, plant diseases, and injuries. The containers and balls of all
plants delivered to the site shall be free from any weeds or grasses which could be considered
noxious or objectionable; i.e., nutgrass or Johnsongrass. ALL PLANT MATERIALS SHALL
BE EQUAL TO OR EXCEED THE MEASUREMENTS SPECIFIED ON THE PLANTING
PLAN WHICH ARE THE MINIMUM ACCEPTABLE SIZES. They shall be measured after
pruning with the branches in normal position. The requirements for measurement, branching,
grading, quality, balling and burlapping of plants specified generally follow the code of the
standards currently recommended by the American Nursery and Landscape Association, in
the American Standards for Nursery Stock.
a. Trees shall not be headed back in the nursery or on site. Trees with multiple leaders,
unless specified, will be rejected . Trees with damaged or crooked leader, bark
abrasions, sunscald, disfiguring knots, insect damage, or cuts of limbs over 20 mm
(3/4 in.) in diameter that are not completely closed will be rejected. The root flare
shall be visible. Trees with girdling roots will be rejected.
C. Packaging:
1. Container Grown Plants: Plants designated as “container grown” on the plans shall be full
or heavy grade and shall have been growing in the specified size container for one full
season prior to delivery to the site.
2. Balled and Burlapped Plants (B&B): Plants designated “B&B” on the plans shall be
balled and burlapped. They shall be dug with firm, natural balls of earth of sufficient
diameter and depth to encompass the fibrous and feeding root system necessary for full
recovery of the plant. Balls shall be firmly wrapped with burlap or similar materials and
bound with twine, cord, or wire mesh. Where necessary, to prevent breaking or cracking
of the ball during the process of planting, the ball may be secured to a platform.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Tree, Shrub, and Groundcover Planting 329300-3
3. Alternate to B&B: Plants grown in containers may be accepted as B&B provided that the
plant has been growing in the container for one full growing season prior to delivery.
Alternate must be approved by Owner.
D. Substitutions: Substitutions will be permitted only upon submission of proof that any plant is
not obtainable and authorization by the Owner or his representative by a Change Order
providing for the use of the nearest equivalent obtainable size or variety of plant having the
same essential characteristics with an equitable adjustment of contract price.
E. Biostimulants: shall contain soil conditioners, VAM, and endomycorrhizal and
etomycorrhizal fungi spores and soil bacteria approprieate for existing soil conditions. Submit
manufacturer literature for approval.
2.08 SOIL STERILANT: (Not required.)
2.09 WEED CONTROLLER: Shall be “Round-Up” as manufactured by Monsanto, Inc or approved
equal.
PART 3 – EXECUTION
3.01 LAYOUT
Location and spacing for plants and outline of areas to be planted shall be as denoted by stem
location or by notations on the plan. All tree and shrub planting locations shall be staked by the
Landscape Contractor and shall be approved by the Owner prior to digging the planting pits.
3.02 SCARIFICATION
A. All bed areas to receive planting shall be scarified to a depth of twelve (12”) inches and all
debris, stone, rubbish, and weeds shall be removed from the site.
B. Weed Control: Prior to scarification the Contractor shall apply “Round-Up” herbicide to all
bed areas. Follow manufacturer’s directions as to timing requirements for effective weed
control.
3.03 BED PREPARATION
A. Planting areas shall be dug and soil fully prepared, graded, and made ready to receive the
plants before delivery of plant materials. After planting, all beds shall be one (1”) inch above
finished grade to allow for settling.
B. Groundcover and Vine Planting Areas:
1. Commercial Soil Mix: All planting beds shall be excavated to twelve (12”) inches below
finished grade by Landscape/General Contractor, and all debris, stone, rubbish, weeds,
and topsoil shall be removed from the site. The subgrade shall then be tilled to a depth of
six (6”) inches and the planting bed shall be backfilled with soil compost mix as available
from Living Earth Technology Co., Inc., Dallas, Texas, or approved equal. Upon
replacement of topsoil with mix and after watering in, the bed should be at the specified
level.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Tree, Shrub, and Groundcover Planting 329300-4
C. Tree and Shrub Planting Pits:
1. Planting Pits: After scarifying, the planting pits shall be excavated. All shrub pits shall be
a minimum of six (6”) inches larger in diameter and three (3”) inches deeper than the
shrub ball or root spread. All tree pits shall be a minimum of twelve (12”) inches larger in
diameter and 2-3 inches less deep than the rootball. All tree pits shall be tested for
percolation. If water does not drain withing 24 hours, drainage or a more suitable species
or location shall be provided. sp.
2. Soil Mix: Soil mix for backfilling the tree and shrub planting pits shall be soil/compost
mix as specified for Groundcover and Vine Planting Areas.
D. Raised Planters:
1. Backfilling: Planters shall be backfilled with specified commercial soil mix.
3.04 DELIVERY OF PLANT MATERIALS
Plants shall be packed and protected during delivery and after arrival at the site, against climatic,
seasonal, wind damage, or other injuries, and at no time shall be allowed to dry out.
3.05 PROTECTION OF PLANT MATERIALS
All plants shall be handled so that roots are adequately protected at all times from drying out and
from other injury. The balls of balled plants which cannot be planted immediately on delivery
shall be “heeled in” for protection with soil mulch, straw, or other acceptable material.
3.06 SETTING THE PLANTS
All plants shall be planted in pits, centered, and set to touch such depth that the finished grade
level at the plant after settlement will be the same as that at which the plant was grown. Each
plant shall be planted upright and faced to give the best appearance or relationship to adjacent
plants or structures. No burlap shall be pulled out from under balls or balls broken when taken
from containers. All broken or frayed roots shall be cut off cleanly. Prepared soil shall be placed
and compacted carefully to avoid injury to roots and to fill all voids. When the hole is nearly
filled, add water and root activator, mixed per manufacturer’s recommendations, and allow it to
soak away. Fill the hole to finished grade and form a shallow saucer around each tree or shrub by
placing a ridge of topsoil around the edge of each pit after planting.
3.07 MULCHING
All plants will be mulched after planting with a three inch (3”) deep layer of mulch material
entirely covering the area around each plant except as noted. The root flare of trees shall not be
covered with much. In the groundcover and massed shrub areas, the entire area between the
plants is to be so treated, regardless of plant spacing.
3.08 GRADING
The surface of all planting areas shall slope as shown on the plans. Unless otherwise shown, slope
one-quarter (1/4”) inch per foot (two (2%) percent gradient) away from foundations and walk.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Tree, Shrub, and Groundcover Planting 329300-5
3.09 CLEANUP
All excess soil, soil preparation materials, fertilizer, or plant containers shall be removed form the
site upon completion of the work.
3.10 PRUNING AND SPRAYING
Each tree will be pruned to preserve the natural shape and character of the plant. All pruning will
be done after delivery to the site, under supervision of the Owner. All soft wood or sucker growth
and all broken or badly bruised branches shall be removed. All pruning diameter will be painted
with tree surgery paint, applied on all cambium and other living tissues immediately after cuts are
made. Immediately after planting and staking, all plant material except coniferous evergreens
must be sprayed with an antidesiccant, if required, using an approved power sprayer for applying
an adequate film over trunks, branches, and foliage. Antidesiccants and surgery paint shall be
delivered in manufacturer’s sealed containers and used in accordance with their
recommendations.
3.11 MAINTENANCE
The Landscape Contractor is responsible for watering, cultivating, and other necessary
maintenance (including regular mowing) until the completion and acceptance of the project.
3.12 INSPECTION FOR ACCEPTANCE
A. Inspections: Inspection of work and planting to determine completion of the work, exclusive
of possible warranty plant replacement, will be made by the Owner upon notice by the
Landscape Contractor. The Owner needs not less than two (2) days notice prior to the
anticipated date, enabling him to schedule the inspection.
B. Acceptance: Acceptance of all work and planting, exclusive of possible plant replacements
subject to guarantee, will be granted to the Landscape Contractor, provided there are no
deficiencies at inspection time. After inspection, the Landscape Contractor will be notified by
a letter of acceptance of work by the Owner. All plants must be healthy (not dry or wilted) to
be accepted.
3.13 GUARANTEE
A. Terms: All shrubs and groundcover shall be guaranteed for a minimum of one (1) year and all
trees for one (1) year or in accordance with the Contract Documents, whichever is greater.
Guarantee begins upon Final Acceptance of project by City.
B. Plant Replacement: At the end of each guarantee period, inspection will be made by the
Owner and the Landscape Contractor. Any plant material required under this contract that is
dead or not in satisfactory growth condition shall be removed and replaced with the same size
and kind of plant specified, at no cost to the Owner.
3.14 MAINTENANCE GUIDE
The Landscape Contractor, upon delivery of the plant materials, shall deliver to the Owner a
brief, written maintenance guide. This guide should describe recommended planting maintenance
procedures, methods, products, quantities, timing, etc.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Tree, Shrub, and Groundcover Planting 329300-6
PART 4 –MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
A. Measurement and Payment shall be specified in the Contract Documents.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco Removal, Protection, and Replacement of Trees May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Shrubbery, Plants, Sod, and Other Vegetation 329600-1
SECTION 329600
REMOVAL, PROTECTION AND REPLACEMENT OF TREES, SHRUBBERY,
PLANTS, SOD, AND OTHER VEGETATION
PART 1 – GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary for removal, protection
and replacement of trees, shrubbery, plants, sod and other vegetation in accordance with
Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 202.1.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 202.1
B. ANSI A300, Pruning Standards
C. City of Frisco Tree Preservation Ordinance
D. City of Frisco Tree Protection Standard Details
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 024100 - General Site Preparation
PART 2 – PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 202.1.
PART 3 – EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 202.1.
B. Unless otherwise specified on the plans, trees and shrubs with calipers greater than three (3”)
inches shall not be cleared (removed) provided that both of the following conditions are met:
1. The vegetation exists in an area that is not proposed for pavement, a structure, or the
playing bounds of an athletic field.
2. The vegetation is in an area where the cut or fill does not exceed six inches (6”).
C. The Owner will assist the Contractor in identifying trees that are to be saved from clearing if
not specified in the plans. The Contractor will protect such trees from construction damage
such as trunk impacts and scrapes, limb breakage, compaction of soil within the drip line, and
other injurious construction activities. If necessary, the Owner may direct the Contractor, at
the Contractor’s expense, to erect protective stockades along the drip lines of trees that the
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco Removal, Protection, and Replacement of Trees May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Shrubbery, Plants, Sod, and Other Vegetation 329600-2
Owner considers vulnerable to damage. Such stockades shall be of eight foot (8’) long x six
inch (6”) diameter posts vertically buried three feet (3’) deep at six foot (6’) intervals along
the drip line.
D. Where grading or clearing and grubbing operations are to occur between trees that are to be
preserved and protected, the Contractor will prune the lower branches of these trees as
necessary to prevent their breakage and to permit access by construction machinery. Branches
will be cut off to the trunk or major limb pursuant to ANSI A300. The Owner may direct that
the Contractor remove additional branches in such a manner that the tree presents a balanced
appearance. Scars will be treated with a heavy coat of an approved tree sealant.
PART 4 – MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 202.1 unless
otherwise specified in the Contract Documents.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 202.1 unless
otherwise specified in the Contract Documents.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Wastewater and Manhole Testing 330131-1
SECTION 330131
WASTEWATER AND MANHOLE TESTING
PART 1 – GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to test wastewater mains
and manholes in accordance with Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th
Edition, Items 502.1.5 and 507.5.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 502.1.5 and 507.5.
1.03 SUBMITTALS
A. Copies of all test reports.
PART 2 – PRODUCTS
Not Used
PART 3 – EXECUTION
3.01 WASTEWATER MAIN TESTING
The Contractor shall complete each of the following tests on all wastewater mains.
A. Low pressure air testing in accordance with Public Works Construction Standards,
NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 507.5.1.3.
B. Deflection testing in accordance with Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th
Edition, Item 507.5.1.4.
3.02 WASTEWATER MANHOLE TESTING
The Contractor shall complete one of the following tests on all wastewater manholes.
A. Exfiltration testing in accordance with Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th
Edition, Item 502.1.5.1.
B. Vacuum testing in accordance with Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th
Edition, Item 502.1.5.2.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Wastewater and Manhole Testing 330131-1
PART 4 – MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.1.6.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Wastewater and manhole testing shall be subsidiary to the wastewater main and manhole bid
items. No separate pay item for wastewater and manhole testing.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Television Inspection for Wastewater Mains 330132-1
SECTION 330132
TELEVISION INSPECTION FOR WASTEWATER MAINS
PART 1 – GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to perform television
inspection of wastewater mains in accordance with Public Works Construction Standards,
NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 507.5.2.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 507.5.2
1.03 SUBMITTALS
A. CD or DVD with wastewater main television inspection videos and data log summary
sheets.
PART 2 – PRODUCTS
Not Used
PART 3 – EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 507.5.2.
PART 4 – MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 507.6.1.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Television inspection of wastewater mains shall be subsidiary to the wastewater main bid
items. No separate pay item for television inspection of wastewater mains.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Trenching, Backfilling and Compaction 330510-1
SECTION 330510
TRENCHING, BACKFILLING AND COMPACTION
PART 1 – GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to perform Trenching,
Backfilling and Compaction operations for utility construction in accordance with Public
Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 107.19.3, 203 and 504.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 107.19.3, 203 and 504
1.03 SUBMITTALS
A. Trench safety plan in accordance with Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th
Edition, Item 107.19.3.3.
PART 2 – PRODUCTS
Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 504.2.
PART 3 – EXECUTION
3.01 CONSTRUCTION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 107.19.3, 203
and 504.
B. Trenches shall be excavated by a trenching machine, backhoe or dragline, except in
locations where hand trenching is required. The banks of trenches shall be vertical, to a
point one foot (1’) above the top of pipe.
C. The excavation shall not advance more than three hundred feet (300’) ahead of the
completed and backfilled line. Pipe shall be laid in all trenches that have been opened
before the end of each day’s work, unless the Contractor secures written permission to do
otherwise from the Inspector.
D. The final backfill shall be moisture treated to a minimum of 3 percentage points above
optimum moisture content at a minimum of 95 percent standard Proctor (ASTM D 698).
PART 4 – MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 504.7 for
measurement of backfill.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Trenching, Backfilling and Compaction 330510-2
B. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 107.19.3.6 for
measurement of trench safety.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 504.7 for
payment of backfill.
B. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 107.19.3.6 for
payment of trench safety.
C. All excavation for utility installation shall be considered subsidiary to the utility bid item.
No separate pay item for excavation, backfill and/or trenching, unless otherwise noted.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Trenchless Utility Installation 330523-1
SECTION 330523
TRENCHLESS UTILITY INSTALLATION
PART 1 – GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
utility lines using trenchless installation methods in accordance with Public Works
Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 503.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 503
B. City of Frisco’s Standard Details included in the plans.
1.03 QUALITY ASSURANCE
A. DESIGN CRITERIA
The pipe casing (or carrier pipe on uncased bores) shall be designed by a Licensed
Professional Engineer for the following loading conditions and applicable combinations
thereof:
1. Cooper's E-80 Railway loading or AASHTO HS20 loading as applicable
2. Earth loading with the height of fill above the casing as shown on the plans
3. Loads applied during jacking, including axial load from jacking
4. All other applicable loading conditions, including loads applied during transportation and
handling.
B. INSTALLER'S QUALIFICATIONS
Installation shall be by a competent, experienced contractor or sub-contractor. The
installation contractor shall have a satisfactory experience record of at least three (3) years
engaged in similar work of equal scope.
All welding shall be performed by a certified welder in the state of Texas.
C. PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
Lateral or vertical variation in the final position of the pipe casing (or carrier pipe on
uncased bores) from the line and grade established by the ENGINEER shall be permitted
only to the extent of 1" in 10' feet, provided that such variation shall be regular and only in
the direction that will not detrimentally affect the function of the carrier pipe.
1.04 SUBMITTALS
Submittals shall include:
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Trenchless Utility Installation 330523-2
A. Shop drawings of the casing pipe (or carrier pipe for uncased bores) from the manufacturer.
Shop drawings shall include calculations for the design of the casing pipe (or carrier pipe for
uncased bores) by a Licensed Professional Engineer.
B. Provide Certificate of Adequacy of Design of casing and/or carrier pipe.
C. Provide record data of casing insulators including sketches of insulators with material
components and dimensions and proposed locations of insulators.
D. Provide Pressure Grout material and method.
PART 2 – PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 503.2.
B. High Density Polyethylene casing spacers are required unless otherwise specified. Refer to
the City of Frisco Approved Materials List.
C. Steel casing pipe shall be new (or used if approved by the OWNER) and suitable for the
purpose intended and shall have a minimum yield strength of 35,000 psi. Casing shall meet
ASTM A-36, ASTM A-570, ASTM A-135, ASTM A-139, or approved equal.
D. Casing pipe shall be coated with coal tar epoxy (15 mils min.) in accordance with AWWA C-
210. Pipe joints shall be welded in accordance with AWWA C-206. After pipe is welded,
coating shall be repaired.
PART 3 – EXECUTION
3.01 GENERAL
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 503.3.
B. All casing pipe joints shall be watertight with no water entering the casing from any sources
prior to carrier pipe installation.
C. The carrier pipe shall be installed within the casing between the limits indicated on the Plans
to the specified lines and grades, and utilizing methods which include due regard for safety
of workers, adjacent structures and improvements, utilities, and the public.
D. Furnish all necessary equipment, power, water, and utilities for carrier pipe installation,
insulator runner lubricant, grouting, and other associated Work required for the Contractor's
methods of construction.
E. Conduct all operations such that trucks and other vehicles do not interfere with traffic or
create a dust or noise nuisance in the streets and to adjacent properties. Promptly clean up,
remove, and dispose of spoils and slurry spillage and any slurry discharges.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Trenchless Utility Installation 330523-3
F. All Work shall be done so as not to disturb roadways, adjacent structures, landscaped areas,
or existing utilities. Any damage shall be immediately repaired to original or better condition
and to the satisfaction of Engineer.
3.02 INSTALLATION OF CARRIER PIPE
A. Pipe Installation: Carrier pipe shall meet the requirements of the applicable Specification
section. Remove all loose soil from casing. Grind smooth all rough welds at casing joints.
Provide casing spacers, or insulators, or other approved devices, as required, to prevent
flotation, movement, or damage to the pipe during installation and annular space grout
placement. Every individual pipe section should be supported by spacers as shown in the
City’s Standard Details. Carrier pipe shall be installed without sliding or dragging it on the
ground or in the casing in a manner that could damage the pipe. Coat the casing spacer
runners with a non-corrosive/environmentally safe lubricant to minimize friction when
installing the carrier pipe.
B. Testing of Carrier Pipe: Testing of the carrier pipe joints shall be completed prior to the
filling of the annular space between the casing and carrier pipe with grout. Pressure testing
shall be performed in accordance with the specification for the selected pipe material. Any
leakage found during this inspection shall be corrected.
C. Backfill Annular Space with Grout: After the installation of the carrier pipe, the annular
space (all voids) between the casing and the carrier shall be filled with grout so all remaining
surfaces of the exterior carrier pipe wall and casing interior are in contact with the grout.
Furnish the necessary grout, equipment, hoses, valves, and fittings for the backfilling
operation. Grout shall be pumped through a pipe or hose. Use grout pipes, or other
appropriate materials to avoid damage to carrier pipe during grouting. The grout shall be
proportioned to flow and to completely fill all voids between the carrier pipe and the casing.
The Contractor shall provide end seals, as approved by the Engineer at each end of the casing
to contain the grout backfill. The end seals shall be designed to withstand the anticipated
grouting pressure and be watertight to prevent groundwater from entering the casing. Block
the carrier pipe during grouting to prevent flotation during grout installation. The Contractor
shall also protect and preserve the interior surfaces of the casing from damage. It is the
responsibility of the Contractor to submit to the Engineer sufficient information indicating all
proposed equipment, materials, and the method for filling this void.
3.03 SAFETY
A. The Contractor is responsible for safety on the job site. Perform all Work in accordance with
the current applicable regulations of the Federal, State, and local agencies. In the event of
conflict, comply with the more restrictive applicable requirement.
B. No gasoline powered equipment shall be permitted in jacking shafts and receiving shafts/pits.
Diesel, electrical, hydraulic, and air powered equipment is acceptable, subject to applicable
local, state, and federal regulations.
C. Methods of construction shall be such as to ensure the safety of the Work, Contractor's and
other employees on site, and the public.
D. Furnish and operate a temporary ventilation system in accordance with applicable safety
requirements when personnel are underground. Perform all required air and gas monitoring.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Trenchless Utility Installation 330523-4
Ventilation system shall provide a sufficient supply of fresh air and maintain an atmosphere
free of toxic or flammable gasses in all underground work areas.
E. Perform all Work in accordance with all current applicable regulations and safety
requirements of the Federal, State, and local agencies. Comply with all applicable provisions
of 29 CFR Part 1926, Subpart S, Underground Construction and Subpart P, Excavations, by
OSHA. In the event of conflict, comply with the more stringent requirements.
F. The Contractor shall develop an emergency response plan for rescuing personnel trapped
underground in a shaft excavation or pipe. Keep on-site all equipment required for emergency
response in accordance with the agency having jurisdiction.
PART 4 – MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 503.4.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 503.4.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Ductile Iron Pipe and Fittings 331113-1
SECTION 331113
DUCTILE IRON PIPE AND FITTINGS
PART 1 – GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Ductile Iron Pipe and Fittings in accordance with Public Works Construction Standards,
NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 501.7. and Item 506.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. ANSI/AWWA C104/A21.4 - American National Standard for Cement - Mortar Lining for
Ductile-Iron Pipe and Fittings for Water, Latest Revision.
B. ANSI/AWWA C105/A21.5 - American National Standard for Polyethylene Encasement,
Latest Revision.
C. ANSI/AWWA C110/A21.10, AWWA Standard for Ductile-Iron and Gray-Iron Fittings,
Latest Revision.
D. ANSI/AWWA C111/A21.11, AWWA Standard for Rubber-Gasket Joints for Ductile-Iron
Pressure Pipe and Fittings, Latest Revision.
E. ANSI/AWWA C115/A21.15, AWWA Standard for Flanged Ductile-Iron Pipe with Ductile-
Iron or Gray-Iron Threaded Flanges, Latest Revision.
F. ANSI/AWWA C150/A21.50,8 American National Standard for the Thickness Design of
Ductile-Iron Pipe, Latest Revision.
G. ANSI/AWWA C151/A21.51, AWWA Standard for Ductile Iron Pipe, Centrifugally Cast,
Latest Revision.
H. ANSI/AWWA C153/A21.53, AWWA Standard for Ductile-Iron Compact Fittings for Water
Service, Latest Revision.
I. AWWA C600, Installation of Ductile-Iron Water Mains and Their Appurtenances, Latest
Revision.
J. AWWA C651, AWWA Standard for Disinfecting Water Mains, Latest Revision.
K. AWWA Manual of Practice M41 Ductile-Iron Pipe and Fittings, Latest Revision.
L. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 501.7 and 506.
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 330510 – Trenching, Backfilling and Compaction
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Ductile Iron Pipe and Fittings 331113-2
B. Section 331240 – Polyethylene Encasement
C. Section 331245 – Tapping Sleeves for PVC and Ductile Iron Pipe
D. Section 331260 – Mechanical Restraint for Ductile Iron Pipe
1.04 SUBMITTALS:
Submittals shall be in accordance with the General Conditions and shall include the following:
A. Submittals required prior to fabrication
1. Pipe design calculations sealed by a Licensed Engineer in the State of Texas.
2. Pipe layout drawings including horizontal stations and locations and vertical elevations
sealed by a Licensed Engineer in the State of Texas.
3. Thrust restraint calculations sealed by a Licensed Engineer in the State of Texas.
4. Certification with full compliance with the specifications
5. Complete materials specification for each part to be furnished.
6. Technical Bulletins and Brochures
7. Statement of Warranty.
8. An estimated delivery date for the equipment (which shall be stated in calendar days after
the releases date to the manufacturer).
9. Name, address, phone number, and fax number of manufacturer’s representative.
10. Test to be run during manufacturing process
B. Submittals required prior to Shipping
1. Certified copies of all test.
2. Lifting instructions
1.04 QUALITY ASSURANCE
A. Manufacturer: Finished pipe shall be the product of one (1) manufacturer. Pipe
manufacturing operations (pipe, fittings, lining, coating) shall be performed at one (1)
location.
1.05 DELIVERY AND STORAGE
A. Delivery and Storage shall be in accordance with AWWA C600 and AWWA Manual of
Practice M41.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Ductile Iron Pipe and Fittings 331113-3
PART 2 – PRODUCTS
2.01 DUCTILE IRON PIPE
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 501.7.
B. Buried ductile iron pipe may be mechanical joint, push-on joint, or restrained push-on joint.
C. All ductile iron pipe shall be cement mortar lined in accordance with AWWA C104.
D. All buried pipe shall be polyethylene encased in accordance with AWWA C105.
E. The pressure rating, thickness class, net weight of pipe without lining, length of pipe and
name of manufacturer shall be clearly marked on each pipe.
2.02 DUCTILE IRON FITTINGS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 501.7.
B. Mechanical joints shall be furnished complete with accessories. Bolts and nuts shall be
stainless steel.
C. Fittings shall be provided with bituminous exterior coating and cement-mortar lining inside
with seal coat in accordance with AWWA C104.
D. All buried fittings shall be polyethylene encased in accordance with AWWA C105.
E. Unless otherwise specified, all fittings shall be of the mechanical joint type with a minimum
pressure rating of 250 psi.
PART 3 – EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 505.1. and 502.4.
3.02 INSTALLATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 506.
B. Jointing Push-On Pipe
1. Remove any foreign matter in the gasket seat of the socket, wipe gasket clean, flex gasket
and place in socket with the large round end or bulb end entering first.
2. Seat gasket evenly around the inside of the socket with the groove fitted over the bead.
Remove any bulges.
3. Apply a thin film of lubricant furnished by the pipe manufacturer to the inside surface of
the gasket. No lubricant other than that furnished with the pipe by the pipe manufacturer
will be allowed to be used.
4. Wipe plain end of pipe, to be entered; clean and place in approximate alignment with the
bell of the pipe to which it is to be jointed.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Ductile Iron Pipe and Fittings 331113-4
5. Apply a thin film of the lubricant to the outside of the plain end about 1” back from the
end.
6. Align the pipe and carefully enter the plain end into the socket until it just makes contact
with the gasket.
7. Complete joint assembly by forcing the plain end of the entering pipe past the gasket
until it makes contact with the bottom of the socket.
8. The maximum deflection at each joint shall not exceed 80% of manufacturer’s
recommendation.
C. Jointing Mechanical Joint Pipe
1. After carefully cleaning both spigot and bell and after slipping the following ring and the
gasket over the spigot end, the spigot shall be slipped into the bell.
2. A lubricant shall be applied to the spigot end to assist in the assembly as directed by the
Inspector.
3. The gasket shall be carefully seated by hand so as to be even in the bell at all points.
4. After drawing up the follower ring to uniform bearing against the gasket the bolts shall be
inserted and tightened by hand in pairs using bolts opposite each other.
5. The nuts are to be tightened to hold the required pressure. Extension wrenches or pipes
over wrench handles will not be permitted. Ten-inch (10”) ratchet wrenches with a
tension setting control shall be used to tighten the nuts unless other types of wrenches are
approved by the Inspector.
6. The finished joint shall be neat and uniform and shall be watertight.
D. Concrete thrust blocks and mechanically restrained joints shall be required to resist thrust
forces at all horizontal and vertical bends, tees and other fittings.
E. Water mains twelve inches (12”) and smaller in the right-of-way near storm inlets shall be
constructed behind the inlet by pulling the pipe using longitudinal bending in accordance with
the manufacturer’s requirements.
F. The maximum deflection angle of pipe joints shall be restricted to 80% of the manufacturers’
recommendation. Otherwise, horizontal bends will be required.
G. Potable water mains and wastewater mains must be installed in separate trenches.
H. New tracer wire shall be installed in the trench with all water mains with a terminal box
located in each water main valve pad.
3.03 HYDROSTATIC TEST
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 506.5
alternative 2-hour testing in accordance with AWWA C600.
B. After the pipe has been laid and backfilled, but prior to replacement of pavement, each
valved section of newly laid pipe shall be subjected to a hydrostatic pressure test.
C. Each valved section of pipe shall be slowly filled with water by means of a pump connected
to the pipe in a satisfactory manner.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Ductile Iron Pipe and Fittings 331113-5
D. The pump, pipe connection, and all necessary apparatus including gauges and meters shall
be furnished by the Contractor. The City will furnish water for filling lines and making tests
through existing mains.
E. The test pressure shall be measured at the point of lowest elevation.
F. Before applying the specified test pressure, all air shall be expelled from the pipe. To
accomplish this, taps shall be made, if necessary, at the points of highest elevation and
afterwards tightly plugged.
G. At intervals during the test the entire route of the pipe line shall be inspected to locate any
leaks or breaks. Any defective joints, cracked or defective pipe, fittings or valves
discovered in consequence of this pressure test shall be removed and replaced with sound
material in the manner provided, and the test shall be repeated until satisfactory results are
obtained.
3.04 PURGING AND DISINFECTION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 506.7.
PART 4 – MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 506.9.1.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 506.9.2.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification PVC Pipe for Water Distribution 331114-1
SECTION 331114
PVC PIPE FOR WATER DISTRIBUTION
PART 1 – GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Water Pipe For Water Distribution in accordance with Public
Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 501.14.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. AWWA C900, AWWA Standard for Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Pressure Pipe and
Fabricated Fittings, 4 in. through 12 in. (100 mm through 300 mm) for Water Distribution
B. AWWA C905, AWWA Standard for Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Pressure Pipe and
Fabricated Fittings, 14 in. through 48 in. (350 mm through 1,200 mm), for Water
Transmission and Distribution
C. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 501.14, 502.4.2, and
502.5
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 330510 – Trenching, Backfilling and Compaction
B. Section 331245 – Tapping Sleeves for PVC and Ductile Iron Pipe
C. Section 331260 – Mechanical Restraint for PVC and Ductile Iron Pipe
PART 2 – PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 501.14.
B. Pipe shall be manufactured in the United States of America and shall be blue in color.
PART 3 – EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 505.1. and
502.4.
3.02 INSTALLATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 502.4 and 506.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification PVC Pipe for Water Distribution 331114-2
B. Concrete thrust blocks and mechanically restrained joints shall be required to resist thrust
forces at all horizontal and vertical bends, tees and other fittings.
C. Water mains twelve inches (12”) and smaller in the right-of-way near storm inlets shall be
constructed behind the inlet by pulling the pipe using longitudinal bending in accordance
with the manufacturer’s requirements.
D. The maximum deflection angle of pipe joints shall be restricted to 80% of the
manufacturers’ recommendation. Otherwise, horizontal bends will be required.
E. Potable water mains and wastewater mains must be installed in separate trenches.
3.03 HYDROSTATIC TEST
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 506.5
alternative 2-hour testing in accordance with AWWA C605. Testing pressure is 200 psi.
B. After the pipe has been laid and backfilled, but prior to replacement of pavement, each
valved section of newly laid pipe shall be subjected to a hydrostatic pressure test.
C. Each valved section of pipe shall be slowly filled with water by means of a pump connected
to the pipe in a satisfactory manner.
D. The pump, pipe connection, and all necessary apparatus including gauges and meters shall
be furnished by the Contractor. The City will furnish water for filling lines and making tests
through existing mains.
E. The test pressure shall be measured at the point of lowest elevation.
F. Before applying the specified test pressure, all air shall be expelled from the pipe. To
accomplish this, taps shall be made, if necessary, at the points of highest elevation and
afterwards tightly plugged.
G. At intervals during the test the entire route of the pipe line shall be inspected to locate any
leaks or breaks. Any defective joints, cracked or defective pipe, fittings or valves
discovered in consequence of this pressure test shall be removed and replaced with sound
material in the manner provided, and the test shall be repeated until satisfactory results are
obtained.
3.04 PURGING AND DISINFECTION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 506.7.
B. The contractor is solely responsible for injecting the chlorine disinfectant into the conduit,
monitoring the solution, collecting samples, and performing the water analysis by an
approved laboratory.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification PVC Pipe for Water Distribution 331114-3
PART 4 – MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 506.9.1.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 506.9.2.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Water Service Connections 331213-1
SECTION 331213
WATER SERVICE CONNECTIONS
PART 1 – GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Water Service Connections in accordance with Public Works Construction Standards,
NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.10.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. AWWA C800, AWWA Standard for Underground Service Line Valves and Fittings
B. AWWA C901, Polyethylene Pressure Pipe and Tubing, 1 in. Through 3 in. for Water Service,
Latest Revision.
C. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.10
D. City of Frisco Standard Detail for Typical Service Connection.
PART 2 – PRODUCTS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 501.10 and
501.21.
B. Water service pipe shall be polyethylene tubing with detectable tracing wire.
C. Tracing wire shall be 10 AWG Standard with HDPE coating.
D. Tape for the tracing wire shall be polypropylene.
E. Service couplings, meter valves and corporation stops shall be “no-lead brass” fittings.
PART 3 – EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.10.3.
B. Tracer wire shall be attached to the polyethylene tubing with two independent, continuous,
spiral-wound polypropylene tape layers.
C. Bullhead services that branch at the end of a service line to serve two or more customers will
not be allowed.
3.02 CONSTRUCTION
A. Service taps shall be made after the mains have been laid.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Water Service Connections 331213-2
B. A tapping saddle shall be used to connect service lines to pipe mains.
C. The service pipe shall be placed at a minimum depth of twenty-four inches (24”) under the
finished grade except where the service pipe shall pass under the curb. At this point the
service pipe shall be a minimum of twenty-four inches (24”) under the top of curb or a
minimum of six inches (6”) under the bottom of the curb and gutter section, or lime stabilized
subgrade whichever is greater.
D. Excessive bending of the service pipe, which will injure or reduce the cross sectional area of
the pipe, will not be permitted.
E. The length of the service pipe shall extend from the main to a point two feet (2’) back of the
street curb or to the property line if no curb exists, unless shown otherwise on the plans.
F. The service pipe shall be continuous with no fittings under paving.
G. If there is a curb, the curb shall be sawcut with “I” and marked with good quality blue paint at
the point where the service pipe passes the curb.
H. Sand embedment shall be required two feet (2’) on either side of the service saddle all the
way around the water main.
PART 4 – MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.10.3.2.2.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.10.3.2.2.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco Air Release Valves for Potable Water May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Systems and Wastewater Force Mains 331216-1
SECTION 331216
AIR VALVES FOR POTABLE WATER SYSTEMS
AND WASTEWATER FORCE MAINS
PART 1 – GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install Air
Release Valves For Potable Water Systems in accordance with Public Works Construction
Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.6.3.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. AWWA C512, AWWA Standard for Air-Release, Air/Vacuum, and Combination Air
Valves for Waterworks Service, Latest Revision.
B. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.6.3
C. City of Frisco’s Standard Details for Combination Air Vacuum Valves.
PART 2 – PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.6.3.
B. Air valves for potable water systems shall be Vento-Mat Series RBX or approved equal.
C. Air valves for wastewater force mains shall be Vento-Mat Series RGX or approved equal.
PART 3 – EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.6.6.2.
PART 4 – MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.6.8.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.6.8.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Resilient Seated Gate Valves 331217-1
SECTION 331217
RESILIENT SEATED GATE VALVES
PART 1 – GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Resilient Seated Gate Valves for potable water systems in accordance with Public Works
Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.6.2.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. AWWA C509, AWWA Standard for Resilient Seated Gate Valves for Water Supply
Service, Latest Revision.
B. AWWA C515, AWWA Standard for Reduced Wall, Resilient Seated Gate Valves for Water
Supply Service, Latest Revision.
C. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.6.2
D. City of Frisco’s Standard Detail for Gate Valves.
PART 2 – PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.6.2.
B. Gate valves shall be Mueller Model Series 2360, M&H Model Series 4067/7571, American
Flow Control Model Series 2500 or approved equal.
C. Valve boxes shall be three (3) piece screw type cast iron of the extension type. The three (3)
pieces shall consist of the top section, bottom section and cover.
PART 3 – EXECUTION
3.01 INSTALLATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.6.6.1.
B. All valve locations shall be marked with a “V” sawcut on the curb or pavement. The “V”
shall point to the location of the valve as follows:
Valve in pavement Upright “V”
Valve outside pavement Upside Down “V”
C. Valve boxes over four feet (4’) deep shall require extensions. Valve box extensions shall be
cast iron. PVC pipe is not allowed.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Resilient Seated Gate Valves 331217-2
3.02 HYDROSTATIC TEST
A. Gate valves shall be tested at a hydrostatic test pressure of 400 psi and shall be guaranteed for
200 psi working pressure.
PART 4 – MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.6.8.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.6.8.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Butterfly Valves 331218-1
SECTION 331218
BUTTERFLY VALVES
PART 1 – GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Butterfly Valves For Potable Water Systems in accordance with Public Works Construction
Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.6.5.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. AWWA C504, AWWA Standard for Rubber-Seated Butterfly Valves, Latest Revision
B. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.6.5
C. City of Frisco’s Standard Detail for Butterfly Valves.
PART 2 – PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.6.5.
B. Refer to City of Frisco’s Approved Material List.
C. Butterfly valves shall be Mueller Model Series 3211 or M&H Model Series 4500/1450 or
approved equal. Valves shall be Class 250.
D. Valve boxes shall be three (3) piece screw type cast iron of the extension type. The three (3)
pieces shall consist of the top section, bottom section and cover.
PART 3 – EXECUTION
3.01 INSTALLATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.6.6.
B. All valve locations shall be marked with a “V” sawcut on the curb or pavement. The “V”
shall point to the location of the valve as follows:
Valve in pavement Upright “V”
Valve outside pavement Upside Down “V”
C. The butterfly valve operator shall face away from the curb line on all installations.
D. Valve boxes over four feet (4’) deep shall require extensions. Valve box extensions shall be
cast iron. PVC pipe is not allowed.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Butterfly Valves 331218-2
PART 4 – MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.6.8.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.6.8.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Fire Hydrants 331219-1
SECTION 331219
FIRE HYDRANTS
PART 1 – GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Fire Hydrants in accordance with Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th
Edition, Item 502.3.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. AWWA C502, AWWA Standard for Dry-Barrel Fire Hydrants, Latest Revision
B. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.3
C. City of Frisco’s Standard Details for Fire Hydrants.
PART 2 – PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.3.
B. Refer to City of Frisco’s Approved Material List.
C. Fire hydrants shall be Waterous Pacer 5 ¼” Model WB67-250 or American Darling 5 ¼”
Model B-84-B or approved equal.
D. Hydrant barrel inside diameter shall not be less than 7 ¼”.
E. All hydrants shall be equipped with two (2) hose nozzles and one (1) steamer nozzle. The
hose nozzles shall be two and one-half inches (2 ½”) nominal I.D. National Standard
Thread. Pumper nozzle shall be four inches (4”) nominal I.D. National Standard Thread.
All nozzles shall be mechanically attached.
F. All five hydrants shall open by turning to the left (counter-clockwise).
G. All hydrants shall be of the breakable type.
H. All hydrants shall have a 4 mil epoxy coating on the interior of the shoe.
PART 3 – EXECUTION
3.01 INSTALLATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.3.2.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Fire Hydrants 331219-2
B. All hydrants shall be painted with two coats of Tnemec Series 530 Omnithane Aluminum,
Silver paint.
C. The top bonnet, including the lip, and the nozzle caps of all hydrants shall be painted
according to the following table:
Size of Main Connected to Fire Hydrant Lead Color
6” Aluminum / Silver
8” True Blue / Safety
12” or larger Yellow / Safety
D. Fire hydrants shall be installed so the breakaway point will be no less than four inches (4”)
and no greater than eight inches (8”) above the final grade elevation. If grade adjustments
are made during residential or commercial construction, the fire hydrant shall be adjusted by
builder to meet breakaway requirements listed previously before obtaining certificate of
occupancy.
E. Fire hydrants shall be located a minimum of two feet (2’) and a maximum of six feet (6’)
from the fire lane or public roadway, based on the location of the sidewalk. The fire hydrant
shall not be located in the sidewalk.
F. All fire hydrants shall be installed so that the steamer connection will face the fire lane or
public roadway.
G. Fire hydrants shall be located no closer than ten feet (10’) from the curb return at street or
fire lane intersections.
H. A blue reflector shall be placed just off center of the street or fire lane opposite fire hydrants.
At intersections, reflectors shall be placed on both roadways opposite fire hydrant.
PART 4 – MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.3.3.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.3.3.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Polyethylene Encasement 331240-1
SECTION 331240
POLYETHYLENE ENCASEMENT
PART 1 – GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
polyethylene encasement around metal pipe and fittings in accordance with Public Works
Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.8.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. AWWA C105, AWWA Standard for Polyethylene Encasement for Ductile Iron Pipe
Systems.
B. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.8
PART 2 – PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.8.1.
B. The polyethylene encasement may be in tube or sheet form and shall have a minimum
thickness of 8 mils.
PART 3 – EXECUTION
3.01 INSTALLATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.8.2.
B. The polyethylene seams and overlaps shall be wrapped and held in place by 2” wide plastic
backed adhesive tape with 2 foot wide overlaps.
C. The wrap on the barrel of the pipe shall be loose enough to allow the polyethylene
encasement to shift with the soil.
D. The polyethylene encasement shall be installed without breaks, tears or holes.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Polyethylene Encasement 331240-2
PART 4 – MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.8.4.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.8.4.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Tapping Sleeves for PVC and Ductile Iron Pipe 331245-1
SECTION 331245
TAPPING SLEEVES FOR PVC AND DUCTILE IRON PIPE
PART 1 – GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
tapping sleeves for polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and ductile iron water pipe in accordance with
Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 506.6.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. ANSI/AWWA C110/A21.10, AWWA Standard for Ductile-Iron and Gray-Iron Fittings,
Latest Revision.
B. ANSI/AWWA C111/A21.11, AWWA Standard for Rubber-Gasket Joints for Ductile-Iron
Pressure Pipe and Fittings, Latest Revision.
C. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 506.6
PART 2 – PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.10.2.3.
B. Refer to City of Frisco Approved Materials List, Latest Edition.
PART 3 – EXECUTION
3.01 INSTALLATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 506.6.
B. Taps must be at least one nominal size smaller than the water main being tapped for
connections to water mains larger than twelve inches (12”) in diameter.
C. The minimum size tap allowed on water mains twenty inches (20”) and larger shall be six
inch (6”).
D. No tapping sleeves allowed on asbestos cement water mains.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Tapping Sleeves for PVC and Ductile Iron Pipe 331245-2
PART 4 – MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 506.9.1.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 506.9.2.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Mechanical Restraint for PVC and Ductile Iron Pipe 331260-1
SECTION 331260
MECHANICAL RESTRAINT FOR PVC AND DUCTILE IRON PIPE
PART 1 – GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
thrust restraint for polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and ductile iron water pipe in accordance with
Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.4.2.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. ANSI/AWWA C110/A21.10, AWWA Standard for Ductile-Iron and Gray-Iron Fittings,
Latest Revision.
B. ANSI/AWWA C111/A21.11, AWWA Standard for Rubber-Gasket Joints for Ductile-Iron
Pressure Pipe and Fittings, Latest Revision.
C. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.4.2
PART 2 – PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.4.
PART 3 – EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.4.
B. Concrete thrust blocks and mechanically restrained joints shall be required to resist thrust
forces at all horizontal and vertical bends, tees and other fittings.
C. Concrete thrust blocking shall be poured against undisturbed earth and will not bear against
the backfill or bedding of another utility.
PART 4 – MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.4.4.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.4.4.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Wastewater Lateral Connections 333109-1
SECTION 333109
WASTEWATER LATERAL CONNECTIONS
PART 1 – GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Wastewater Lateral Connections in accordance with Public Works Construction Standards,
NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.10.4.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. ASTM D3034 Standard Specification for Type PSM Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Sewer Pipe
and Fittings, Latest Revision
B. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.10.4
C. City of Frisco Standard Details for Wastewater Laterals.
PART 2 – PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 501.18.
B. Wastewater laterals shall be PVC SDR 35 in accordance with ASTM D3034 or PVC SDR
26 in accordance with ASTM D2241.
PART 3 – EXECUTION
3.01 CONSTRUCTION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.10.4.
B. The wastewater lateral shall extend from the wastewater main to the customer’s property
line. The elevation of the wastewater lateral at the property line shall be at such a depth that
will provide for a lateral from the proposed building site with a minimum grade of one
percent (1%) and a maximum grade of one and one-half percent (1.5%) from the building
site to the property line. A depth in excess of six feet (6’) at the property line is not
approved.
C. If there is a curb, the curb shall be sawcut with “II” and marked with good quality green
paint at the point where the wastewater lateral passes under the curb.
D. A standard wastewater lateral connection shall consist of the service wye or tee and
necessary fittings.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Wastewater Lateral Connections 333109-2
E. All residential wastewater laterals shall be extended to a point ten feet (10’) from the back of
the property line at a maximum depth of four feet (4’). The lateral shall then be extended at
a forty-five degree angle to four feet (4’) above the finished grade and capped.
F. Fittings are not permitted on wastewater service laterals between the wye and the property
line.
PART 4 – MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.10.4.3.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.10.4.3.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification PVC Pipe for Gravity Wastewater Mains 333110-1
SECTION 333110
PVC PIPE FOR GRAVITY WASTEWATER MAINS
PART 1 – GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Pipe For Gravity Wastewater Mains in accordance with Public
Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 501.17, 505 and 507.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. ASTM D3034 Standard Specification for Type PSM Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Sewer Pipe
and Fittings, Latest Revision
B. ASTM F679 Standard Specification for Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Large Diameter Plastic
Gravity Sewer Pipe and Fittings, Latest Revision
C. ASTM D2321 Standard Practice for Underground Installation of Thermoplastic Pipe for
Sewers and Other Gravity Flow Applications
D. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 501.17, 505 and 507
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 330510 – Trenching, Backfilling and Compaction
B. Section 330131 – Wastewater and Manhole Testing
C. Section 330132 – Television Inspection for Wastewater Mains
PART 2 – PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 501.17.
B. Refer to City of Frisco’s Approved Material List.
C. All gravity PVC wastewater pipe shall be green in color.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification PVC Pipe for Gravity Wastewater Mains 333110-2
PART 3 – EXECUTION
3.01 CONSTRUCTION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 505 and 507.
B. The construction of all wastewater mains shall begin at the outlet or lower end, unless
otherwise directed by the Inspector.
C. Appurtenances shall be constructed as soon as the wastewater main of which they are a part
is constructed to their locations. Upon request by the Contractor, the Inspector may permit
postponement of the construction of manholes on wastewater mains, and the Contractor
shall, without additional cost to the Owner, lay the pipe continuously through the manhole
location.
D. The construction of appurtenances in advance of construction of the wastewater line will not
be permitted.
E. No connecting wastewater main shall project beyond the inside surface of the wastewater
mains or appurtenances.
PART 4 – MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 507.6.1.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 507.6.2.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco Pressure Rated PVC Pipe May 2012
Standard Technical Specification for Gravity Wastewater Mains 333115-1
SECTION 333115
PRESSURE RATED PVC PIPE FOR GRAVITY WASTEWATER MAINS
PART 1 – GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Pressure Rated Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Pipe For Gravity Wastewater Mains in accordance
with Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 501.15, 505 and
507.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. ASTM D2241 Standard Specification for Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Pressure Rated Pipe
(SDR Series), Latest Revision
B. ASTM D3139 Standard Specification for Joints for Plastic Pressure Pipes Using Flexible
Elastomeric Seals, Latest Revision
C. ASTM D2321 Standard Practice for Underground Installation of Thermoplastic Pipe for
Sewers and Other Gravity Flow Applications
D. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 501.15
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 330510 – Trenching, Backfilling and Compaction
B. Section 330131 – Wastewater and Manhole Testing
C. Section 330132 – Television Inspection for Wastewater Mains
PART 2 – PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 501.15.
PART 3 – EXECUTION
3.01 CONSTRUCTION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 505 and 507.
B. The construction of all wastewater mains shall begin at the outlet or lower end, unless
otherwise directed by the Inspector.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco Pressure Rated PVC Pipe May 2012
Standard Technical Specification for Gravity Wastewater Mains 333115-2
C. Appurtenances shall be constructed as soon as the wastewater main of which they are a part
is constructed to their locations. Upon request by the Contractor, the Inspector may permit
postponement of the construction of manholes on wastewater mains, and the Contractor
shall, without additional cost to the Owner, lay the pipe continuously through the manhole
location.
D. The construction of appurtenances in advance of construction of the wastewater line will not
be permitted.
E. No connecting wastewater main shall project beyond the inside surface of the wastewater
mains or appurtenances.
PART 4 – MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 507.6.1.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 507.6.2.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco Centrifugally Cast Fiberglass Reinforced May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Pipe for Gravity Wastewater Mains 333130-1
SECTION 333130
CENTRIFUGALLY CAST FIBERGLASS REINFORCED PIPE
FOR GRAVITY WASTEWATER MAINS
PART 1 – GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Centrifugally Cast Fiberglass Reinforced Pipe For Gravity Wastewater Mains in accordance
with Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 501.24, 505 and
507.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. ASTM D3262 Standard Specification for “Fiberglass” (Glass-Fiber-Reinforced
Thermosetting Resin) Sewer Pipe, Latest Revision
B. ASTM D4161 Standard Specification for “Fiberglass” (Glass-Fiber-Reinforced
Thermosetting-Resin) Pipe Joints Using Flexible Elastomeric Seals, Latest Revision
C. ASTM D3840 Standard Specification for “Fiberglass” (Glass-Fiber-Reinforced
Thermosetting-Resin) Pipe Fittings for Nonpressure Applications
D. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 501.24, 505 and 507
PART 2 – PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 501.24.
PART 3 – EXECUTION
3.01 CONSTRUCTION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Items 505 and 507.
B. The construction of all wastewater mains shall begin at the outlet or lower end, unless
otherwise directed by the Inspector.
C. Appurtenances shall be constructed as soon as the wastewater main of which they are a part
is constructed to their locations. Upon request by the Contractor, the Inspector may permit
postponement of the construction of manholes on wastewater mains, and the Contractor
shall, without additional cost to the Owner, lay the pipe continuously through the manhole
location.
D. The construction of appurtenances in advance of construction of the wastewater line will not
be permitted.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco Centrifugally Cast Fiberglass Reinforced May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Pipe for Gravity Wastewater Mains 333130-2
E. No connecting wastewater main shall project beyond the inside surface of the wastewater
mains or appurtenances.
PART 4 – MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 507.6.1.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 507.6.2.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Wastewater Manhole Frames and Covers 333913-1
SECTION 333913
WASTEWATER MANHOLE FRAMES AND COVERS
PART 1 – GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Wastewater Manhole Frames and Covers in accordance with Public Works Construction
Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.1.3.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. ASTM A48 Standard Specification for Gray Iron Castings, Latest Revision
B. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.1.3
C. City of Frisco Standard Details for Manhole Lid and Frame
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 333914 – Cast-in-Place Concrete Manholes
B. Section 333915 – Precast Concrete Manholes
PART 2 – PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.1.3.
B. Refer to City of Frisco’s Approved Material List.
PART 3 – EXECUTION
3.01 INSTALLATION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.1.4.
B. All wastewater manhole covers shall be installed with inflow protection inserts.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Wastewater Manhole Frames and Covers 333913-2
PART 4 – MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.1.6.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.1.6.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Cast-In-Place Concrete Manholes 333914-1
SECTION 333914
CAST-IN-PLACE CONCRETE MANHOLES
PART 1 – GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Cast-In-Place Concrete Manholes in accordance with Public Works Construction Standards,
NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.1.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.1
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 333913 – Wastewater Manhole Frames and Covers
B. Section 330131 – Wastewater and Manhole Testing
PART 2 – PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.1.4.1.1.
B. A manhole-pipe connection must use water tight, size on size resilient connectors that allow
for differential settlement and must conform to ASTM C923.
C. A manhole located in a roadway or other paved area subject to vehicular traffic must meet or
exceed the American Association of State Highways and Transportation Officials standard
M-306 for load bearing.
PART 3 – EXECUTION
3.01 CONSTRUCTION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.1.4.
B. For fifteen inch (15”) to twenty-seven inch (27”) wastewater mains, the manhole shall have a
minimum diameter of five feet (5’).
C. For wastewater mains larger than twenty-seven inches (27”), the manhole shall have a
minimum diameter of six feet (6’).
D. Manholes deeper that fifteen feet (15’) shall have a minimum diameter of five feet (5’).
E. The exterior of all concrete manholes shall be coated with bituminous waterproofing material.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Cast-In-Place Concrete Manholes 333914-2
PART 4 – MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.1.6.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.1.6.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Precast Concrete Manholes 333915-1
SECTION 333915
PRECAST CONCRETE MANHOLES
PART 1 – GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Precast Concrete Manholes in accordance with Public Works Construction Standards,
NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.1.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. ASTM C478 Standard Specification for Precast Reinforced Concrete Manhole Sections,
Latest Revision
B. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.1
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 333913 – Wastewater Manhole Frames and Covers
B. Section 330131 – Wastewater and Manhole Testing
PART 2 – PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.1.1.1.
B. A manhole-pipe connection must use water tight, size on size resilient connectors that allow
for differential settlement and must conform to ASTM C923.
C. A manhole located in a roadway or other paved area subject to vehicular traffic must meet or
exceed the American Association of State Highways and Transportation Officials standard
M-306 for load bearing.
PART 3 – EXECUTION
3.01 CONSTRUCTION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.1.4.
B. For fifteen inch (15”) to twenty-seven inch (27”) wastewater mains, the manhole shall have a
minimum diameter of five feet (5’).
C. For wastewater mains larger than twenty-seven inches (27”), the manhole shall have a
minimum diameter of six feet (6’).
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Precast Concrete Manholes 333915-2
D. Manholes deeper that fifteen feet (15’) shall have a minimum diameter of five feet (5’).
E. The exterior of all concrete manholes shall be coated with bituminous waterproofing material.
PART 4 – MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.1.6.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.1.6.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Fiberglass Manholes 3339161
SECTION 333916
FIBERGLASS MANHOLES
PART 1 – GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Fiberglass Manholes in accordance with Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG,
4th Edition, Item 502.1.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.1
B. City of Frisco’s Standard Details for Fiberglass Manholes.
PART 2 – PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.1.1.2.
B. Requirements to Item 502.1.1.2.1 are to manufacture the fiberglass manholes as a one piece
unit that includes a fiberglass bottom.
C. Requirements to Item 502.1.1.2.1 are to manufacture the fiberglass manholes with the stubouts
installed at the manufacturing plant.
PART 3 – EXECUTION
3.01 CONSTRUCTION
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.1.4.
B. Meet all requirements of TCEQ §217.55 Manholes and Related Structures.
PART 4 – MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.1.6.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to Public Works Construction Standards, NCTCOG, 4th Edition, Item 502.1.6.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Reinforced Concrete Pipe 334113-1
SECTION 334113
REINFORCED CONCRETE PIPE
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Reinforced Concrete Pipe in accordance Texas Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications for Construction and Maintenance of Highways, Streets, and Bridges Item
464.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. TxDOT Items 400, 402, 403, 420, 464, 467, and 473
B. Section 330510 Trenching, Backfilling and Comaction
C. City of Frisco’s Standard Detail for Storm Drain Embedment and Backfill.
D. TxDOT standard details included in the plans.
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 464.2.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 464.3. The Excavation, Shaping, Bedding, and Backfill section
references TxDOT Item 400. The City of Frisco’s Standard Detail for Standard Storm Drain
Embedment and Backfill detail shall replace Figure 1 in TxDOT Item 400.
B. After compaction and subgrade preparation but prior to paving, television inspections tests
are required on all storm sewer mains laterals and culverts as identified on the construction
plans. The minimum information to be provided to the Owner and City’s inspectors, in both
text and video form, are line designation, length, slope, and joints. Acceptable video formats
are VHS and DVD. Any line or lines found to be defective will be corrected and another
television inspection shall be performed at the contractor’s expense
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to TxDOT 464.4.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Reinforced Concrete Pipe 334113-2
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to TxDOT 464.5.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Reinforced Box Culvert 334200-1
SECTION 334200
REINFORCED BOX CULVERT
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Reinforced Box Culverts in accordance with Texas Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications for Construction and Maintenance of Highways, Streets, and Bridges Item
462.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. TxDOT Items 400, 402, 403, 420, 421, 440, 462, 464, 466, 467 and 473
B. TxDOT Standard Details included in the plans.
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 033105 – Concrete Structures – Cast-in-Place (TxDOT)
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to TxDOT 462.2
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to TxDOT 462.3.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to TxDOT 462.4.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to TxDOT 462.5.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Storm Sewer Manholes 334913-1
SECTION 334913
STORM SEWER MANHOLES
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Storm Sewer Manholes in accordance with Texas Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications for Construction and Maintenance of Highways, Streets, and Bridges-Item
465.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. TxDOT Items 421, 440, 465, and 471
B. TxDOT Standard Details included in the plans.
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 033105 – Concrete Structures – Cast-in-Place (TxDOT)
B. Section 034105 – Concrete Structures – Precast (TxDOT)
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to TxDOT 465.2.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to TxDOT 465.3.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to TxDOT 465.4.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to TxDOT 465.5.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Headwalls and Wingwalls 334914-1
SECTION 334914
HEADWALLS AND WINGWALLS
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Headwalls and Wingwalls in accordance with Texas Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications for Construction and Maintenance of Highways, Streets, and Bridges-TxDOT
Item 466.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. TxDOT Items 420, 421, 430, 432, 440, 464, and 466
B. TxDOT Standard Details included in the plans.
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 033105 – Concrete Structures – Cast-in-Place (TxDOT)
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to TxDOT 466.2.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to TxDOT 466.3.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to TxDOT 466.4.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to TxDOT 466.5.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Safety End Treatment 334915-1
SECTION 334915
SAFETY END TREATMENT
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Safety End Treatment in accordance with Texas Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications for Construction and Maintenance of Highways, Streets, and Bridges -Item
467.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. TxDOT 400, 420, 421, 432, 440, 442, 445, 460, 464, and 467
B. TxDOT Standard Details included in the plans.
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 033105 – Concrete Structures – Cast-in-Place (TxDOT)
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to TxDOT 467.2.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to TxDOT 467.3.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to TxDOT 467.4.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to TxDOT 467.5.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Standard and Recessed Curb Inlets and Other Inlets 334920-1
SECTION 334920
STANDARD AND RECESSED CURB INLETS AND OTHER INLETS
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Standard and Recessed Curb Inlets and Other Inlets in accordance with Texas Department of
Transportation Standard Specifications for Construction and Maintenance of Highways,
Streets, and Bridges Item 465.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. TxDOT Items 400, 402, 420, 424, 464, 467, and 467
B. City of Frisco’s Standard Detail for Standard Storm Drain Embedment and Backfill.
C. TxDOT standard details included in the plans.
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 034105 – Concrete Structures – Precast (TxDOT)
B. Section 033100 - Concrete Structures – Cast-In-Place (City)
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to TxDOT 465.2.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 PREPARATION
A. Refer to TxDOT 465.3.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to TxDOT 465.4.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to TxDOT 465.5.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Installation of Highway Traffic Signal 344113-1
SECTION 344113
INSTALLATION OF HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SIGNAL
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install a
Traffic Signal in accordance with TxDOT Item 680.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. TxDOT Items 502, 610, 636, 656, 680, 684, 686, 687, 688, 6006, and 6266
B. TxDOT’s Standard Details included in the plans.
C. Traffic Signal Plans
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 260500 – Electric Conductor
B. Section 260501 – Electric Service
C. Section 270500 – Conduit
D. Section 033101 – Drilled Shaft Foundation
E. Section 344125 – Vehicle and Pedestrian Signal Heads
F. Section 344130 – Traffic Signal Cable
G. Section 344135 – Ground Box
H. Section 347113 – Barricade, Signs, and Traffic Handling
1.04 SUBMITTALS
A. Shop Drawings for all traffic signal equipment as required by the City (5 copies).
B. Shop Drawings for street signs (except illuminated signage) (5 copies).
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to TxDOT Items 502, 610, 636, 656, 680, 684, 686, 687, 688, 6006, and 6266.
B. The Contractor shall furnish and install the pedestal pole assemblies.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Installation of Highway Traffic Signal 344113-2
C. All traffic signal mast arm pole and pedestal pole assemblies shall be powder coated. The
powder coat paint shall be RAL9017 (TRAFFIC BLACK) or City approved equal.
1. All assemblies that are to be powder coated shall be hot dipped galvanized to ASTM 123
and 153 specifications. Once galvanizing is completed, all exposed surfaces shall be
mechanically etched by blast cleaning to remove mill scale, impurities and non-metallic
foreign materials. All surfaces visually exposed are to be coated with a urethane or
Triglycidyl (TGIC) Polyester Powder to a minimum film thickness of 2.0 mils. The
coating shall be electrostatically applied and cured in a gas fired convention oven by
heating the steel substrate to between 350 and 400 degrees Fahrenheit.
D. Roadway Illumination Assemblies (TxDOT Item 610):
1. Luminaire ballasts shall be rated for operation at 240 volts.
2. Luminaire lamps for this project shall be 250 Watt Metal Halide. The luminaire housings
shall be powder coated using RAL 9017 (traffic black) paint or City approved equal. The
covers for the luminaries shall be a clear flat-glass insert.
3. When luminaires are to be installed on steel mast arm poles, a separate terminal strip in
the signal pole access compartment shall be provided. The terminal strip shall be 4
circuit Buchanan Type 104SN or Kulka Type 985-GP-4 CU or equivalent.
4. Sections of TxDOT standards RID (LUM1) and RID (LUM2) that pertain to High-
Pressure Sodium (HPS) specifications are not applicable to this project.
5. The conductors from the service pole to the terminal strip shall be No. 8 XHHW wires.
The conductors from the terminal strip to the luminaire shall be No. 12 XHHW wires.
E. City Furnished Material
1. Install NEMA Controller Cabinet Assembly
2. Install Illuminated Street Name Signs
3. Install VIVDS Shielded Cable
4. Install VIVDS Processor System
5. Install VIVDS Camera Assembly
6. Install VIVDS Set-up System
7. Install Opticom Cable
8. Install Opticom Detector
9. Install Opticom Discriminator Module
10. Install Ped Detect and Push Button Signs (2 Inch Push Button)
11. Install count-down ped displays
12. Install signal heads and LEDs
13. Install electrical service pedestal panel
14. Install traffic signal poles
15. Install Ethernet cable for communications equipment
16. Install Ethernet cable for PTZ camera
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 INSTALLATION
A. Refer to TxDOT Items 502, 610, 636, 656, 680, 684, 686, 687, 688, 6006, and 6266.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Installation of Highway Traffic Signal 344113-3
B. This project shall consist of furnishing and installing all materials and equipment necessary
for a complete signal system at the proposed location. In addition to these Items, the
contractor shall be responsible for the following:
1. Furnishing and installing all signs for mounting on signal mast arms, pedestal poles, and
existing sign posts. These signs shall be furnished in accordance with TxDOT Item 636
(subsidiary). Signs shall be mounted with ASTRO-SIGN BRAC or SIGNFIX Aluminum
Channel or City approved equal. The standard street name signs shall have 12” upper
case and 12” lower case lettering with clearview hwy 3w font (unless otherwise shown on
the plans). Illuminated street name signs (ILSN) and mounting hardware will be
provided by the City. The Contractor shall be responsible for installation of ILSN.
2. During the 30-day test period, the Contractor shall utilize qualified personnel to respond
to and diagnose all trouble calls. The Contractor shall repair any malfunctions to signal
equipment supplied on the project. A local telephone number (not subject to frequent
changes) where trouble calls are to be received on a 24-hour basis shall be provided to the
City by the Contractor. The Contractor's response time to reported calls shall be within a
reasonable travel time from a Dallas address, but not more than two (2) hours maximum.
Appropriate repairs shall be made within 24 hours. The contractor shall keep a record of
each trouble call reported in the log book provided by the City. The Contractor shall
notify the City of each trouble call. The error log in the malfunction management unit
(MMU) shall not be cleared during the 30-day test period without the approval of the
City.
3. The existing “stop” signs, shall be removed after the traffic signals are in operation and
returned to the City of Frisco as noted.
4. All Opticom Cable, opticom detectors with mounting brackets, and opticom discriminator
module will be provided by the City of Frisco. The contractor shall be responsible for
installing and making the opticom system operational.
5. The City will furnish the traffic signal controller and cabinet. The contractor shall
connect all field wiring to the controller assembly. The City will assist in determining
how the detector loop lead-in cables are to be connected (i.e., series or parallel). The City
will program the controller for operation, hook up the conflict monitor, detector units,
and other equipment in the controller cabinet and turn on the controller. The contractor
shall obtain the signal cabinet from the City of Frisco signal shop. When using City
supplied controllers, the contractor shall have a qualified technician on the project site to
place the traffic signals in operation.
6. All VIVDS equipment including cameras, processor system, set-up system, and VIVDS
cable will be provided by the City. The contractor shall be responsible for installing and
making the VIVDS operational. The City will set-up VIVDS detection zones with
Contractor’s assistance in aiming cameras.
7. The Contractor shall provide at least 48 hours of notice to the City for pick-up of the City
supplied equipment.
8. All nuts installed on the anchor bolts for traffic signal pole assemblies need to be
installed using an air impact wrench followed by two impacts from a striker wrench.
9. The Contractor shall install the traffic signal pole and mast arm assemblies furnished by
the City.
10. Erection of poles, luminaries and structures located near any overhead or underground
utilities shall be accomplished using established industry and utility safety practices. The
Contractor shall consult with the appropriate utility company and the City prior to
beginning such work.
11. The Contractor shall install the pedestrian push button assemblies furnished by the City
unless otherwise noted on the plans.
12. No extra compensation will be allowed for fulfilling the requirements stated above.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Installation of Highway Traffic Signal 344113-4
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. This Item will be measured on a Lump Sum (LS) basis.
B. Contractor shall submit a Schedule of Values prior to beginning any work on this project.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. All work performed and materials furnished in accordance with this Item will be paid for at
the unit price for “Installation of Highway Traffic Signal.” This price is full compensation
for all material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to complete this work.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Vehicle and Pedestrian Signal Heads 344125-1
SECTION 344125
VEHICLE AND PEDESTRIAN SIGNAL HEADS
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install Vehicle and
Pedestrian Signal Heads.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. TxDOT Item 682
B. TxDOT’s Standard Details included in the plans.
C. Traffic Signal Plans
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 344113 – Installation of Highway Traffic Signals
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 682.
B. City furnished vehicle and pedestrian signal heads, LEDs and backplates. Contractor shall
supply the mounting hardware.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 INSTALLATION
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 682.
B. The Contractor shall install all vehicle and pedestrian signal heads, LEDs, and backplates
furnished by the City of Frisco.
C. No exposed cable or wiring will be permitted.
D. Signal heads mounted on poles and mast arms shall be level and plumb and aimed as directed
by the City.
E. The signal head to mast arm connection must allow for adjustment about the horizontal and
vertical axis
F. All mast arm mounted signal heads shall be turned down and all other signal heads shall be
covered with burlap or other material approved by the City until placed into operation.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Vehicle and Pedestrian Signal Heads 344125-2
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 682.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. All work performed in accordance with this Item will be paid for at the unit bid price for
“Vehicle And Pedestrian Signal Heads,” at the size and type specified. This price is full
compensation for all labor, equipment, tools, and superintendence necessary to complete the
work.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Traffic Signal Cable 344130-1
SECTION 344130
TRAFFIC SIGNAL CABLE
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install a
Traffic Signal Cable.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. TxDOT Item 684
B. TxDOT’s Standard Details included in the plans.
C. Traffic Signal Plans
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 344113 – Installation of Highway Traffic Signal
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 684.
B. Individual conductors shall be No. 14 AWG.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 INSTALLATION
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 684.
B. The conductors in the Traffic Signal Cable shall be stranded.
C. Each cable shall be identified as shown on the plans (CABLE 1, etc.) With permanent
marking labels (PANDUIT TYPE PLM STANDARD SINGLE MARKER TIE, THOMAS &
BETTS TYPE 5512M or equivalent) at each ground box and controller
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 684.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 684.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Ground Box 344135-1
SECTION 344135
GROUND BOX
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Ground Boxes for Traffic Signals and/or Street Lighting.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. TxDOT Items 421, 440 and 624
B. TxDOT’s Standard Details included in the plans.
C. Traffic Signal Plans and/or Street Lighting Plans.
1.03 RELATED SECTIONS
A. Section 344113 – Installation of Highway Traffic Signal
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 624.
B. All ground boxes used for lighting shall have "LIGHTING" and "DANGER-HIGH
VOLTAGE" imprinted on the cover.
C. All ground boxes used for signals shall have “SIGNALS” and “DANGER-HIGH
VOLTAGE” imprinted on the cover.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 INSTALLATION
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 624.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. This Item shall be measured on a per Each (EA) basis for each Ground Box, complete in
place.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Ground Box 344135-2
4.02 PAYMENT
A. All work performed and materials furnished in accordance with this Item will be paid for at
the unit bid price for “Ground Box,” of the size and type specified. This price is full
compensation for all material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to
complete the work, including installing the the ground box and concrete apron.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Temporary Traffic Signal 344140-1
SECTION 344140
TEMPORARY TRAFFIC SIGNAL
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish, install,
operate, maintain, reconfigure, and remove a Temporary Traffic Signal.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. TxDOT Items 625, 627, and 681
B. TxDOT’s Standard Details included in the plans.
C. Traffic Signal Plans
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to TxDOT Items 625, 627, and 681.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 INSTALLATION
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 625, 627, and 681.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 681.
4.02 PAYMENT
B. Refer to TxDOT Item 681.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Small Roadside Supports and Assemblies 344150-1
SECTION 344150
SMALL ROADSIDE SIGN SUPPORTS AND ASSEMBLIES
PART 1 – GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Small Roadside Sign Supports and Assemblies.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. TxDOT Items 421, 440, 441, 442, 445, 634, 636, 643, 644, and 656
B. City of Frisco and TxDOT’s Standard Details included in the plans.
C. Signing Plans
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 644.
B. The Contractor shall provide field galvanizing and metalizing equipment, per TxDOT Item
445, at all times and shall make repairs to galvanized surfaces according to these
specifications at intervals as directed by the City.
C. Any signs required that on not detailed on the plan sheets shall be in conformance with the
most recent Texas MUTCD and the “Standard Highway Sign Designs for Texas.”
D. All small sign assemblies shall be installed as shown in the City of Frisco Standard Detail:
“Sign Posts, Stop Signs, and Street Name Signs”
E. Individual units requiring cleaning shall be washed with an approved cleaning solution to
remove all grease, oil, dirt, smears, streaks, debris, and other foreign particles.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 INSTALLATION
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 644.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Small Roadside Supports and Assemblies 344150-2
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 644 and as indicated in the Contract Documents.
4.02 PAYMENT
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 644 and as indicated in the Contract Documents.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Barricades, Signs and Traffic Handling 347113-1
SECTION 347113
BARRICADES, SIGNS, AND TRAFFIC HANDLING
PART 1 - GENERAL
1.01 DESCRIPTION
A. All material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to furnish and install
Barricades, Signs, and Traffic Handling in accordance with the Contract Documents.
1.02 REFERENCES
A. TxDOT Item 502
B. TxDOT’s Standard Details included in the plans.
C. City of Frisco’s General Notes
PART 2 - PRODUCTS
2.01 MATERIALS
A. All traffic control devices requiring reflective sheeting shall have Type C -high specific
intensity sheeting for signs with white backgrounds and Type E -fluorescent prismatic
sheeting for signs with orange backgrounds.
PART 3 - EXECUTION
3.01 IMPLEMENTATION
A. Refer to TxDOT Item 502.
B. The Traffic Control Plan (TCP) shall be in accordance with the standard plan sheets
WZ(BTS-1)-03 & WZ(BTS-2)-03 for signals, and as provided for in the latest edition of
Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways (TMUTCD).
C. Barricades and warning signs, as appropriate, shall be placed at stockpiles to adequately warn
motorists. At all stockpile sites that are less than 30 feet from the edge of any traveled lane, a
Type III barricade shall be erected immediately in front of or at each end if required by the
City. When a stockpile site equals or exceeds 100 feet in length, one object marker (OM-
2HP) per 100 feet shall be placed alongside the stockpile.
D. All traffic control signs shall be clean and legible, and maintained clean and legible
throughout the construction phases.
E. The Contractor shall plan his or her work sequence in a manner that will cause the minimum
interference with traffic during construction operations. Before beginning work, the
Contractor shall submit, for approval by the City, a plan of construction operations outlining
in detail a sequence of work to be followed, setting out the method of handling traffic along,
across, and adjacent to work.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Barricades, Signs and Traffic Handling 347113-2
F. If, at any time during construction, the Contractor's proposed plan of operation for handling
traffic does not provide for safe, comfortable movement, the Contractor shall immediately
change its operations to correct the unsatisfactory condition.
G. Subject to the approval of the City and in accordance with the plans, portions of this project,
which are not affected by or in conflict with the proposed method of handling traffic or utility
adjustments, can be constructed during any phase.
H. During construction, the Contractor shall furnish, place, and maintain vertical panels or
drums as indicated in the plans along the edge of pavements and fills in accordance with the
latest edition of TMUTCD. The vertical panels shall be supplemented with lights as directed
by City.
I. Barricades and signs shall be placed in such a manner as to not interfere with the sight
distance of drivers entering the highway from driveways or side streets. To facilitate shifting,
barricades and signs used in lane closures or traffic staging may be erected and mounted on
portable supports. The designs of these supports shall be in compliance with current TxDOT
and Texas MUTCD standards and are subject to the approval of the City.
J. The Contractor shall provide and maintain flaggers at such points and for such periods of
time as may be required to provide for the safety and convenience of public travel and
contractor's personnel, and as shown on the plans or as directed by the city. These flaggers
shall be located at each end of the lane closure and shall be properly attired. The two flaggers
shall be in two-way radio contact with each other at all times.
K. The Contractor will not be permitted to commence work on the road before sunrise and shall
arrange his work so that no machinery or equipment shall be closer than 30 feet to the
traveled roadway after sunset except as authorized by the City. The Contractor must comply
with the City’s Noise Ordinance at all times.
L. The Contractor shall keep traveled surfaces used in his hauling operation clear and free of dirt
or other material.
M. The use of rubber-tired equipment, licensed for operation on public highways, will be
required for moving dirt and other materials along or across paved surfaces.
N. Where the Contractor desires to move any equipment not licensed for operation on public
highways on or across any pavement, the Contractor shall protect the pavement from all
damage as directed by the City.
O. No lane closures will be allowed prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 3:30 p.m., Monday through Friday
unless otherwise directed by the City.
PART 4 - MEASUREMENT AND PAYMENT
4.01 MEASUREMENT
A. This Item shall be measured on a Lump Sum (LS) basis or on a Monthly (MO) basis as
indicated in the Contract Documents.
Version 6/19/12
City of Frisco May 2012
Standard Technical Specification Barricades, Signs and Traffic Handling 347113-3
4.02 PAYMENT
A. All work performed and materials furnished in accordance with this Item will be paid for at
the unit bid price for “Barricades, Signs, and Traffic Handling.” This price is full
compensation for all material, labor, equipment, tools and superintendence necessary to
complete all work including, but not limited to, signage, barricades, flagmen, temporary
pavement markers and markings, detours, and temporary pavement.
END OF SECTION
Version 6/19/12
AM – Approved Materials List May 2012
AM
APPROVED MATERIALS LIST
Version 6/19/12
AM- Approved Materials Utilities 6/14/2012 Page 1 of 10
BASIC PRODUCT CATEGORY
PRODUCT
SUB-CATEGORY MANUFACTURER
MODEL, TYPE, OR
STYLE APPROVED
GOVERNING
SPECIFICATION NOTES
NSF 61
CERTIFIED
Air Valves Manufacturer
Combination Air Valves Distribution/ Transmission Vent-O-Mat RBX Series
AWWA C512
NCTCOG 502.6.3 NSF
Combination Air Valves Force Mains Vent-O-Mat RGX Series NCTCOG 502.6.3
Angle Meter Valve Manufacturer
Angle Meter Valve 3/4" Ford BA43-333W-G-NL
Comp x Meter Tail or
FL
Angle Meter Valve 1" Ford BA43-444W-G-NL
Comp x Meter Tail or
FL
Angle Meter Valve 1-1/2" Ford FV43-666W-G-NL
Comp x Meter Tail or
FL
Angle Meter Valve 2" Ford FV43-777W-G-NL
Comp x Meter Tail or
FL
Angle Meter Valve 3/4" Cambridge 210NL-H3T3
Comp x Meter Tail or
FL
Angle Meter Valve 1"
Cambridge
210NL-H4T4
Comp x Meter Tail or
FL
Angle Meter Valve 1 1/2" Cambridge 210NL-H6MF6 Comp x FL
Angle Meter Valve 2" Cambridge 210NL-H7MF7 Comp x FL
Angle Meter Valve 3/4" to 2" A.Y. McDonald 74602BQ
Comp x Meter Tail or
FL
City of Frisco
Approved Materials List for Utilities
Last Revised May 2012
Kevin Grant (972) 292-5815
Version 6/19/12
AM- Approved Materials Utilities 6/14/2012 Page 2 of 10
BASIC PRODUCT CATEGORY
PRODUCT
SUB-CATEGORY MANUFACTURER
MODEL, TYPE, OR
STYLE APPROVED
GOVERNING
SPECIFICATION NOTES
NSF 61
CERTIFIED
City of Frisco
Approved Materials List for Utilities
Last Revised May 2012
Kevin Grant (972) 292-5815
Automatic Flush Point Manufacturer
Eclipse Kupferle Foundry
9800WC - Eclipse
Warm Climate
Casing Spacers Manufacturer
Cleanout Castings Bass & Hays Pattern No. 339
Cleanout Castings Dallas Foundry No. 349
Cleanout Castings Trinity Valley Iron & Steel No. 1684
Corporation Stop Manufacturer
Plug Type 3/4" Ford F1000-3 AWWA C800 AWWA Taper x Comp
Plug Type 1" Ford F1000-4 AWWA C800 AWWA Taper x Comp
Plug Type 3/4" Cambridge 302NL-A3H3 AWWA C800 AWWA Taper x Comp
Plug Type 1" Cambridge 302NL-A4H4 AWWA C800 AWWA Taper x Comp
Plug Type 3/4" to 2" A.Y. McDonald 4701T/4701-22 AWWA C800 AWWA Taper x Comp
Ball Type 3/4" Ford FB1000-3-G-NL AWWA C800 AWWA Taper x Comp
Ball Type 1" Ford FB1000-4-G-NL AWWA C800 AWWA Taper x Comp
Version 6/19/12
AM- Approved Materials Utilities 6/14/2012 Page 3 of 10
BASIC PRODUCT CATEGORY
PRODUCT
SUB-CATEGORY MANUFACTURER
MODEL, TYPE, OR
STYLE APPROVED
GOVERNING
SPECIFICATION NOTES
NSF 61
CERTIFIED
City of Frisco
Approved Materials List for Utilities
Last Revised May 2012
Kevin Grant (972) 292-5815
Ball Type 1-1/2" Ford FB1000-6-G-NL AWWA C800 AWWA Taper x Comp
Ball Type 2" Ford FB1000-7-G-NL AWWA C800 AWWA Taper x Comp
Ball Type 3/4" Cambridge 301NL-A3H3 AWWA C800 AWWA Taper x Comp
Ball Type 1" Cambridge 301NL-A4H4 AWWA C800 AWWA Taper x Comp
Ball Type 1-1/2" Cambridge 301NL-A6H6 AWWA C800 AWWA Taper x Comp
Ball Type 2" Cambridge 301NL-A7H7 AWWA C800 AWWA Taper x Comp
Ball Type 3/4" to 2" A.Y. McDonald 74701BQ AWWA C800 AWWA Taper x Comp
Coupling Straight Manufacturer
Coupling Transition Manufacturer
Curb Stop Manufacturer
Version 6/19/12
AM- Approved Materials Utilities 6/14/2012 Page 4 of 10
BASIC PRODUCT CATEGORY
PRODUCT
SUB-CATEGORY MANUFACTURER
MODEL, TYPE, OR
STYLE APPROVED
GOVERNING
SPECIFICATION NOTES
NSF 61
CERTIFIED
City of Frisco
Approved Materials List for Utilities
Last Revised May 2012
Kevin Grant (972) 292-5815
Fire Hydrants Manufacturer
Fire Hydrant American Flow Control 5 1/4" Waterous Pacer AWWA C502 Rain cap Required NSF
Fire Hydrant American Flow Control
5 1/4" American Darling
B-84-B-5 AWWA C502 Rain cap Required NSF
Fire Hydrant Paint
(Entire Hydrant) All Main Sizes Tnemec Series 530 Omnithane Aluminum
Fire Hydrant Paint
(Top bonnett, lip and nozzle caps) 6" Main Size Tnemec Series 530 Omnithane Aluminum
Fire Hydrant Paint
(Top bonnett, lip and nozzle caps) 8" Main Size Tnemec Series 2H True Blue / Safety
Fire Hydrant Paint
(Top bonnett, lip and nozzle caps)
12" and Larger
Main Size Tnemec Series 2H Yellow / Safety
Fire Hydrant Extension Manufacturer
Fire Hydrant Extension Match Hydrant Manufacturer
Breakaway coupler
shall be located per
manufacturer
recommendation
Fire Hydrant Reflector Manufacturer
Fire Hydrant Reflector Stimsonite C88-AB Blue
Fittings Manufacturer
Ductile Iron Fittings
American, U.S. Pipe, Griffin,
Tyler Pipe Full Body or Compact
AWWA C110/
AWWA C153
Distribution/
Transmission NSF
Version 6/19/12
AM- Approved Materials Utilities 6/14/2012 Page 5 of 10
BASIC PRODUCT CATEGORY
PRODUCT
SUB-CATEGORY MANUFACTURER
MODEL, TYPE, OR
STYLE APPROVED
GOVERNING
SPECIFICATION NOTES
NSF 61
CERTIFIED
City of Frisco
Approved Materials List for Utilities
Last Revised May 2012
Kevin Grant (972) 292-5815
Flange Adapters Manufacturer
Flange Coupling Adapter Manufacturer
Flange Reducing Coupling Adapter Manufacturer
Large Service Hatches Manufacturer
Manhole Appurt. Manufacturer
Manhole Ring and Cover 32" Opening Certainteed Pamrex Hinged / With Logo
Manhole Ring and Cover 30" Opening EJIW BH HM - 30 Hinged / With Logo
Manhole to Pipe Connectors 6" to 15" Trelleborg
Kor-N-Seal I
106/406 Series ASTM C923 Precast Manholes
Manhole to Pipe Connectors 18" to 48" Trelleborg
Kor-N-Seal II
206 Series ASTM C923 Precast Manholes
Manhole to Pipe Connectors 8" to 48" A-LOK Products A-LOK Premium ASTM C923 Precast Manholes
Manhole to Pipe Connectors 8" to 48" A-LOK Products
A-LOK Fiberglass
Field Sleeve ASTM C923
Cast-In-Place
Manholes
Manhole Waterproofing Material 16 mils Carboline Bitumastic 300M AWWA C210 Precast / Cast-In-Place
Version 6/19/12
AM- Approved Materials Utilities 6/14/2012 Page 6 of 10
BASIC PRODUCT CATEGORY
PRODUCT
SUB-CATEGORY MANUFACTURER
MODEL, TYPE, OR
STYLE APPROVED
GOVERNING
SPECIFICATION NOTES
NSF 61
CERTIFIED
City of Frisco
Approved Materials List for Utilities
Last Revised May 2012
Kevin Grant (972) 292-5815
Pipe Material Manufacturer
Ductile Iron Pipe 16" to 48"
American, U.S. Pipe,
Griffin
Pressure Class 150, 250, 300,
350 AWWA C151
Distribution/
Transmission NSF
PVC Pipe 6" to 30" Various Manufacturers DR-14, DR-18
AWWA C900
AWWA C905
Distribution/
Transmission NSF
PVC Pipe 6" to 15" Various Manufacturers
SDR 26 (PS 115)
SDR 35 (PS 46) ASTM D3034
Non-pressure
Wastewater
PVC Pipe 18" to 48" Various Manufacturers PS 115 ASTM F679
Non-pressure
Wastewater
PVC Pipe 18" to 48" Various Manufacturers Closed Profile (PS 46) ASTM F1803
Non-pressure
Wastewater
PVC Pipe 6" to 12" Various Manufacturers
SDR 26 (Pressure rated 160
psi) ASTM D2241
Pressure Wastewater;
White in Color
PVC Pipe 16" to 42" Various Manufacturers DR-25 AWWA C905
Pressure Wastewater;
White in Color
Fiberglass Pipe 18" to 72" Hobas, Future, Ameron PS 46 ASTM D3262
Non-pressure
Wastewater
Pipe Lubricant Manufacturer
Polywrap Manufacturer
Polyethylene Encasement
Ductile Iron Pipe and
Fittings Various Manufacturers 8 mils AWWA C105
Adhesive Tape 2" Wide Polyken Scotchrap No. 50
Version 6/19/12
AM- Approved Materials Utilities 6/14/2012 Page 7 of 10
BASIC PRODUCT CATEGORY
PRODUCT
SUB-CATEGORY MANUFACTURER
MODEL, TYPE, OR
STYLE APPROVED
GOVERNING
SPECIFICATION NOTES
NSF 61
CERTIFIED
City of Frisco
Approved Materials List for Utilities
Last Revised May 2012
Kevin Grant (972) 292-5815
Retainer Glands Manufacturer
Retainer Glands
For MJ DI Pipe
Up to 36" Uni-Flange Series 1400-D
AWWA C600
NCTCOG 502.4 NSF
Retainer Glands
For MJ DI Pipe
Up to 48" Ebba Iron
Megalug
Series 1100, 1100SD
AWWA C600
NCTCOG 502.4 NSF
Retainer Glands
For MJ PVC Pipe
Up to 24" Uni-Flange Series 1500, 1500-C
AWWA C600
NCTCOG 502.4 NSF
Retainer Glands
For MJ PVC Pipe
Up to 24" Ebba Iron
Megalug
Series 2000PV NCTCOG 502.4 NSF
Reclaimed Water Meter Manufacturer
1"-6" Neptune (sole source) No Lead
Reclaimed Water Meter Boxes Manufacturer
water meter box 1" DFW Plastics DFW36C-12-5BA purple
water meter box 11/2" or 2" DFW Plastics DFW1730F-18-5BA purple
Service Saddles Manufacturer
Service Saddle 3/4" to 2" Ford Style 202B
Brass with double
bronze straps
Service Saddle 3/4" to 2" Cambridge Series 810
Brass with double
bronze straps
Service Saddle 3/4" to 2" A.Y. McDonald Model #3825
Brass with double
bronze straps
Version 6/19/12
AM- Approved Materials Utilities 6/14/2012 Page 8 of 10
BASIC PRODUCT CATEGORY
PRODUCT
SUB-CATEGORY MANUFACTURER
MODEL, TYPE, OR
STYLE APPROVED
GOVERNING
SPECIFICATION NOTES
NSF 61
CERTIFIED
City of Frisco
Approved Materials List for Utilities
Last Revised May 2012
Kevin Grant (972) 292-5815
Tapping Sleeve Manufacturer
Tapping Sleeve
For DI, CI, PVC
Up to 24" Mueller Model #H-615 AWWA C600
Gray or DI,
Full Bodied NSF
Tapping Sleeve For DI Up to 36" American Series 2800 AWWA C600 DI Full Bodied NSF
Tapping Sleeve
For CI or DI
14" to 36" American Series 1004 AWWA C600 DI Full Bodied NSF
Tapping Sleeve
For DI, CI, PVC
Up to 36" U.S. Pipe T-9 AWWA C600 DI Full Bodied NSF
Tapping Sleeve 20" and Larger Smith-Blair Style 623 AWWA C600 Stainless Steel NSF
Valves Manufacturer
Gate Valve
6" to 12"
150 psi test Mueller 2360 Series AWWA C509 Distribution NSF
Gate Valve
16" to 24"
150 psi test M&H Style 4067 AWWA C509 Distribution NSF
Gate Valve
6" to 16"
150 psi test M&H Style 7571 AWWA C515 Distribution NSF
Gate Valve
6" to 12"
150 psi test American Flow Control Series 2500 AWWA C509 Distribution NSF
Butterfly Valve 16" to 48" Mueller 3211 Series AWWA C504
Distribution/
Transmission NSF
Butterfly Valve 16"to 24" M&H Style 4500 AWWA C504
Distribution/
Transmission NSF
Butterfly Valve 30" to 48" M&H Style 1450 AWWA C504
Distribution/
Transmission NSF
Plug Valve (Eccentric) 4" to 24" M&H Style 1820
AWWA C504
AWWA C505 NSF
Version 6/19/12
AM- Approved Materials Utilities 6/14/2012 Page 9 of 10
BASIC PRODUCT CATEGORY
PRODUCT
SUB-CATEGORY MANUFACTURER
MODEL, TYPE, OR
STYLE APPROVED
GOVERNING
SPECIFICATION NOTES
NSF 61
CERTIFIED
City of Frisco
Approved Materials List for Utilities
Last Revised May 2012
Kevin Grant (972) 292-5815
Valve Stack Manufacturer
Valve Stack 3 piece screw type Mueller No. H-10360
Valve Box Insert Manufacturer
Valve Box Insert Parsons Environmental Valve Box Insert ASTM D1248 5 1/4" SRC
Water Meter AMR Lids Manufacturer
18" x 18" DFW Plastics DFW18 AMR ISF ASTM C857-95
28" x 18" DFW Plastics DFW 20 CTL ASTM C857-95
Water Meter Vaults Manufacturer
Domestic Meter Vault 3" to 6" Meter
Park Environmental
Equipment Co. Precast Concrete
Galvanized Steel
Hatchway
Double Detector Check Fire Meter Vault 4" to 10" Meter
Park Environmental
Equipment Co. Precast Concrete Aluminum Hatchway
Water Meter Boxes Manufacturer
Water Meter Boxes 1" DFW Plastics DFW-1818 TEX-EJ-15F
Water Meter Boxes 1-1/2" to 2" DFW Plastics DFW-2818-CIRTR
Water Meter Boxes 1" DFW Plastics DFW-37C-KSBSM Reclaimed only (Purple)
Water Meter Boxes 1-1/2" to 2" DFW Plastics D1730 -18-KSBSM Reclaimed only (Purple)
Version 6/19/12
AM- Approved Materials Utilities 6/14/2012 Page 10 of 10
BASIC PRODUCT CATEGORY
PRODUCT
SUB-CATEGORY MANUFACTURER
MODEL, TYPE, OR
STYLE APPROVED
GOVERNING
SPECIFICATION NOTES
NSF 61
CERTIFIED
City of Frisco
Approved Materials List for Utilities
Last Revised May 2012
Kevin Grant (972) 292-5815
Water Meter Couplings Manufacturer
Water Services Manufacturer
HDPE Water Service Pipe 3/4" to 2" Endot Industries EndoTrace
AWWA C901
ASTM D2239 Blue with Tracer wire NSF
Version 6/19/12
AM- Approved Materials
PondSwale 6/14/2012 Page 1 of 1
Common Name Scientific Name
Acceptable Form
Remarks
Prairie Cordgrass Spartina pectinata Container/ seed Bottom
Bushy bluestem Andropogon glomeratus Container/ seed Bottom
Crowfoot Caric Sedge Carex crus-corvi Container/ seed Bottom
Eastern Gramagrass Tripsacum dactyloides Container/ seed Bottom
Lowland Switchgrass Panicum virgatum L. Container/ seed Bottom
Alamo Switchgrass Panicum virgatum 'Alamo' Container/ seed Bottom
Lometa Indiangrass Sorghastrum nutans 'Lometa' Container/ seed Slope
Earl Big Bluestem Andropogon gerardii 'Earl' Container/ seed Slope
Little Bluestem Schizachyrium scoparium
Container/ seed
Slope
Canada Wildrye Elymus canadensis Container/ seed Slope
Spring Obedient Plant Physostegia intermedia Container/ seed Slope
Maximilian Sunflower Helianthus maximiliana Container/ seed Slope
Halberd-leaf Hibiscus Hibiscus laevis Container/ seed Slope
Haskell Sideoats Grama Bouteloua curtipendula Container/ seed Slope
City of Frisco
Approved Materials List for Grass in
Detention Ponds, Swales, Bio-retention Areas
Last Revised May 2012
Darell Bagley (972) 292-5352
Grass/Turf
Version 6/19/12
AM- Approved Materials
MedianPkwyGrass 6/14/2012 Page 1 of 1
Common Name Scientific Name
Acceptable Form
Remarks
Buffalograss Bouteloua dactyloides Sod Native
Bermudagrass Cynodon dactylon Sod or hydromulch Adapted
City of Frisco
Approved Materials List for Grass in Medians and Parkways
Last Revised May 2012
Bobby Johnson (972) 292-6503
Grass/Turf
Version 6/19/12
AM- Approved Materials
MedianPkwyTrees 6/14/2012 Page 1 of 1
Common Name Scientific Name
Container Size to
be Planted
Maximum Mature
Size Remarks
80’ h
80’ w
Common Name Scientific Name
Container Size to
be Planted
Maximum Mature
Size Remarks
80’ h
50’ w
90’ h
80’ w
70’ h
50’ w
Common Name Scientific Name
Container Size to
be Planted
Maximum Mature
Size Remarks
Common Name Scientific Name
Container Size to
be Planted
Maximum Mature
Size Remarks
20’ h
10’ w
25’ h
Holly, Nellie R.Stevens 15’ w
Oak, Chinquapin Quercus muehlenbergii See Plans Native
Elm, Cedar Ulmus crassifolia See Plans Native
Bald Cypress Taxodium distichum See Plans Native
Ilex x ‘Nellie Stevens’ See Plans Adapted
City of Frisco
Approved Materials List for Trees in Medians and Parkways
Last Revised May 2012
Bobby Johnson (972) 292-6503
TREES (LIVING SCREEN)
Holly, Foster Ilex x attenuata ‘Fosteri’ See Plans Adapted
Adapted
TREES (SMALL ORNAMENTAL)
TREES (MEDIUM SHADE)
Pistachio, Chinese Pistacia chinensis See Plans
TREES (LARGE SHADE)
Version 6/19/12
AM- Approved Materials
MedianPkwyShrubs 6/14/2012 Page 1 of 1
Common Name Scientific Name
Container
Size to be
Maximum
Mature Size Remarks
3’ h
3’ w
3’ h
3’ w
3’ h
3’ w
3’ h
4’ w
3’ h
3’ w
Texas Sage, 4’ h
Silverado 4’ w
Dwarf Yaupon Holly Ilex vomitoria ‘Nana’ See Plans
See Plans Dwarf
Dwarf Nandina Nandina domestica See Plans Dwarf
Leucophyllum frutescens
‘Silverado’ See Plans Native
Dwarf
City of Frisco
Approved Materials List for Shrubs in Medians and Parkways
Last Revised May 2012
Bobby Johnson (972) 292-6503
Red Yucca Hesperaloe parviflora
See Plans
Native
Hawthorn, Indian Rhaphiolepsis indica See Plans Adapted
SHRUBS
Dwarf Crape Myrtle Lagerstroemia indica
Version 6/19/12
AM- Approved Materials Irrigation 6/14/2012 Page 1 of 1
BASIC PRODUCT CATEGORY
SUBCATEGORY
MANUFACTURER
MODEL, TYPE, OR
STYLE APPROVED
SPECIFICATI
ON NOTES
NSF 61
CERTIFIED
Rotors Hunter, Rainbird, Toro High Efficiency
Spray Nozzels (Turf Areas) Hunter, Rainbird, Toro High Efficiency
Shrub Nozzle Adapter (Plant Bed Areas) Rainbird
Shrub Nozzles (Plant Bed Areas) Riggs SN8-24
Brass Gate Valve, Domestic Manufacturer Nibco T-113
Drip Irrigation Netafim Unitechline or Techline
Solenoid Valve w/ DC Latching Solenoid Rain Bird PEB-PRS-B Series
Quick Coupling Valves Rain Bird Model 44RC
PVC Ball Valves Spears or Approved Equal Compact Unit
Backflow Preventer
Febco
Double Check Valve
Double Check Box Plastic "Jumbo" DCA
Valve Box DFW Plastics
DFW65C-14-PKSPSM
(Reclaim Water)
D1730-18-PKSPSM (Reclaim Water)
Quick Coupler Valve Box Ametek
Purple 10" Circular Box w/
Purple Lid
PVC Solvent and Purple Tinted Primer IPS P-70/PVC Purple Tinted
City of Frisco
Approved Materials List for Irrigation
Last Revised May 2012
Bill Straw (972) 292-6504
Version 6/19/12
SD – Standard Details May 2012
SD
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAILS
Version 6/19/12
SD – Standard Details May 2012
Standard Construction Details
Table of Contents
Detail No. Description Date
G01 Project Sign March 2012
GENERAL
P01 Thoroughfare Classes “A” Through “G” – Typical Section (with
PAVING
Moisture Conditioning) March 2012
P02 Thoroughfare Classes “C” Through “G”, Alleys, Firelanes –
Typical Section (without Moisture Conditioning) March 2012
P03 Typical Pavement Reinforcement and Concrete Curb March 2012
P04 Existing Concrete Pavement Widening March 2012
P05 Concrete Pavement – Jointing Layout March 2012
P06 Concrete Pavement – Construction Joints March 2012
P07 Concrete Pavement – Expansion Joint March 2012
P08 Concrete Street Headers March 2012
P09 Monolithic Median Nose – Type 1 March 2012
P10 Monolithic Median Nose – Type 2 March 2012
P11 Median Nose with Pavers March 2012
P12 Commercial Driveway Approach March 2012
P13 Residential Driveway Approach with Vertical Sawcut March 2012
P14 Residential Driveway Approach with Horizontal Sawcut March 2012
P15 Alley Approach - RESERVED TBD
P16 Alley Geometrics – Types “A” & “B”- RESERVED TBD
P17 Alley Geometrics – Types “C” & “D”- RESERVED TBD
P18 Alley Geometrics – Types “E” & “F” - RESERVED TBD
P19 Alley Geometrics – Types “G” & “H”- RESERVED TBD
P20 Alley Geometrics – Type “J” – RESERVED TBD
P21 Speed Table March 2012
P22 Reinforced Concrete Sidewalk March 2012
P23 Directional Barrier Free Ramps – RESERVED TBD
T01 Pavement Markings and Markers – Sheet 1 of 3 March 2012
TRAFFIC
T02 Pavement Markings and Markers – Sheet 2 of 3 March 2012
T03 Pavement Markings and Markers – Sheet 3 of 3 – RESERVED TBD
T04 Sign Post March 2012
T05 Road Closed Barricade March 2012
T06 Stop Signs and Stop Bars March 2012
T07 Sign and Street Light Placement – RESERVED TBD
T08 Street Name Blade March 2012
D01 Curbed Flume March 2012
DRAINAGE
D02 Standard Curb Inlet – Sheet 1 of 2 March 2012
D03 Standard Curb Inlet – Sheet 2 of 2 March 2012
D04 Recessed Curb Inlet – Sheet 1 of 2 March 2012
Version 6/19/12
SD – Standard Details May 2012
D05 Recessed Curb Inlet – Sheet 2 of 2 March 2012
D06 Center Support Beam and Inlet Section for Recessed & Standard Inlets March 2012
D07 Inlet Lid Detail and General Notes March 2012
U01 Embedment “A” – RESERVED TBD
UTILITY
U02 Embedment “B” (Storm) March 2012
U03 Embedment “B+” (Water) April 2012
U04 Embedment “B-1” (Wastewater) April 2012
U05 Embedment “C+” April 2012
U06 Embedment “G” March 2012
U07 Embedment “H” (Wastewater) March 2012
U08 Infiltration Protection – Conduit Under Channel March 2012
U09 Casing Spacers March 2012
W01 Horizontal Thrust Block at Pipe Bend - Sheet 1 of 3 March 2012
WATER
W02 Horizontal Thrust Block at Pipe Bend - Sheet 2 of 3 March 2012
W03 Horizontal Thrust Block at Pipe Bend - Sheet 3 of 3 March 2012
W04 Horizontal Thrust Block at Tees and Plugs – RESERVED TBD
W05 Vertical Thrust Block at Pipe Bend March 2012
W06 Thrust Block – General Notes March 2012
W07 Gate Valve March 2012
W08 Butterfly Valve March 2012
W09 Combination Air Vacuum Valve Type “1”, Air Vent - RESERVED TBD
W10 Blow Off Valve March 2012
W11 Flush Point September 2011
W12 Fire Hydrant March 2012
W13 Fire Hydrant Installation March 2012
W14 Pipe Bollard March 2012
W15 Residential Service Locations March 2012
W16 Typical Service Connection March 2012
W17 Domestic Water Meter Vault March 2012
W18 Double Detector Check Fire Vault March 2012
W19 Double Detector Check Fire Vault and F.D.C. March 2012
W20 Water Main Lowering Below Wastewater Main March 2012
W21 Offsite Water Main Marker March 2012
S01 Standard Cast-In-Place Manhole March 2012
WASTEWATER
S02 Precast Concrete Manhole March 2012
S03 Manhole to Pipe Resilient Connector March 2012
S04 Vented Type S Manhole March 2012
S05 Pressure Manhole Lid and Frame March 2012
S06 Manhole Drop Connection March 2012
S07 Wastewater Manhole Line Intersection March 2012
S08 Wastewater Manhole False Bottom March 2012
S09 Manhole Abandonment March 2012
S10 Wastewater Main Cleanout March 2012
S11 Wastewater Lateral March 2012
S12 Offsite Wastewater Marker March 2012
Version 6/19/12
SD – Standard Details May 2012
L01 Tree Planting (Single-Trunk) March 2012
LANDSCAPING
L02 Tree Planting (Multi-Trunk) March 2012
L03 Shrub Planting March 2012
L04 Groundcover Planting March 2012
L05 Tree Protection March 2012
L06 Concrete Mow Strip March 2012
L07 Steel Edging March 2012
Version 6/19/12
City Logo
(See Note #1)
City of Frisco
Capital Improvement
Program
Project Name Line 1
Project Name Line 2
Project Manager:
City of Frisco
Engineering Dept.
972-292-5400
Contractor:
Contractor Name
Contractor City, State
Contractor Phone No.
PROJECT SIGN
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
THOROUGHFARE CLASSES "A" THROUGH "G"
TYPICAL SECTION (WITH MOISTURE CONDITIONING)
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
THOROUGHFARE CLASSES "C" THROUGH "G"
TYPICAL SECTION (WITHOUT MOISTURE CONDITIONING)
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
TYPICAL PAVEMENT REINFORCEMENT
AND CONCRETE CURB
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
EXISTING CONCRETE PAVEMENT WIDENING
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
CONCRETE PAVEMENT
JOINTING LAYOUT
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
OPTION 1
OPTION 2
CONCRETE PAVEMENT
CONSTRUCTION JOINTS
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
CONCRETE PAVEMENT
EXPANSION JOINT
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
STREET HEADER AT EXISTING PAVEMENT
STREET HEADER FOR FUTURE CONCRETE PAVEMENT
CONCRETE PAVEMENT AT STREET HEADER
CONCRETE STREET HEADERS
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
PLAN
SECTION A-A
SECTION B-B
MONOLITHIC MEDIAN NOSE
TYPE 1
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
PLAN
SECTION A-A
SECTION B-B
MONOLITHIC MEDIAN NOSE
TYPE 2
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
SECTION A-A
PLAN
MEDIAN NOSE WITH PAVERS
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
SECTION A-A
PLAN
COMMERCIAL DRIVEWAY APPROACH
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
PLAN
SECTION A-A
RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAY APPROACH
WITH VERTICAL SAWCUT
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
SECTION A-A
PLAN
RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAY APPROACH
WITH HORIZONTAL SAWCUT
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
SECTION A-A
PLAN
SPEED TABLE
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
PLAN
JOINT LUG DETAIL FOR
SIDEWALK ADJACENT TO CURB
SECTION B-B
SECTION A-A
REINFORCED CONCRETE SIDEWALK
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
DOUBLE YELLOW LINE (PAVEMENT MARKINGS)
DOUBLE YELLOW LINE (BUTTONS, RAISED PAVEMENT MARKERS)
BROKEN WHITE LANE LINE
WHITE OR YELLOW EDGE LINE LEFT TURN "PUPPY TRACKS"
LEFT TURN BAY LINE RIGHT TURN BAY LINE
PAVEMENT MARKINGS AND MARKERS
SHEET 1 OF 2
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
OPPOSING TRAFFIC GORE DETAIL
NEUTRAL AREA CHANNELIZATION
LANE DROP
PAVEMENT MARKINGS AND MARKERS
SHEET 2 OF 2
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
SIGN POST
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
TYPICAL INSTALLATION
ROAD CLOSED BARRICADE
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
STOP SIGNS AND STOP BARS
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
STREET NAME BLADE
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
CURBED FLUME
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
PLAN
PROFILE
STANDARD CURB INLET
SHEET 1 OF 2
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
THROAT SECTION
STANDARD CURB INLET
SHEET 2 OF 2
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
PLAN
PROFILE
RECESSED CURB INLET
SHEET 1 OF 2
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
THROAT SECTION
RECESSED CURB INLET
SHEET 2 OF 2
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
CENTER SUPPORT BEAM FOR 15' & 20'
RECESSED AND STANDARD INLETS
INLET SECTION FOR RECESSED AND STANDARD INLETS
CENTER SUPPORT BEAM & INLET SECTION
FOR RECESSED AND STANDARD INLETS
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
INLET LID DETAIL
INLET LID DETAIL AND
GENERAL NOTES
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
CLASS "B"
EMBEDMENT "B" (STORM)
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
CLASS "B+"
EMBEDMENT "B+" (WATER)
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
CLASS "B-1"
EMBEDMENT "B-1" (WASTEWATER)
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
CLASS "C+"
EMBEDMENT "C+"
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
CLASS "G"
EMBEDMENT "G"
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
CLASS "H"
EMBEDMENT "H" (WASTEWATER)
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
INFILTRATION PROTECTION
CONDUIT UNDER CHANNEL
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
CASING SPACER
CASING SPACER PROFILE
CASING SPACERS
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
PLAN
SECTION X-X
?? ??
??
HORIZONTAL THRUST BLOCK AT PIPE BEND
SHEET 1 OF 3
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
?? ?? ??
?? ??
HORIZONTAL THRUST BLOCK AT PIPE BEND
SHEET 2 OF 3
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
?? ??
?? ??
HORIZONTAL THRUST BLOCK AT PIPE BEND
SHEET 3 OF 3
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
?? ??
ELEVATION B-B SECTION A-A
VERTICAL THRUST BLOCK AT PIPE BEND
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
THRUST BLOCK
GENERAL NOTES
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
VALVE SETTING & BOX
VALVE BOX PAD PLAN VALVE BOX WITH EXTENSION
VALVE EXTENSION
GATE VALVE
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
BUTTERFLY VALVE
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
BLOW OFF VALVE
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
”
”
”
FLUSH POINT
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
FIRE HYDRANT
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
FIRE HYDRANT INSTALLATION
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAILS
Version 6/19/12
PIPE BOLLARD
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
RESIDENTIAL SERVICE LOCATIONS
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
TYPICAL SERVICE CONNECTION
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
SECTION
PLAN VIEW
DOMESTIC WATER METER VAULT
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
SECTION
PLAN VIEW
DOUBLE DETECTOR CHECK FIRE VAULT
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
SECTION
PLAN VIEW
DOUBLE DETECTOR CHECK FIRE VAULT
AND F.D.C.
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
WATER MAIN LOWERING
BELOW WASTEWATER MAIN
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
FIELD INSTALLATION DETAIL
ELEVATION
OFFSITE WATER MAIN MARKER
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
STANDARD CAST-IN-PLACE MANHOLE
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
PRECAST CONCRETE MANHOLE
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
MANHOLE TO PIPE RESILIENT CONNECTOR
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
VENTED TYPE S MANHOLE
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
E SEW R
ASSEMBLY PLAN VIEW
ASSEMBLY CROSS SECTION
NI AS
RY AT
PRESSURE MANHOLE LID AND FRAME
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
MANHOLE DROP CONNECTION
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
PLAN
SECTION A-A
??
WASTEWATER MANHOLE
LINE INTERSECTION
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
PLAN VIEW
INSTALLATION AND REMOVAL POSITION
WASTEWATER MANHOLE
FALSE BOTTOM
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
MANHOLE ABANDONMENT
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
PROFILE VIEW
SECTION X-X
WASTEWATER MAIN
CLEANOUT
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
PLAN VIEW
SECTION VIEW
WASTEWATER LATERAL
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
FIELD INSTALLATION DETAIL
ELEVATION
OFFSITE WASTEWATER MARKER
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
PLAN
SECTION
TREE PLANTING (SINGLE TRUNK)
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
PLAN
SECTION
TREE PLANTING (MULTI-TRUNK)
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
SHRUB PLANTING
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
PLAN
SECTION
GROUNDCOVER PLANTING
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
TREE PROTECTION
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
CONCRETE MOW STRIP
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
STEEL EDGING
STANDARD CONSTRUCTION DETAIL
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Appendix A – Definitions and Abbreviations May 2012 Page 1
APPENDIX A
DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Appendix A – Definitions and Abbreviations May 2012 Page 2
Definitions
The definitions within this Section are intended to provide descriptions for words and terms used within
the Engineering Standards. When words and terms are defined herein, and are also defined in other
ordinance(s) of the City, they shall be read in harmony unless there exists an irreconcilable conflict, in
which case the definition contained in this Section shall control for the Engineering Standards. Where no
definition appears, then the term should be interpreted according to their customary usage in the practice
of municipal planning and engineering. The City has the final determination of interpretation.
Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the singular number include the plural
number, and words used in the plural number include the singular number. The word shall is mandatory
and not directory. The word may is directory and not mandatory.
Approved, Accepted, Directed, Required, and Words of Like Import: Whenever they apply to the
work or its performance, the words "directed," “accepted,” "required," "permitted," "ordered,"
"designated," "established," "prescribed" and words of like shall imply the direction, requirement,
permission, order, designation or prescription of the City; and "approved," "acceptable," "satisfactory"
and words of like import shall mean approved by, acceptable to or satisfactory to the City.
Backfill: The term means the following (1) the placement of new dirt, fill, or other material to refill an
Excavation; or (2) the return of excavated dirt, fill or other material to an Excavation.
City: The term City means the City of Frisco or its authorized representative(s).
Compaction: The term refers to consolidating material to prevent future settlement
Contract or Contract Documents: Contract documents are all of the written, printed, typed, drawn
instruments, plans, and specifications that comprise and govern the performance of the contract between
the Owner and the Contractor.
Contractor: The person, persons, partnership, firm, corporation, association or organization, or any
combination thereof, as an independent contractor entering into the contract for the execution of the work,
acting directly or through a duly authorized representative. Contractor does not refer to the City.
Development: Refers to the project being designed or constructed. (see also Subdivision Ordinance)
Director of Engineering Services: The Director of Engineering Services or their authorized
representative. (see also Subdivision Ordinance)
Easement: A property right giving an entity other than the owner permission to use a property for a
specific purpose stated in the easement document. (see also Subdivision Ordinance)
Emergency Operations: Those operations and repairs necessary to prevent damage or injury and to
protect the health or safety of the public or any person and the work necessary to address or prevent an
immediate service interruption. Upgrading of facilities, new service installation and neighborhood
improvement projects are not emergency operations.
Engineer, Owner’s Engineer, Design Engineer: The Engineer or its duly authorized representative
means the Engineer of the Owner, who is the Engineer of Record of the Contract Documents.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Appendix A – Definitions and Abbreviations May 2012 Page 3
Equal: Materials, articles or methods that are of equal or higher quality than those specified or shown on
the drawings, as determined by the City’s sole discretion.
Excavation: Excavation means any activity that removes or otherwise disturbs soil, pavement,
driveways, curbs, or sidewalks in the right-of-way or an easement.
100-Year Floodplain: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year, based upon a fully developed watershed and the City’s criteria to accommodate a 100-year
storm in a Major Creek.
Owner: For the purposes of this manual, the term Owner refers to the entity that is financially responsible
for developing and maintaining a particular site or project, either the City for public projects or the
developer for private projects.
Plan or Plans: The plans are the drawings or reproductions therefrom made by or approved by the Owner
showing in detail the location, dimension and position of the various elements of the project, including
such profiles, typical cross-sections, layout diagrams, working drawings, preliminary drawings and such
supplemental drawings as the Owner’s Engineer may issue to clarify other drawings or for the purpose of
showing changes in the work hereinafter authorized by the Owner.
Private Facilities or Improvements: Any improvements on private property where a public entity (i.e.
the City) is not considered the Owner.
Public Facilities or Improvements: Public facilities and/or improvements include streets (including
streetlights, street signs, signals and pavement markings), storm drainage systems, water lines, sanitary
sewer lines, pedestrian improvements, or other similar improvements constructed within public right-ofway
or easements. Typically, the City maintains public improvements after expiration of any applicable
maintenance bonds.
Private Fire Service Main: Pipe and its appurtenances on private property beyond the meter supplying
water for fire protection facilities such as automatic sprinkler systems
Private Water Line: Pipe and its appurtenances beyond the meter supplying potable water on private
property.
Right of Way or Public Right of Way (ROW): A use of land dedicated by plat or metes and bounds to
and for use by the public, which is separate and distinct from the lots and parcel abutting it, and which is
not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. Generally describes an area used for
the provision of streets and utilities. Unless otherwise specified, the term right-of-way shall refer to a
public right-of-way.
Specifications or Technical Specifications: Document giving a detailed description of the quantitative
and qualitative requirements for products, materials, and workmanship
Utility Easement: A water, wastewater, or reuse water easement granted to the City.
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Appendix A – Definitions and Abbreviations May 2012 Page 4
Abbreviations and Acronyms
Wherever the abbreviations defined herein occur in the Engineering Standards, the intent and meaning
shall be as follows:
% Percent
‘ Foot or Feet
“ Inch or Inches
#, lbs Pound or pounds
AASHTO American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials
ACI American Concrete Institute
am, a.m. Before noon
ANSI American National Standards Institute
Asph. Asphalt
ASME American Society of Mechanical Engineers
ASTM American Society for Testing and Materials
APWA American Public Works Association
AWS American Welding Society
AWWA American Water Works Association
B/L Base Line
cc Cubic Centimeter
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
cfs Cubic feet per second
CI Cast Iron
C/L Center Line
cm Centimeter
CO Cleanout
Conc Concrete
Cond Conduit
Corr Corrugated
Cu Cubic
cy, CY,C.Y. Cubic Yard
DES Director of Engineering Services
DI Ductile Iron
Dia Diameter
Elev Elevation
F Fahrenheit
fps Feet per second
ft Foot or Feet
Gal Gallon
g, gm Gram
HDPE High Density Polyethylene
HP Horsepower
hr Hour
ID Inside Diameter
in Inch or Inches
Kg or kg Kilogram
kPa Kilopascals
L Liter
LDPE Low Density Polyethylene
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Appendix A – Definitions and Abbreviations May 2012 Page 5
LF Linear foot or feet
LL Liquid Limit
LLDPE Linear Low Density Polyethylene
LMDPE Linear Medium Density Polyethylene
m Meter
Max Maximum
MH Manhole
Min Minimum or Minute
MJ Mechanical Joint
mm Millimeter
Mono Monolithic
mph Miles per hour
MSS Manufacturers Standardization Society of the Valve and Fittings Industry
MPa Megapascal
NACE National Association of Corrosion Engineers
Nat’l National
NCTCOG North Central Texas Council of Governments
NEMA National Electrical Manufacturers Association
No. Number
NPT National Pipe Thread
NRMCA National Ready-mixed Concrete
NTTA North Texas Tollway Authority
o.d., OD Outside Diameter
OSHA Occupational Safety and Health Administration
oz Ounce
PCC Portland Cement Concrete
PI, P.I. Plasticity Index
pm, p.m. Afternoon
psi Pounds per Square Inch
PVC Polyvinyl Chloride
R Radius
RAP Recycled/Reclaimed Asphalt Pavement
RCP Reinforced Concrete Pipe
RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
Reinf Reinforced or reinforcing
ROW Right-of-Way
SS Sanitary Sewer
Sec Second
S.F. or sf Square Foot
Sq Square
SSPC The Society for Protective Coatings [formerly Steel Structures Painting Council]
Std Standard
Str Strength
SWPPP, SW3P Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan
SY Square Yard
TAC Texas Administrative Code
Tex-###-X Refer to TxDOT Manual of Testing Procedures
TCEQ Texas Commission on Environmental Quality [formerly Texas Natural Resource
Conservation Commission (TNRCC)]
TMUTCD Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
Version 6/19/12
Engineering Standards
Appendix A – Definitions and Abbreviations May 2012 Page 6
TxDOT Texas Department of Transportation
TxDOT Item # Refer to current TxDOT Standard Specifications for Construction of Highways,
Streets and Bridges
UL Underwriter's Laboratory
um,µm Micrometers
US, U.S. United States
USACE United States Army Corps of Engineering
U.S.C. United States Code
USEPA United States Environmental Protection Agency
Vert Vertical
Vol Volume
Wt Weight
WW Wastewater
Yd Yard
Version 6/19/12

Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
Frisco
FORM-BASED CODE
Manual
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
Credits
CITY COUNCIL
Mayor Mike Simpson
(Former) Mayor Pro-Tem, Maher Maso
(Former) Dep. Mayor Pro-Tem, Bob Allen
Matt Lafata, Joy West, Tony Felker, Jim Joyner
Jeff Cheney, David Prince
PLANNING & ZONING COMMISSION
Dave Wilcox – Chair
Philip Lotspeich – Vice Chair
Jim Tupper – Commissioner
Bob Bennett – Commissioner
Chris Moss – Commissioner
Bryan Johnson – Commissioner
Geralyn Kaminsky – Past Chair
AD-HOC COMMITTEE
Steve Modory
Jim Williams
Paul Shaw
Brant Bryan
Jim Gandy
Geralyn Kaminsky
Steve Hulsey
Pieter Kessels
Coy Talley
STAFF
John Lettelleir
Jeffrey Witt
Michael Walker
Liz Metting
CONSULTANT
Townscape, Inc.
December 18, 2007
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
City of Frisco
Form-Based Code Standards
Introduction........................................................................................... 1
Glossary of Terms ................................................................................. 2
General .................................................................................................. 5
G-1. Administration .......................................................................................5
G-2. Landmark Commercial Buildings..........................................................8
G-3. Street Grid..............................................................................................9
G-4. Interconnectivity of Developments......................................................10
G-5. Neighborhood Oriented Open Space ...................................................11
G-6. Views ...................................................................................................12
Land Use.............................................................................................. 13
LU-1. Mixed-Use Developments ...................................................................13
LU-2. Retail At-Grade Standards (Urban) .....................................................14
LU-3. Residential At-Grade Standards (Urban) .............................................15
LU-4. Relationship Between Residential and Non-Residential in a
Non-Mixed Use Setting .......................................................................16
LU-5. Building Orientation as it Relates to Open Space................................17
Site ...................................................................................................... 18
S-1. Site Layout – Big Box..........................................................................18
S-2. Site Layout – Retail Centers ................................................................20
S-3. Commercial Use Parking Location......................................................22
S-4. Fencing, Visible from the Street ..........................................................23
S-5. Single Family Residential Garage Locations.......................................24
S-6. Single Family Residential Front Entry Garages ..................................25
Building ............................................................................................... 27
B-1. Architectural Detailing of Residential Window Treatments ...............27
B-2. Front Porch Requirements ...................................................................28
B-3. Anti-Monotony ....................................................................................29
B-4. Residential Building Standards for Traditional Neighborhood
Developments (TND)...........................................................................30
B-5. Commercial Building Form .................................................................31
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
Public Realm ....................................................................................... 32
PR-1. Special Street Types — Retail Internal Circulation.............................32
PR-2. Special Street Types — Round-About.................................................34
PR-3. Special Street Types — Townhome Alley...........................................35
PR-4. Sidewalks .............................................................................................36
PR-5. Street Trees ..........................................................................................37
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
1 Introduction
INTRODUCTION
INTENT
This Form-Based Code Standards document implements policies in the 2006
Comprehensive Plan that focuses on physical form. The majority of these policies
can be found in Chapter 5 Livability Strategy, which seek to ensure that Frisco
guides its development in a way that creates neighborhoods and centers which are
simply great places to be and which foster social interaction and a sense of
community. These types of developments tend to attract financial reinvestment
over time and therefore become sustainable building blocks of a great city.
These standards are representative of “great places” around the country and
around the world that embody timeless attractiveness and contribute to positive
human social and economic interaction.
HOW TO USE THIS DOCUMENT
The standards set out in this document are intended to be utilized in creating
planned development districts throughout the City which implement the
Comprehensive Plan. They represent a starting point from which certain elements
of standards may be varied as appropriate for each district. Care must be taken
however, not to greatly vary these standards to such an extent that the positive
physical and social characteristics are compromised. Please note that all
references to ordinances in this document are to existing ordinances or as they
may be amended.
For ease in cataloguing, standards are organized into:
?? General
?? Land Use
?? Site
?? Building
?? Public Realm
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
2 Glossary
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
Big Box Development. Any building designed for a single ground floor tenant
greater than 70,000 s.f. or as may be defined in the Comprehensive Zoning
Ordinance, whichever is more restrictive.
Build-to Line. This is a defined line parallel to a public or private street that the
primary building façade must be built along.
Browsing Lane. In this code, “browsing lane” refers to particular configuration of
parking with a drive aisle that is similar to the diagram in S-2-Retail
Centers. It relies on the fact that the drive aisle will continue through
different properties along a block face. It is intended only for those
developments located along a 4-lane or larger thoroughfare, and provides
convenience parking for customers, and slows traffic speed. The primary
pedestrian sidewalk is transitioned from the front street into the site to be
adjacent to the building face.
CPTED (Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design). The concept of
CPTED is based upon the following theory: the proper design and
effective use of the built environment can lead to the reduction in the
incidence and fear of crime, and an improvement in the quality of life.
Director. References to “the Director” in this document refer to the Director of
Planning & Development Services for the City of Frisco or his/her
designee.
District. The zoning district which refers to the standards in this document.
Feature Buildings. Buildings which are located on axis with a terminating street
or open space, or at the intersection of streets. Such buildings shall
incorporate architectural features which address height and articulation
that emphasize the importance of such a location.
FEATURE BUILDING EXAMPLES
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
3 Glossary
Neighborhood Oriented Open Space. This is shared common open space in a
residential or mixed use residential neighborhood that is intended to help
create property uniqueness, enhance property value and support
neighborhood socialization. It is not a part of the City’s parks program or
eligible for park dedication fee credits, and it does not include landscaped
portions of public street rights-of-way.
Pattern Book. This is an inventory of building styles and designs for a particular
development, including available additions and variations which are
proposed by the developer and which guides the “style” of buildings
constructed in a development. It may also refer to and utilize “A Field
Guide to American Houses” by Virginia and Lee McAlester, Alfred A.
Knopf, 1990. The Pattern Book may also include requirements or
limitations on the number or repetition of certain elements such as front
porches, mother-in-law or studio suites, garage configurations and
cementitious siding. Pattern Books must be approved by the Planning &
Zoning Commission.
Pedestrian Oriented Development. Development that is designed and built to
cater to the pedestrian by creating an experience of comfort, safety,
security, attractiveness and interest. This includes land use patterns, urban
design characteristics and transportation systems.
Public Realm. The term “Public Realm” refers to both the public areas of streets
and parks, and the semi-public areas of sidewalks, streets and parks/plazas
within a private development which the general public is intended to use,
such as in retail and mixed use centers.
Style. Refers to acceptable architectural styles, including such things as building
articulation, window proportion, doors, garage doors, roof shape, materials
and building siting.
TND Neighborhoods. “Traditional Neighborhood Developments” that are
determined by the Director as generally incorporating the following
characteristics:
?? Designed to be pedestrian-oriented with sidewalks of a minimum of 5
feet wide;
?? Contain a mixture of residential unit types (such as single family,
“mother-in-law” suites, townhomes, multi-unit homes and/or lofts in
conjunction with retail);
?? A majority of homes include front porches of at least 70 square feet
(s.f.) and are generally set back no more than 15-20 feet from the
sidewalk;
?? Include community-accessible open space;
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
4 Glossary
?? All streets are lined with shade trees.
Urban Mixed Use Development. This is a development or portion of a
development that includes a mixture of residential and non-residential uses
in a configuration where a majority of the buildings are two or more
stories tall and pedestrian-oriented.
Waiver to Design Standards, Major (Major Waiver). A significant change to
both the standards and intent of this Zoning District, which involves
Planning & Zoning Commission approval. (See “G-1. Administration”.)
Waiver to Design Standards, Minor (Minor Waiver). A minor change to the
standards, but not the intent, of the Zoning District and involves Director
approval unless otherwise noted. (See “G-1. Administration”.)
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
5 General Standards
GENERAL
G-1. Administration
A. INTENT
It is the intent that a developer or builder who wishes to develop utilizing
form-based code standards included in this document will be processed in an
expedited manner with administrative approvals where possible. However, if
there are Major Waivers requested, additional approvals shall be required
which may require additional time to process applications.
B. REGULATING EXHIBIT
1. Authority
A Regulating Exhibit is the instrument for application of certain zoning
district provisions to properties, and shall be considered part of any
Zoning District utilizing the standards in this document. It establishes such
things as:
a. Public Realm
b. Major street types within the district
c. Sub-district areas
d. Land uses
e. Required at-grade retail construction
f. Public open space and plazas
g. Regional Hike and Bike Corridors
2. Zoning of Property
Regulating Exhibit Required. A Regulating Exhibit for the property to
be zoned shall be adopted as part of the zoning of such property.
C. DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION SUBMITTAL
Applications for development submittals for plats and site plans shall be made
in accordance with the City’s development review process. Review of such
applications shall follow the Zoning and Development Review Schedule as
provided in the Zoning and Development Packet.
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
6 General Standards
D. WAIVERS OF DESIGN STANDARDS
1. For the purposes of this District, there are two types of Waivers of Design
Standards — Minor and Major. A waiver request shall be made in
conjunction with an application for a site plan and/or plat. The applicant
shall specify the reasons for the waiver and provide alternatives to meet
the regulation(s) at the time of the waiver request.
2. Minor Waivers are those changes to design standards in the District
which may be approved administratively by the Director in conjunction
with a decision on an application for approval of a Site Plan. All Minor
Waivers must meet the full intent of the Zoning District and applicable
standards in this document. Minor Waivers are specified within each
Section of this Code.
3. Major Waivers are major changes to the design standards in the District,
including any change not identified in Subsection 2 above. Major Waivers
may only be approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission following a
recommendation by the Director, with an appeal to the City Council, in
conjunction with a decision on an application for approval of a Site Plan
and/or plat.
a. In order to approve a Major Waiver, the Planning & Zoning
Commission must find that the waiver:
?? Will not compromise the public realm or discourage pedestrian
use.
?? Meets the general intent of this Manual and the zoning district in
which the property is located, and
?? Will result in an improved project which will be an attractive
contribution to the district; and
?? Will not prevent the realization of the intent of the district or
adjoining districts.
b. Major Waivers are specified within each Section of this Code.
4. Conditions. The approving authority may impose lawful conditions on
granting any Waiver to mitigate negative impacts on neighboring
properties, public streets or open space.
5. Appealing the Director’s Decision on a “Minor Waiver”. The
applicant may appeal the decision of the Director regarding a Minor
Waiver to the Planning & Zoning Commission within 14-calendar days of
notification of the decision.
6. Appealing the Planning & Zoning Commission Decision on a Waiver.
The applicant, Director, or four members of City Council may appeal the
decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission regarding a Minor
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
7 General Standards
Waiver to the City Council within 14-calendar days of official action of
the Planning & Zoning Commission on a Minor Waiver.
7. Appeal to Council. City Council has final decision making authority over
any Waivers that come before the Council.
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
8 General Standards
G-2. Landmark Commercial Buildings
INTENT
To create a focus and identity for the community, and
provide a means for orientation for pedestrians and drivers.
Landmark buildings include office, retail and urban housing
buildings at street termination and at the corners of
intersections; they also include civic and cultural buildings
such as theaters, museums and schools.
STANDARDS TERMINI CORNERS
Requirement Buildings at the terminus of a street and at
the intersection of streets shall include
landmark features as noted below.
Height Up to 20% taller for
portion within
projection of
terminating ROW
Up to 20% taller for
portion within 50 ft.
of the corner
Alignment Wall of the portion noted above may be set
forward up to 10% of the building height or
6 feet, which ever is greater; and may
encroach upon the Build-to Line subject to
preserving pedestrian zones
Articulation Other features that may be modified include
wall materials, window design, roof design
and lighting.
APPROVALS
The Director may modify the architectural features to ensure
compliance with the intent of these standards. The Director’s
decision may be appealed using the procedures set forth in
section G.1.C. paragraphs 5-7.
Terminating ROW where a portion of a building is
taller in-line with the center of the ROW than
adjacent buildings
Portion of building is higher and built further out
than the main building wall on this corner
Landmark Building
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
9 General Standards
G-3. Street Grid
INTENT
In order to facilitate pedestrian movement, dispersion of traffic,
reduced intersection congestion and delivery of emergency
services, block lengths should be limited and streets should be
interconnected. Streets may be curved to slow traffic and
provide enclosed views. Streets should also be laid out in a way
that preserves trees and responds to natural topography and
drainage patterns.
STANDARDS
SF
RESID.
URBAN
RESID. RETAIL OFFICE
Block Length
(Max.)
800 ft.
400 ft. 400 ft. 800 ft.
Interconnectivity
No culde-
sacs
No cul-de-sacs or looped
streets
APPROVALS
The Director may approve a waiver of these standards where
unique conditions occur such as adjacent to parks, trails and
golf courses. Approval of residential cul-de-sacs and
commercial cul-de-sacs and looped streets shall require a Minor
Waiver unless necessitated by preservation of a public or
common open space or trail. With any block length exceeding
the standards above, a minimum 20-foot landscaped pedestrian
cut-through may be required.
Seaside, FL
Kentlands, MD
Example of Layout that Responds to Topography,
Drainage and Existing Wooded Lot
Based on a Plan for Woodland Estates
Harvest Real Estate, TBG Partners
Mid-Block Pedestrian Access
to Parking Garage (Left)
Mid-Block Pedestrian
Connection (Above)
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
10 General Standards
G-4. Interconnectivity of Developments
INTENT
Developments should provide for interconnections with
adjacent properties. This will facilitate pedestrian and vehicular
circulation and minimize major roadway and intersection
congestion.
STANDARDS
Minimum
connections
?? 1 Connection with a property that has
at least 200 feet of common property
line, and
?? 1 Connection for each 1,000 feet or
portion thereof, of common property
line
APPROVALS
The Director may approve a Minor Waiver of these standards
based on unique circumstances.
Sample Illustration of Street Connections
Example of Street grid that
conforms to creeks and
open space
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
11 General Standards
G-5. Neighborhood Oriented Open Space
INTENT
To enhance a sense of community, social interaction and
strengthen property values. This may occur as a village green, a
pocket of open space or a trail. All buildings immediately
adjacent or across a street must face directly on to the open
space for it to count toward requirement.
STANDARDS
Minimum Size ?? Minimum 50-foot wide (or average,
radius – see illustration)
Minimum Area ?? 10% of total project area for Urban
Mixed Use
20% for greater than 5 units per acre
15% for 2.5 u/a to 5 u/a
0% for less than 2.5 u/a
?? Up to 50% of the minimum area may be
comprised of flood plain subject to:
o Compliance with the Major Creek
Ordinance
o Restoration of the ecological flood
plain to 100% function per the
City’s Riparian & Wetland
Assessment and providing the
associated buffer width
o Provision of passive recreation
amenities
o Approval by the Director
Neighboring
Buildings
All buildings immediately adjacent or
across a street must face directly on to the
open space for it to count.
Distance from
Residential Lots
100% Within 800 feet
Design CPTED principles shall be used in design
of open space.
APPROVALS
The Director may approve a Minor Waiver of these standards
where special conditions occur.
Sample Illustration of Neighborhood Open Space
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
12 General Standards
G-6. Views
INTENT
Streets should be located to provide views to open space, trails,
parks, plazas, landmark buildings, vistas and other views of
merit in order to help build community character and a sense of
“neighborhood”.
STANDARDS
Open Space ?? All public open space shall have a
street on at least one side
?? Linear open space and trails shall have
street for at least 20% of its length
?? The design of open space shall employ
CPTED principles
Other Views ?? Non-arterial streets shall be laid out in
a manner that provides terminus
(building or landscape feature) or
oblique views, and may, where
topography and other conditions allow,
provide expansive vistas
?? Plazas should have a focus such as a
fountain or artwork, and contain shade
such as large trees or a trellis
APPROVALS
The Director will determine if this standard is being met.
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
13 Land Use Standards
LAND USE
LU-1. Mixed-Use Developments
INTENT
Mixed use developments must include residential and either
retail or office, mixed vertically or horizontally. The key
determinant is that they are included in a comprehensively
planned development with a high degree of pedestrian linkages
and amenities.
STANDARDS
Mixed Use
Residential
?? A minimum of 4 square feet of
residential use for each square foot of
retail use
Mixed Use
Non-Residential
?? A minimum of 4 square feet of retail
or office use for each square foot of
residential use
Focus ?? A minimum 10% of the project area
shall be used for public
plaza/commons
Connectivity Uses must be vertically integrated or
horizontally integrated with pedestrian
connections that do not cross high traffic
corridors or parking lots.
APPROVALS
The Director may approve site plans within the ratio range if
he/she determines that the development is highly pedestrian
oriented, provided there will be adequate infrastructure. For use
mixtures that do not meet the ratios above, City Council shall
be the final approving authority based upon recommendation
by the Planning & Zoning Commission.
Examples of Horizontal Mixed
Use, with comprehensively
planned pedestrian connections
Examples of Vertical Mixed Use
Vertical Mixed
Use
Horizontal Mixed Use
in a Comprehensively
Planned Pedestrian-
Oriented Setting
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
14 Land Use Standards
LU-2. Retail At-Grade Standards (Urban)
INTENT
To create attractive and successful retail that contributes to the
pedestrian environment.
STANDARDS
Grade Level
Ceiling
Height
First floor minimum 14 feet clear inside
ceiling for buildings up to 50-feet deep; 16-
feet for buildings greater than 50-feet deep.
Window
Area
?? Between 60 and 80 percent of the ground
floor façade shall be windows. This
includes a watercourse of at least 18-
inches
?? Windows must be clear
Primary
Entries
?? Must be inset at least 4 feet from front
façade
Setback ?? Primary Building Wall: 18-24 feet from
back of curb
?? The Primary Building Wall must be
continuous along a block face, and at least
70% must be located within the setback
above
Sidewalk ?? Minimum 6-foot clearance for pedestrians
Materials Only durable materials such as stone, cast
stone or brick shall be allowed on the first
level, 80% on the façade above ground level.
Increased amounts of (3-step process) stucco
may be allowed above the ground floor
provided that building edges, and door and
window surrounds are stone or brick.
Articulation Retail shall be accentuated by including
awnings or canopies, building materials or
architectural building features.
APPROVALS
The Director may approve a Minor Waiver of the primary entry
and setback standards, but a waiver to other standards shall be
considered a Major Waiver, and must be approved by the
Planning & Zoning Commission. The Director may also
approve alternative masonry materials where the building wall
does not face a sidewalk, street or open space, as a Minor
Waiver.
Windows at Grade
Primary Entry inset from front building line
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
15 Land Use Standards
LU-3. Residential At-Grade Standards (Urban)
INTENT
To animate the sidewalk, create a sense of privacy for residents
and promote a feeling of community and safety in the street and
sidewalk.
STANDARDS
First Floor ?? All residential units located within 6
feet of grade shall have a direct front
door access to the sidewalk
Setback ?? Façade from Sidewalk: 6-12 feet for
the primary façade, but allows stairs,
stoops and elevated patios. The
remainder to be landscaped
?? Façade from Back-of-Curb: 18-24 ft
Sidewalk ?? Minimum 6-foot clearance for
pedestrians
Porch or Stoop ?? Minimum 24 square feet in area
?? Either inset or covered with an
architectural feature or awning
Lobby For access to units above the first floor,
lobbies may be located at grade level and
may not exceed an expression of 12 feet in
width on the exterior wall.
APPROVALS
The Director may approve plans that differ from these
standards by 20% or less as a Minor Waiver, provided that the
development meets the spirit and intent of this section.
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
16 Land Use Standards
LU-4. Relationship Between Residential and Non-Residential in a Non Mixed-Use Setting
INTENT
To preserve privacy of residential properties when located
adjacent to non-residential uses in a non-mixed use setting.
STANDARDS
Landscape
Screen
?? Refer to the Comprehensive Zoning
Ordinance, Article IV, Section 5 for
landscape screening requirements
Setback ?? Building must fit within a 2:1 slope
from the residential property line
Windows on the
Non-Residential
Property above
the first floor
?? No transparent windows above the
first floor may be horizontally less
than 60o from the residential property
line if within 140 feet of the common
property line
APPROVALS
The Director may approve, as a Minor Waiver, non-residential
development site plans that do not meet these requirements
provided that he/she determines that the development protects
the privacy of neighboring residential properties.
Allowed Screening
Trees:
?? Live Oak
?? Chinese Pistachio
?? Eastern Red Cedar
?? Lace Bark Elm
?? Alle Elm
?? Cedar Elm
?? Bald Cypress
?? Chinese Photenia
?? American Holly
?? Nelly R. Stephens Holly
Windows Above the First Floor
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
17 Land Use Standards
LU-5. Building Orientation as it Relates to Open Space
INTENT
That all residential properties face the front of their primary
buildings directly towards any Neighborhood-Oriented Open
Space or trails in order to enhance property values and provide
security.
STANDARDS
Building
Orientation
?? All residential buildings which are
adjacent to, or across a street from, a
Neighborhood Oriented Open Space or
trail shall face directly on to such
amenity
?? Any retail or office building located
adjacent to or across the street from a
Neighborhood Oriented Open Space or
trails shall have a major entry and
windows overlooking the amenity
APPROVALS
The Director may approve site plans where buildings will face
or side on to open space, trails and parks, but may require
adjustments to street alignment and building siting and design
to maximize benefits and preserve public safety. Any Site Plan
that contains buildings which back on to public open space
must be approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission as a
Major Waiver.
Homes Should Face Directly to
Open Space to Enhance
Property Values and Provide
Security
Example of Possible Open
Space Configuration
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
18 Site Standards
SITE
S-1. Site Layout – Big Box
INTENT
To ensure that large retail buildings can be readily redeveloped
for smaller pedestrian-oriented uses and minimize large vacant
buildings when businesses relocate or close.
STANDARDS
Development
Alternative
Either of the following must be approved
in conjunction with a Site Plan for the
development:
1. A Plan demonstrating that the site can
be re-configured into a pedestrian
oriented development by adding
additional development, without
removing more than 50% of the
proposed big box building; or
2. The primary building front wall is
built no greater than 100 feet from the
back of curb of all fronting streets, in
a manner that would facilitate its use
by smaller tenants, with one full bay
of parking in front and a continuous
browsing lane. (See Browsing Lane
Diagram in S-2 Site Layout - Retail
Centers below.) This does not apply to
big box buildings which are part of a
larger development that meets these
setback standards.
Articulation 1. Horizontal Articulation. No building
wall shall extend for a distance equal
to 3 times the wall’s height without
having an off-set equal to 25% of the
wall’s height, and that new plane shall
extend for a distance equal to at least
25% of the maximum length of the
first plane. (See Diagram on next
page.)
2. Vertical Articulation. No horizontal
wall shall extend for a distance greater
than 3 times the height of the wall
without changing height by a
minimum of 25% of the wall’s height.
APPROVALS
The Director may approve the development alternative or set
conditions for alternatives that will achieve this intent.
Examples of Articulation
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
19 Site Standards
Articulation Diagram
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
20 Site Standards
S-2. Site Layout - Retail Centers
INTENT
To create a pedestrian oriented retail center where the
pedestrian environment is attractive and comfortable.
STANDARDS
Build-to Lines
(See LU-2 Retail
At-Grade for
other standards)
?? On planned 4-lane or larger streets,
build-to lines shall be 94-100 feet from
back-of-curb to permit one full bay of
parking and a “browsing lane”
between the street and building
?? On streets with no on-street parking,
the build-to line shall be 24-feet from
back of curb to allow for a 6-8 foot
tree planting and lighting zone
?? On streets with on-street parking, the
build-to line shall be 18-24-feet from
back of curb to allow for 18-inch
dismount and 4-6 feet for a street tree
and lighting zone
?? Additional setback from the build-to
lines may be permitted to provide for
pedestrian amenities such as an
outdoor dining patio or plaza
?? Retail should be constructed the entire
length of the property line along street
frontages except for access drives
unless otherwise approved as part of a
Site Plan
Pedestrian
Orientation
All buildings shall be laid out to create an
attractive pedestrian environment with
retail/restaurant use and windows at grade,
and shade from street trees and awnings.
Location of
Parking
All on-site parking shall be located to the
side or rear of the property behind the
front building lines except where allowed
along a 4-lane or larger street (See
Browsing Lane Diagram next page.).
APPROVALS
The Director may approve the development alternative or set
conditions for alternatives that will achieve this intent.
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
21 Site Standards
Browsing Lane
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
22 Site Standards
S-3. Commercial Use Parking Location
INTENT
To enhance pedestrian orientation and reduce the need for large
signage along streets.
STANDARDS
Location of
Parking
?? Properties adjacent to a Major
Thoroughfare may locate a maximum
of one full bay (64-ft) adjacent to the
thoroughfare. Shade trees shall be
planted along the street and within the
parking area. All remaining parking
must be located 20 feet or more behind
the front façade of the building closest
to the thoroughfare (See Diagram in S-
1)
?? Properties adjacent to other
thoroughfares must locate all parking
at least 20 feet behind the front façade
of the building located closest to the
thoroughfare
?? Properties which are located on a
collector or smaller street and intended
to be a pedestrian-oriented
development may construct on-street
parking parallel or at 60 degrees to the
curb line provided that it is approved
by the Director in consultation with the
Director of Engineering Services
?? Parking may be located in structured
garages provided that they are located
generally in the center of a property
and lined with building
APPROVALS
The Director may approve the development alternative or set
conditions for alternatives that will achieve this intent.
Public
Street
Public
Street
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
23 Site Standards
S-4. Fencing, Visible from the Street
INTENT
In residential properties, fencing which is visible from public
areas reflects the quality of the house and the need for fence
maintenance is minimized.
STANDARDS
Materials ?? All metal fencing shall have a wrought
iron appearance in shape
?? A combination of masonry and metal
fencing where masonry columns are
located between 12 and 16 feet apart,
or with a masonry base not to exceed
36 inches and metal fencing above
?? White picket fences may be
constructed provided they do not
exceed 3 feet in height. Such picket
fences may be constructed of painted
wood or cementitious fiberboard
?? Drought tolerant landscaping shall be
planted in combination with fencing
?? All forms of chain link and natural or
stained wood fencing are prohibited
where it can be viewed from a public
area
?? Masonry must match the masonry of
the primary structure
Location ?? When greater than 3 feet in height,
fencing must be located at least 10 feet
behind the front façade line
?? Where on a corner lot, a fence up to 6
feet in height may be built up to the
side street property line
APPROVALS
The Director may approve fencing where the intent is achieved
and the result will provide a more effective solution based on
local site conditions.
Wrought Iron and Masonry Fence
Wrought Iron Fence
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
24 Site Standards
S-5. Single Family Residential Garage Locations
INTENT
To emphasize the home over the garage and on-site parking in
the neighborhood streetscape.
STANDARDS
Setbacks Garages shall meet all building setbacks
except for rear yard setbacks.
Front Street
Loaded Garages
Garages shall be setback a minimum of 20
feet from the front building line or porch
line, which ever is closest to the street.
(See also S-6 Residential Front Entry
Garages)
Side Street
Loaded Garage
The front of the garage shall be setback a
minimum of 28 feet from the opposing
property line. (See also S-6 Residential
Front Entry Garages)
J-Swing
Garages
Same as “Front Street Loaded Garages”
above. (See also S-6 Residential Front
Entry Garages)
Pass-Thru
Garages
?? A maximum width of the driveway
shall be 12 feet between the street and
the front façade of the primary
structure
?? The rear of the garage may be set back
a minimum of 6 feet from the rear
property line provided it is a single
story structure. Otherwise, it shall
meet the usual building setback
requirement
Alley Loaded
Garage
The minimum setback from the alley rightof-
way shall be 20 feet.
APPROVALS
The Director may approve alternative garage locations which
meet the intent of these standards but which will result in an
improved site and neighborhood design.
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
25 Building Standards
S-6. Single Family Residential Front Entry Garages
Planting strips can screen J-Swing Garages Garages should have single doors to
break up the massing of large double
doors
Driveways should include enhanced
paving or stamped patterned concrete
within the property lines.
INTENT
To ensure that garages do not dominate the neighborhood
streetscape, and to ensure that landscaping and enhanced
paving soften the effects of increased amounts of paving, and to
provide alternatives for front entry conditions.
STANDARDS
Front Loaded &
J-Swing
Garages
?? Garage Doors. Garages Doors shall
be single door units with a minimum
18-inch column separation. Doors
shall be inset from the front façade and
columns a minimum of 12-inches
?? Paving. Drives should include accents
of brick, concrete pavers or stamped
and colored concrete within the
property
J-Swing
Garages
?? J-swing properties should be clustered
in pairs with garages facing each other
and a planting strip along the shared
property line that will provide
screening from the street
?? Screening. Garages should be
screened from the street with planting
strips opposite the garage doors
APPROVALS
The Director may approve alternative garage locations which
meet the intent of these standards and will result in an improved
site and neighborhood design.
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
26 Building Standards
Front Entry Garages
Illustration of
Front Entry
Garage with
Courtyard
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
27 Building Standards
BUILDING
B-1. Architectural Detailing of Residential Window Treatments
INTENT
To ensure that a traditional residential character is maintained
and that windows provide “eyes on the street” following
CPTED principles for neighborhood security. These standards
apply only to windows facing a street or other public area such
as alleys, open spaces and parks.
STANDARDS
Window
proportion
?? Windows shall be vertical in
proportion by a ratio of 1.25:1 or more
(height to width)
?? Multiple vertical windows may be
placed together to form a compound
window which may be wider than it is
tall
Amount of
window area
A minimum of 15% of the total façade
area facing a street or other public area
shall be comprised of windows.
Window reveal Windows shall have at least a 4-inch
reveal.
APPROVALS
The Director may approve elevation plans which meet the
intent of these standards but which will result in an improved
site and neighborhood design.
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
28 Building Standards
B-2. Front Porch Requirements
INTENT
To create useable porches on single family homes which are
integrated into the building design, and which encourage
neighborhood socializing.
STANDARDS
Depth Porches shall have a minimum 7-foot
depth between building wall and inside of
railing.
Area Porches shall contain a minimum of 70
square feet of area.
Wrap-around Porches on corner lots shall wrap around
the house corner for a minimum of 8 feet
to face both intersecting streets. This
applies only to homes using cementitious
siding with the approval of a pattern book.
Structural
Columns
?? Porch columns supporting the roof
shall be constructed of stone, cast
stone or brick (which matches the
masonry on the main structure) on
buildings which contain 60% or more
of masonry exterior walls, excluding
windows and doors
?? Buildings with less than 60% masonry
may use columns made of
cementitious fiberboard material
approved by the Building Official
Porch
Foundation
?? The porch foundation shall be an
extension of the house foundation; not
just constructed as a deck
APPROVALS
The Director may approve non-masonry columns if they
contribute to the particular character or style of the architecture.
A reduction in the porch size or depth must be approved by the
Planning & Zoning Commission as a Major Waiver.
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
29 Building Standards
B-3. Anti-Monotony
INTENT
To ensure that homes appear to be custom designed within a
neighborhood to support property values and property identity;
and to avoid excessively tall and unarticulated roof lines.
STANDARDS
Diversity of
Design
Differences shall be reviewed for the
entire block face of the proposed house.
They must differ in at least two of the
following ways—
(Note: The simple “flipping” of a house
plan shall not qualify.)
a. Number of
Stories
Half-stories or attic rooms shall count if
articulated with windows toward the
street(s).
b. Roof Type
and Layout
?? Gabled versus hipped; and
?? Distinct variation in ridge lines
c. Front
Façade
Articulation
?? Inclusion of porches greater than 8 feet
in length with a minimum of 70 s.f.
?? Use of bay windows
?? Variation of building materials
?? Changes to the front wall plane
?? Location of front door
d. Garage
Location
(If not Alley
loaded)
?? J-Swing
?? Pass-through garage
?? Front loaded garage
(Note: standards must be met for each
garage type)
APPROVALS
The Director shall consider the variations listed above to
determine whether the Anti-monotony standard is being met.
Three homes which vary in Roof Layout Façade Articulation and Garage Configuration
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
30 Building Standards
B-4. Residential Building Standards for Traditional Neighborhood Developments (TND)
INTENT
To create a neighborhood that appears to have developed with
individual homes over time, but within a general style, and to
ensure that there will be a minimum of maintenance required to
keep homes attractive as they age.
STANDARDS
Allowed
Materials
?? The exterior of all primary structures
shall be constructed of 100% masonry,
excluding windows and doors
?? For the purposes of this section,
masonry shall be considered as stone,
cast stone and fired clay brick.
However, cementitious fiberboard may
be used provided that it meets the
highest standards of the industry and
the standards below, and that it is
approved by the Building Official.
Cementitious
Fiberboard
?? Smooth cementitious fiberboard siding
(minimum 5/8-inch thick) may be used
for trim and soffits
?? The exposed width of siding or trim
shall not exceed 12-inches
?? It may also be used for accents of
architectural bead-board, scallops and
board and batten in neighborhoods
approved as “TND neighborhoods”
?? Based on a Pattern Book or Style
references, in TND neighborhoods—
1 in 8 houses may include up to 100%
cementitious siding material
2 in 8 houses may include up to 50%
2 in 8 houses may include up to 75%
(This applies to all sides of a house)
APPROVALS
The Director may approve standards provided he/she
determines that the development meets the spirit and intent of
this section.
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
31 Building Standards
B-5. Commercial Building Form
INTENT
To provide a pleasing articulated architectural form to the
public environment and to support a healthy pedestrian district.
STANDARDS
Tri-partite
Architecture
All buildings shall be designed and
constructed in tri-partite architecture so
they have a distinct base, middle and top.
Emphasize
Entries
Main entries shall be highlighted so that
they are obvious to pedestrians and
motorists using such techniques as
building articulation and/or entry canopies
Frequency of
Entries
?? Each building and separate lease space
at grade along the street edge shall
have a functioning Primary Entry from
the sidewalk
?? Primary entries must be located no
greater than 60 feet apart. Such entries
must be inset from the front building
plane by at least 4 feet (See LU-2
Retail at Grade Standards)
?? Corner entries may count as a Primary
Entry for both intersecting street fronts
Windows ?? Windows shall have at least a 4-inch
reveal and except for retail at grade,
shall be vertical in proportion
?? Glass curtain wall may be permitted as
an architectural feature by Minor
Waiver
?? Windows and glazing shall be a
minimum of 30% up to a maximum of
70% of each building elevation
excluding retail at grade
APPROVALS
The Director may approve, as a Minor Waiver, a variation of up
to 15% of the minimum dimensions above, a greater reduction
must be approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission as a
Major Waiver.
Tri-Partite Architecture: Buildings with a “Base”,
“Middle” and “Top”
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
32 Public Realm Standards
PUBLIC REALM
PR-1. Special Street Types — Retail Internal Circulation
INTENT
To provide a pedestrian oriented retail street on a development
parcel without through traffic, that is internal to a retail or
mixed use area (i.e. not a public right-of-way).
STANDARDS PARALLEL PARKING ANGLED PARKING
Street width 40 ft. (back of
curb); 24 ft. Driving
Lane
62 ft. (back of curb)
28 ft. Driving Lane
Parking ?? 8 ft.
?? Neck down at
Intersection
?? 19 ft.
?? Neck down at
Intersection
Building Face to
Building Face
76 – 88 ft. 102 – 114 ft.
Street Trees +/-30 ft. on center
Pedestrian
Street Lights
+/-60 ft. on center
Enhanced
Sidewalks &
Crosswalks
?? Utilize enhanced materials, especially
at crosswalks
?? Score lines on concrete sidewalks and
building entry “aprons” can enliven
the sidewalk
APPROVALS
The Director may approve minor modifications to these
standards as a Minor Waiver.
Enhanced Sidewalks and Crosswalks
Sidewalk Sidewalk Roundabout Neck Down
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
33 Public Realm Standards
Parallel Parking
Sidewalk width may go down to 15-ft if trees are
planted in parking islands
Angled Parking
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
34 Public Realm Standards
PR-2. Special Street Types — Round-About
INTENT
To provide a modern roundabout that allows vehicles free-flow
capability through an intersection, while enhancing pedestrian
and bicycle safety as a result of reduced traffic speeds.
STANDARDS
Roadway and
Pedestrian
Design
Standards
See ”ITE Proposed Recommended
Practice - Context Sensitive Solutions in
Designing Major Urban Thoroughfares
for Walkable Communities”, 2006
Circle Feature The Circle should have a distinctive
vertical feature such as public art, a
colorful tree grouping or a large shade
tree.
APPROVALS
The Director of Engineering Services may approve minor
modifications to these standards using the standards for Minor
Waivers.
Source: Kimley-Horn and Associates, Inc.
Source: Kimley-Horn and
Associates, Inc.
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
35 Public Realm Standards
PR-3. Special Street Types — Townhome Alley
INTENT
To provide an attractive and functional design for townhome
developments. This design should provide for pedestrian
comfort, accommodate vehicle maneuvering in and out of
garages, temporary parallel parking and emergency vehicle
access. In addition, it should provide landscaping and shade on
paved areas for most of the day.
STANDARDS
Alley Width Alleys shall be 12 feet of paving in a 12-
foot right-of-way, with a 12-foot public
easement on each side that is adjacent to
parking.
Parking ?? Garages shall be set back a minimum
of 12 feet from the alley right-of-way
?? Additional surface parking may be
provided adjacent to garages on a
paved surface
Landscaping ?? One ornamental tree shall be planted at
a shared property line or right-of-way
line for lots up to 60 feet in width.
Trees shall be planted 5 feet from the
edge of the drive aisle paving.
?? Larger lots shall plant two ornamental
trees.
APPROVALS
The Director of Engineering Services may approve minor
modifications to these standards subject to working out the
location of all utilities using the standards for Minor Waivers.
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
36 Public Realm Standards
PR-4. Sidewalks
INTENT
To create sidewalks which will be shaded, attractive and provide
a feeling of safety in order to encourage pedestrian use.
STANDARDS
Residential
Sidewalks
?? Shall be a minimum of 5 feet wide
?? Shall be setback from the curb by at
least 7 feet with shade trees planted in
this setback area at a frequency
specified in PR-5 Street Trees
Non-
Residential/Mixed
Use Sidewalks
?? Shall be a minimum of 6 feet clear
pathway (plus additional for outside
dining and seating), and up to 10 feet
clear for high density developments
?? Shall have an additional 18-inch hardsurfaced
dismount strip including the
top of curb adjacent to parallel parking
?? Shall have a minimum 5-foot street
tree, pedestrian light and bicycle
parking zone between the sidewalk
and the street
Hike-Bike Trails ?? Shall be a minimum of 6 feet in width,
or as may be modified by the City’s
Hike & Bike Master Plan
?? 3 ½ inch Caliper (minimum) shade
trees shall be planted within 5 feet of
the trail on the west or south edge of
the trail, at an average of 1 for each 35
linear feet
APPROVALS
The Director may approve minor modifications to these
standards as a Minor Waiver.
Hike-Bike Trails
Non-Residential/MXU Sidewalks
Residential Sidewalks
Form-Based Code Standards
December 18, 2007
37 Public Realm Standards
PR-5. Street Trees
INTENT
To create attractive streets, decrease ambient summer
temperature, improve air quality and support pedestrian
activity.
STANDARDS
Street Trees ?? All residential neighborhood streets
shall have shade trees planted an
average of 35 feet on center between
the curb and sidewalk
?? Retail urban and mixed use streets
shall have trees planted an average of
30 feet on center
?? All trees shall be a minimum of 3 ½
inch caliper when planted
?? Root control system as required by the
City’s Landscape Architect
Tree Prohibition ?? No tree except those listed on this
page, or which may be approved by
the Director shall be planted within 10
feet of any public street curb or
paving.
Tree Wells Minimum 4-foot width or depth and a
minimum of 25 s.f. in area.
APPROVALS
The Director may approve minor modifications to these
standards as a Minor Waiver.
TREES WHICH MAY BE PLANTED ADJACENT
TO STREETS:
Shade Trees:
?? Bald Cyprus
?? Pond Cyprus
?? Cedar Elm
?? Texas Red Oak
?? Homestead Elm
?? Lace Bark Elm
?? Alle Elm
?? Chinese Pistachio
?? October Glory Maple
?? Texas Ash
?? Chinquapin Oak
?? Shumard Oak
?? Sycamore
?? Burr Oak
Under-story and Ornamental Trees:
?? Texas Redbud
?? Eve’s Necklace
?? Mexican Plum
?? Downy Hawthorn
?? Crepe Myrtle
?? Chinese Pistachio
?? Texas Mountain Laurel
?? Vitex
?? Desert Willow

CITY OF FRISCO, TEXAS ORDINANCE NO.: 17-08-51
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF FRISCO,
TEXAS, AMENDING FRISCO'S ZONING ORDINANCE, ORDINANCE
NO. 11-04-09, AS AMENDED, SUBSECTION 4.13.03 (NONRESIDENTIAL
OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS) OF SECTION 4 (SITE DEVELOPMENT
REQUIREMENTS), BY MODIFYING CERTAIN REGULATIONS
GOVERNING NONRESIDENTIAL OPEN SPACE AND ESTABLISHING
NEW REQUIREMENTS FOR CONSOLIDATED AND USABLE OPEN
SPACE IN NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS; PROVIDING A
PENALTY CLAUSE, SAVINGS/REPEALING CLAUSE, SEVERABILITY
CLAUSE AND AN EFFECTIVE DATE; AND PROVIDING FOR THE
PUBLICATION OF THE CAPTION HEREOF.
WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Frisco, Texas ("City Council") has investigated
and determined that Subsection 4.13.03 (Nonresidential Open Space Requirements) of Section 4
(Site Development Requirements) of the Zoning Ordinance, Ordinance No. 11-04-09, as amended
("Zoning Ordinance"), of the City of Frisco, Texas ("Frisco") should be amended to modify certain
regulations governing nonresidential open space and establish new requirements for consolidated
and usable open space in nonresidential developments, as provided herein; and
WHEREAS, the City Council finds that this Ordinance contains textual amendments to the
Zoning Ordinance that do not change zoning district boundaries, and therefore, written notice to
individual property owners is not legally required; and
WHEREAS, the City Council finds that all legal notices required for amending the Zoning
Ordinance have been given in the manner and form mandated by law, public hearings have been
held on the proposed amendments and all other requirements have been fulfilled; and
WHEREAS, the City Council finds that it would be advantageous, beneficial and in the
best interest of the citizens of Frisco to amend the Zoning Ordinance as set forth below.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY
OF FRISCO, TEXAS:
SECTION 1: Findings Incorporated. The findings set forth above are incorporated into
the body of this Ordinance as if fully set forth herein.
SECTION 2: Amendment to Subsection 4.13.03 (Nonresidential Open Space
Requirements) of Section 4 (Site Development Requirements) of the Zoning Ordinance.
Subsection 4.13.03 (Nonresidential Open Space Requirements) of Section 4 (Site Development
Requirements) of the Zoning Ordinance is hereby amended as follows:
"4.13.03. Nonresidential Open Space Requirements
(A) Dedicated Amount Requirement
All nonresidential developments shall provide one of the following types of open space:
Ordinance Amending Zoning Ordinance Subsection 4.13.03
(Nonresidential Open Space Requirements)
2217345
Page! of 13 
Ordinance Amending Zoning Ordinance Subsection 4.13.03 Page 2 of 13
(Nonresidential Open Space Requirements)
2217345
(1) Consolidated Open Space Type A: 
    Figure 4.13.03.1: Example of Type A Consolidated Open Space 
Single  lot  developments.  All  nonresidential  developments  on  a  single  lot  shall  provide  a 
minimum of ten (10) percent of the net total lot area as consolidated and usable open space. 
(see  Figure  4.13.03.1).    All  open  space  shall  be  owned  and  maintained  by  the  property 
owner(s) or the property owners’ association. 
(2) Consolidated Open Space Type B: 
Figure 4.13.03.2: Example of Type B Consolidated Open Space
Developments containing more than one lot. All nonresidential developments consisting of 
more than one lot shall provide a minimum of ten (10) percent of the net total area of the lots 
of  the  overall  development  (as  defined  on  the  preliminary  site  plan  and/or  site  plan)  as 
consolidated and usable open space (see Figure 4.13.03.2). Such open space shall serve as the 
sole and exclusive open space for all of the lots in the development and shall be shown on the 
preliminary site plan. The open space may cross property lines. All open space shall be owned 
and maintained by the property owner(s) or property owners’ association. 
Ordinance Amending Zoning Ordinance Subsection 4.13.03 Page 3 of 13
(Nonresidential Open Space Requirements)
2217345
(B) Open Space Plan 
The applicant  shall  submit an  open  space  plan with  the  preliminary  site  plan and/or  site  plan 
submittal for the subject property. The open space plan shall include the information listed on the 
Open  Space  Plan  Checklist,  which  shall  be  established  and  maintained  by  the  Director.  The 
approval of the open space plan shall expire when the development plans expire, but the platted 
easements shall remain in effect. Should the location open space change with a new preliminary 
site  plan and/or  site  plan,  then  the  platted easement  shall  be amended  to  reflect  the  revised 
location. 
(C) Requirement for Open Space Easement 
All Type A and Type B open space shall be dedicated as an easement on a conveyance plat and/or 
final plat. This plat shall be submitted in accordance with Subdivision Ordinance Section 3.03 and 
shall be submitted with the preliminary site plan. The plat and the preliminary site plan shall be 
considered at the same Planning & Zoning Commission meeting and the plat, once approved, shall 
be filed in accordance with Subdivision Ordinance Section 4.03(j). 
(D) Timing of Improvements 
(1)The construction of the required open space improvements: 
a. Shall be in conjunction with the development of the first lot of a preliminary site plan 
and completed on or before the acceptance of the final improvements for the first lot 
of a preliminary site plan and/or site plan; or 
b. May be deferred when the Director requires or agrees to accept escrow deposits. The 
developer shall deposit in escrow with the City an amount equal to one hundred and 
ten  percent  (110%)  of  the  total  “turnkey”  costs,  including,  but  not  limited  to,  the 
design,  permitting,  acceptance  and  inflation  costs  related  to  the  improvement(s). 
Should  the  escrow  not  cover  the  total  costs  at  the  time  of  development,  the 
developer  shall  be  responsible  for  the  added  costs  to  implement  the  open  space 
improvements. If construction is deferred under this subsection, the improvements 
must be completed on or before the date established by the Director. 
(E) Open Space Amenity Requirement 
(1) The following shall not count toward the open space requirement (applicable to Type A and 
Type B): 
a. Vehicular paving; 
b. Parking lot tree islands; 
c. Building footprint; 
d. Utility yards; 
e. Required landscaping per Section 4.02 (Landscaping Requirement);  
f. Required Licensed Child-Care Facility play space; or 
g. Open space that is not viewable from the public right-of-way/public access easements 
nor provides access to the general public. 
Ordinance Amending Zoning Ordinance Subsection 4.13.03 Page 4 of 13
(Nonresidential Open Space Requirements)
2217345
(2) The following amenities are required within the required open space (applicable to Type A 
and Type B): 
a. A pedestrian pathway constructed of brick or concrete pavers a minimum of eight (8) 
feet in width traversing the consolidated open space with pedestrian lighting;  
b. One shade tree, a minimum of ten (10) to twelve (12) feet in height and a minimum 
of six inch in caliper at the time of planting, planted a minimum of thirty (30) feet on 
center staggered on each side of the eight foot walking path; 
c. Plaza or courtyard covered with brick or concrete pavers; 
                 
                 Figure 4.13.03.3: Example of Plaza Covered with Brick or Concrete Pavers
d. Lawn; a minimum of 30 (thirty) percent of the consolidated open space requirement, 
or as otherwise approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission;  
Figure 4.13.03.4: Example of Typical Lawn 
e. Furniture, such as benches and/or low masonry seating walls; and 
Ordinance Amending Zoning Ordinance Subsection 4.13.03 Page 5 of 13
(Nonresidential Open Space Requirements)
2217345
f.     Overlook (required only for retention/detention ponds). 
(3) In addition to the required amenities, at least eight of the following amenities are required 
within the required open space (applicable to Type A and Type B), as approved by the Planning 
& Zoning Commission: 
a. Sculptures,  and/or  pedestrian  entry  monuments/gateways,  as  approved  by  the 
Planning & Zoning Commission. Each installation to be counted as one amenity. A pair 
of  pedestrian entry monuments  count as  one  (1) amenity. A maximum  of  four  (4) 
amenities may be counted from this category; 
b. Water  features,  excluding  required  retention/detention  ponds,  (to  be  counted  as 
three (3) amenities). A maximum of one (1) water feature shall be counted towards 
an open space amenity; 
c. Tree groves/orchards (Trees shall be a shade tree a minimum of ten (10) to twelve 
(12) feet in height and a minimum of six inch in caliper at the time of planting); 
d. Shade structures such as pavilions or pergola (to be counted as three (3) amenities). 
A  maximum  of  one  (1)  shade  structure  shall  be  counted  towards  an  open  space 
amenity; 
e. Raised  planter  beds  with  plants of  seasonal  color and/or  native  plants    with  brick 
and/or stone veneer (collectively count as one (1) amenity); 
f. Educational paths with plaques & monuments describing natural habitats and plant 
life of the surrounding area; and/or 
g. Other features as approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission.
                            This space intentionally left blank  
Ordinance Amending Zoning Ordinance Subsection 4.13.03 Page 6 of 13
(Nonresidential Open Space Requirements)
2217345
Ordinance Amending Zoning Ordinance Subsection 4.13.03 Page 7 of 13
(Nonresidential Open Space Requirements)
2217345
Ordinance Amending Zoning Ordinance Subsection 4.13.03 Page 8 of 13
(Nonresidential Open Space Requirements)
2217345
Ordinance Amending Zoning Ordinance Subsection 4.13.03 Page 9 of 13
(Nonresidential Open Space Requirements)
2217345
(F) Placement of Open Space 
(1) The required open space shall meet the following location requirements (applicable to Type 
A and Type B): 
a. The required open space shall be of fifty (50) feet or greater in width at its narrowest 
point, and a minimum square footage of 2,500 square feet (applicable to Type A and 
Type B); 
b. The  required  open  space  shall  be  adjacent  to  a  minimum  of  one  (1)  commercial 
building  (an  occupied  space  a  minimum  of  6,000  square  feet),  not  seperated  by 
vechicular traffic, on a minimum of one (1) side. All commercial buildings shall comply 
with the Fire Code. 
c. A front or side of a commercial building must be adjacent to the required open space 
(applicable to Type A and Type B) and be permeable/interactive. For restaurants uses 
(an  occupied  commercial  building  a  minimum  of  2,500  square  feet),  the  required 
open space may be located behind a commercial building providing outdoor dining. 
(see Figure 4.13.03.18).  
Figure 4.13.03.18: Example of Open Space at Rear of Building 
d. The applicant may request to the Planning & Zoning Commission that the required 
open  space  may  be  split  into  separate  areas  within  the  development  through  an 
alternative  design.  The  applicant  must  demonstrate  to  the  Planning  &  Zoning 
Commission how the alternative design meets the intent of the Nonresidential Open 
Space  Requirements  set  forth  herein.  The  alternative  design  shall  conform  to 
Subsection 4.13.03(C)-(D). (See Figure 4.13.03.19)  
Ordinance Amending Zoning Ordinance Subsection 4.13.03 Page 10 of 13
(Nonresidential Open Space Requirements)
2217345
(2) Incorporating Natural Features: 
a. In this subsection, the term “natural feature” is defined as a:
i. Creeks; 
ii. Natural drainage area;  
iii. Floodplain  (FEMA  Special  Flood  Hazard  Area  and  fully-developed  100-year 
floodplain) and/or. 
iv. Protected trees. 
b. The site’s natural  feature(s) shall be preserved and incorporated into  the  required 
open  space  (Type  A  or  Type  B)  in  accordance  with  Subsection  4.13.03(A)(1)-(2), 
(Dedicated  Amount  Requirement).  The  natural  feature(s)  shall  be  defined  and 
identified on the open space plan submitted with the preliminary site plan and/or site 
plan  in  accordance  with  Subsection  4.13.03(B)  (Open  Space  Plan)  and  Subsection 
4.13.03(C) (Requirement for Open Space Easement).  
c. The  required  open  space  containing  the  natural  feature(s)  shall  comply  with 
Subsection 4.13.03(F)(1)(a)-(d) (Placement of Open Space). If the applicant identifies 
a natural feature where it is not possible for a commercial building to comply with 
Subsection 4.13.03(F)(1)(a)-(d) (Placement of Open Space), the applicant may request 
an  alternative  design  to  the  Planning  &  Zoning  Commission.  The  applicant  must 
demonstrate how the alternative design incorporates the natural feature and meets 
the intent of the Nonresidential Open Space Requirements set forth herein.   
d. The required open space containing the natural feature(s) shall provide amenities in 
accordance with Subsection 4.13.03(E)(2)-(3) (Open Space Amenity Requirement), as 
permitted by Federal, State and Local requirements (lawn amenity requirement may 
be waived with Planning & Zoning Commission approval).  
 (3) Detention Ponds or Retention Ponds 
a. A detention and/or retention pond may count toward the required open space if it 
meets the following design requirements: 
Figure 4.13.03.19: Example of Type B Consolidated Open Space (Split)   
Ordinance Amending Zoning Ordinance Subsection 4.13.03 Page 11 of 13
(Nonresidential Open Space Requirements)
2217345
i. Meets the location criteria set forth in Subsection 4.13.03(F)(1) (Placement of 
Open Space); 
ii. Meets Engineering Standards; 
iii. Slope of the pond area does not exceed three (3) percent; allowable to twenty-
five  (25) percent, but requires stone  terracing for any slope exceeding  three  (3) 
percent. Terracing or the cutting of a sloped plane into a series of successively 
receding flat surfaces or platforms, shall have a maximum shelf depth of three 
feet with maximum 6 inch risers; 
iv. Accessible by the public; 
v. The  water  surface  in  the  retention  pond  as  measured  at  the  normal  pool 
elevations shall only account for a maximum of ten (10) percent of consolidated 
open space requirement;  
vi. Natural stone or brick veneer is required on headwalls, bridges, wall, culverts, 
retaining walls, and like structures; and 
vii. Meets the amenity requirements set forth in Subsection 4.13.03(E)(2-3). 
(G) Criteria for Approval 
(1) Open Space Recommendation. 
The Director shall recommend approval of the proposed open space plan when the applicant 
demonstrates that:  
a. The  open  space  plan  has  been  submitted  and  found  to  be  in  compliance  with  all 
applicable City ordinances and standards; and 
b. The applicant has received approval from the Director for instances requiring Director 
approval; or 
c. In the event that the proposed open space plan fails to comply with this section, the 
applicant shall provide documentation stating  the  reasons  for non-compliance and 
provide an acceptable alternative proposal that meets the intent of this section for 
Figure 4.13.03.20: Example of Stone/Brick Infrastructure Veneer   
Ordinance Amending Zoning Ordinance Subsection 4.13.03 Page 12 of 13
(Nonresidential Open Space Requirements)
2217345
quality, usable and consolidated open space. 
(2) Criteria for Open Space Approval. 
The  Planning  &  Zoning  Commission  shall  approve,  deny,  or  approve  with  conditions  the 
proposed open space plan based upon the criteria listed in Subsection 4.13.03.(G)(1)(a)-(c) 
(Open Space Recommendation).” 
 SECTION 3: Savings/Repealing. The Zoning Ordinance shall remain in full force and
effect, save and except as amended by this or any other Ordinance. All provisions of any ordinance
in conflict with this Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent they are in conflict, but such repeal
shall not abate any pending prosecution for violation of the repealed ordinance, nor shall the repeal
prevent a prosecution from being commenced for any violation if occurring prior to the repeal of
the ordinance. Any remaining portions of said ordinances shall remain in full force and effect.
SECTION 4: Severability. Should any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of
this Ordinance be declared unconstitutional and/or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, it
is expressly provided that any and all remaining portions of this Ordinance shall remain in full
force and effect. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed this Ordinance, and
each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof, regardless of whether any one or more sections,
subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases is declared unconstitutional and/or invalid.
SECTION 5: Penalty. Any person, firm, corporation or entity violating any provision of
this Ordinance or the Zoning Ordinance, as they exist or may be amended, shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction therefore, shall be fined in a sum not exceeding TWO
THOUSAND AND NO/100 DOLLARS ($2,000.00). Each continuing day’s violation shall
constitute a separate offense. The penal provisions imposed under this Ordinance shall not
preclude Frisco from filing suit to enjoin the violation. Frisco retains all legal rights and remedies
available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law.
SECTION 6: Effective Date. This Ordinance shall become effective from and after its
adoption and publication as required by law and the City Charter.
[The remainder of this page intentionally left blank.]
 
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
•
Abrrnathy Roeder Boyd & Hullett, P.C.
Ryan D. Pittman, City Attorneys
ATTESTED TO AND
CORRECTLY FA CORDED
DULY PASSED AND APPROVED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
FRISCO, TEXAS on this 1st day of August ,2017.
Dates of Publication: August 4 & 11, 2017 , Frisco Enterprise
Ordinance Amending Zoning Ordinance Subsection 4.13.03 Page 13 of 13
(Nonresidential Open Space Requirements)
2217345 
Development Services Department
City of Frisco, Texas
Memorandum
To: Honorable Mayor Cheney and Members of the Frisco City Council
Cc: George A. Purefoy, City Manager
 John Lettelleir, FAICP, Director of Development Services

From: Anthony Satarino, AICP, Planning Manager
Date: 08/01/2017
Agenda Caption: Consider and act upon adoption of an Ordinance to amend
the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, Section 4.13.03.
Nonresidential Open Space Requirements and Section 7.01. Terms
and Words Defined, concerning proposed amendments to
nonresidential open space requirements.
Action Requested: City Council adoption of an Ordinance to amend the
Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, Section 4.13.03. Nonresidential Open Space
Requirements and Section 7.01. Terms and Words Defined, concerning proposed
amendments to nonresidential open space requirements.
Background Information: On July 6, 2017, the City Council held a public
hearing, and directed staff to prepare an Ordinance by a vote of 6 – 0.
Board Review/Citizen Input: The Planning & Zoning Commission held a public
hearing on June 28, 2017, and voted 4 – 1 to recommend approval of the request.
(Cox absent) (Williamson against because he felt the proposal was too restrictive).
Alternatives: The City Council may:
• Approve the Ordinance;
• Approve the Ordinance with modifications;
• Table for further review; or
• Deny the Ordinance.
Financial Considerations: None.
Legal Review: The City Attorney’s office prepared the Ordinance. 
C:\Program Files (x86)\neevia.com\docConverterPro\temp\NVDC\B2F985F5-40B6-4942-9E94-
297FC97BCDCB\103761.doc
Supporting Documents:
• City Council Outcome Memo dated July 7, 2017.
• Ordinance.
Recommendation: Recommended for adoption. 
Results
S:\Case Files\aaaa_Result Memos\2017 Memos\07-06-17 CC\ZA17-0001 CC PH Result Memo 07-06-17.docx
Page 1 of 12
July 07, 2017
TO: Applicant
FROM: Anthony Satarino, AICP, Planning Manager AS
SUBJECT: Results of the City Council Meeting, July 06, 2017
Public Hearing –
Zoning Ordinance Amendment: Amendment to Nonresidential Open Space
Requirements (ZA17-0001)
Owner(s): City of Frisco
Description:
A request to amend the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, Section 4.13.03.
Nonresidential Open Space Requirements and Section 7.01. Terms and Words
Defined, concerning proposed amendments to nonresidential open space requirements,
and to consider to direct Staff to prepare an ordinance of the same. (Development
Services/AS)
Result/Action:
Approved: 6 – 0
ACTION:
City Council approved the request and directed staff to prepare an Ordinance per the
following conditions:
4.13.03 Nonresidential Open Space Requirements
(A) Dedicated Amount Requirement
All nonresidential developments shall provide one of the following types of open space:
(1) Consolidated Open Space Type A:
Results
S:\Case Files\aaaa_Result Memos\2017 Memos\07-06-17 CC\ZA17-0001 CC PH Result Memo 07-06-17.docx
Page 2 of 12
Figure 4.13.03.1: Example of Type A Consolidated Open Space
Single lot developments. All nonresidential developments on a single lot shall provide a
minimum of ten (10) percent of the net total lot area as consolidated and usable open space.
(see Figure 4.13.03.1). All open space shall be owned and maintained by the property
owner(s) or the property owners’ association.
(2) Consolidated Open Space Type B:
Figure 4.13.03.2: Example of Type B Consolidated Open Space
Developments containing more than one lot. All nonresidential developments consisting of
more than one lot shall provide a minimum of ten (10) percent of the net total area of the lots
of the overall development (as defined on the preliminary site plan and/or site plan) as
consolidated and usable open space (see Figure 4.13.03.2). Such open space shall serve as the
sole and exclusive open space for all of the lots in the development and shall be shown on the
preliminary site plan. The open space may cross property lines. All open space shall be owned
and maintained by the property owner(s) or property owners’ association.
Results
S:\Case Files\aaaa_Result Memos\2017 Memos\07-06-17 CC\ZA17-0001 CC PH Result Memo 07-06-17.docx
Page 3 of 12
(B) Open Space Plan
The applicant shall submit an open space plan with the preliminary site plan and/or site plan
submittal for the subject property. The open space plan shall include the information listed on the
Open Space Plan Checklist, which shall be established and maintained by the Director. The
approval of the open space plan shall expire when the development plans expire, but the platted
easements shall remain in effect. Should the location open space change with a new preliminary
site plan and/or site plan, then the platted easement shall be amended to reflect the revised
location.
(C) Requirement for Open Space Easement
All Type A and Type B open space shall be dedicated as an easement on a conveyance plat and/or
final plat. This plat shall be submitted in accordance with Subdivision Ordinance Section 3.03 and
shall be submitted with the preliminary site plan. The plat and the preliminary site plan shall be
considered at the same Planning & Zoning Commission meeting and the plat, once approved, shall
be filed in accordance with Subdivision Ordinance Section 4.03(j).
(D) Timing of Improvements
(1)The construction of the required open space improvements:
a. Shall be in conjunction with the development of the first lot of a preliminary site plan
and completed on or before the acceptance of the final improvements for the first lot
of a preliminary site plan and/or site plan; or
b. May be deferred when the Director requires or agrees to accept escrow deposits. The
developer shall deposit in escrow with the City an amount equal to one hundred and
ten percent (110%) of the total “turnkey” costs, including, but not limited to, the
design, permitting, acceptance and inflation costs related to the improvement(s).
Should the escrow not cover the total costs at the time of development, the
developer shall be responsible for the added costs to implement the open space
improvements. If construction is deferred under this subsection, the improvements
must be completed on or before the date established by the Director.
(E) Open Space Amenity Requirement
(1) The following shall not count toward the open space requirement (applicable to Type A and
Type B):
a. Vehicular paving;
b. Parking lot tree islands;
c. Building footprint;
d. Utility yards;
e. Required landscaping per Section 4.02 (Landscaping Requirement);
f. Required Licensed Child-Care Facility play space; or
Results
S:\Case Files\aaaa_Result Memos\2017 Memos\07-06-17 CC\ZA17-0001 CC PH Result Memo 07-06-17.docx
Page 4 of 12
g. Open space that is not viewable from the public right-of-way/public access easements
nor provides access to the general public.
(2) The following amenities are required within the required open space (applicable to Type A
and Type B):
a. A pedestrian pathway constructed of brick or concrete pavers a minimum of eight (8)
feet in width traversing the consolidated open space with pedestrian lighting;
b. One shade tree, a minimum of ten (10) to twelve (12) feet in height and a minimum
of six inch in caliper at the time of planting, planted a minimum of thirty (30) feet on
center staggered on each side of the eight foot walking path;
c. Plaza or courtyard covered with brick or concrete pavers;

 Figure 4.13.03.3: Example of Plaza Covered with Brick or Concrete Pavers
d. Lawn; a minimum of 30 (thirty) percent of the consolidated open space requirement,
or as otherwise approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission; 
Results
S:\Case Files\aaaa_Result Memos\2017 Memos\07-06-17 CC\ZA17-0001 CC PH Result Memo 07-06-17.docx
Page 5 of 12
Figure 4.13.03.4: Example of Typical Lawn
e. Furniture, such as benches and/or low masonry seating walls; and
f. Overlook (required only for retention/detention ponds).
(3) In addition to the required amenities, at least eight of the following amenities are required
within the required open space (applicable to Type A and Type B), as approved by the Planning
& Zoning Commission:
a. Sculptures, and/or pedestrian entry monuments/gateways, as approved by the
Planning & Zoning Commission. Each installation to be counted as one amenity. A pair
of pedestrian entry monuments count as one (1) amenity. A maximum of four (4)
amenities may be counted from this category;
b. Water features, excluding required retention/detention ponds, (to be counted as
three (3) amenities). A maximum of one (1) water feature shall be counted towards
an open space amenity;
c. Tree groves/orchards (Trees shall be a shade tree a minimum of ten (10) to twelve
(12) feet in height and a minimum of six inch in caliper at the time of planting);
d. Shade structures such as pavilions or pergola (to be counted as three (3) amenities).
A maximum of one (1) shade structure shall be counted towards an open space
amenity;
e. Raised planter beds with plants of seasonal color and/or native plants with brick
and/or stone veneer (collectively count as one (1) amenity);
f. Educational paths with plaques & monuments describing natural habitats and plant
life of the surrounding area; and/or
g. Other features as approved by the Planning & Zoning Commission.
 This space intentionally left blank 
Results
S:\Case Files\aaaa_Result Memos\2017 Memos\07-06-17 CC\ZA17-0001 CC PH Result Memo 07-06-17.docx
Page 6 of 12
Results
S:\Case Files\aaaa_Result Memos\2017 Memos\07-06-17 CC\ZA17-0001 CC PH Result Memo 07-06-17.docx
Page 7 of 12
Results
S:\Case Files\aaaa_Result Memos\2017 Memos\07-06-17 CC\ZA17-0001 CC PH Result Memo 07-06-17.docx
Page 8 of 12
Results
S:\Case Files\aaaa_Result Memos\2017 Memos\07-06-17 CC\ZA17-0001 CC PH Result Memo 07-06-17.docx
Page 9 of 12
(F) Placement of Open Space
(1) The required open space shall meet the following location requirements (applicable to Type
A and Type B):
a. The required open space shall be of fifty (50) feet or greater in width at its narrowest
point, and a minimum square footage of 2,500 square feet (applicable to Type A and
Type B);
b. The required open space shall be adjacent to a minimum of one (1) commercial
building (an occupied space a minimum of 6,000 square feet), not seperated by
vechicular traffic, on a minimum of one (1) side. All commercial buildings shall comply
with the Fire Code.
c. A front or side of a commercial building must be adjacent to the required open space
(applicable to Type A and Type B) and be permeable/interactive. For restaurants uses
(an occupied commercial building a minimum of 2,500 square feet), the required
open space may be located behind a commercial building providing outdoor dining.
(see Figure 4.13.03.18).
Figure 4.13.03.18: Example of Open Space at Rear of Building
d. The applicant may request to the Planning & Zoning Commission that the required
open space may be split into separate areas within the development through an
alternative design. The applicant must demonstrate to the Planning & Zoning
Commission how the alternative design meets the intent of the Nonresidential Open
Space Requirements set forth herein. The alternative design shall conform to
Subsection 4.13.03(C)(D). (See Figure 4.13.03.19) 
Results
S:\Case Files\aaaa_Result Memos\2017 Memos\07-06-17 CC\ZA17-0001 CC PH Result Memo 07-06-17.docx
Page 10 of 12
(2) Incorporating Natural Features:
a. In this subsection, the term “natural feature” is defined as a:
i. Creeks;
ii. Natural drainage area;
iii. Floodplain (FEMA Special Flood Hazard Area and fully-developed 100-year
floodplain) and/or.
iv. Protected trees.
b. The site’s natural feature(s) shall be preserved and incorporated into the required
open space (Type A or Type B) in accordance with Subsection 4.13.03(A)(1-2),
(Dedicated Amount Requirement). The natural feature(s) shall be defined and
identified on the open space plan submitted with the preliminary site plan and/or site
plan in accordance with Subsection 4.13.03(B) (Open Space Plan) and Subsection
4.13.03(C) (Requirement for Open Space Easement).
c. The required open space containing the natural feature(s) shall comply with
Subsection 4.13.03(F)(1)(a-d) (Placement of Open Space). If the applicant identifies a
natural feature where it is not possible for a commercial building to comply with
Subsection 4.13.03(F)(1)(a-d), the applicant may request an alternative design to the
Planning & Zoning Commission. The applicant must demonstrate how the alternative
design incorporates the natural feature and meets the intent of the Nonresidential
Open Space Requirements set forth herein.
d. The required open space containing the natural feature(s) shall provide amenities in
accordance with Subsection 4.13.03(E)(2-3) (Open Space Amenity Requirement), as
permitted by Federal, State and Local requirements (lawn amenity requirement may
be waived with Planning & Zoning Commission approval).
(3) Detention Ponds or Retention Ponds
Figure 4.13.03.19: Example of Type B Consolidated Open
Space (Split) 
Results
S:\Case Files\aaaa_Result Memos\2017 Memos\07-06-17 CC\ZA17-0001 CC PH Result Memo 07-06-17.docx
Page 11 of 12
a. A detention and/or retention pond may count toward the required open space if it
meets the following design requirements:
i. Meets the location criteria set forth in Subsection 4.13.03(F)(1) (Placement of
Open Space);
ii. Meets Engineering Standards;
iii. Slope of the pond area does not exceed three (3) percent; allowable to twentyfive (25) percent, but requires stone terracing for any slope exceeding three (3)
percent. Terracing or the cutting of a sloped plane into a series of successively
receding flat surfaces or platforms, shall have a maximum shelf depth of three
feet with maximum 6 inch risers;
iv. Accessible by the public;
v. The water surface in the retention pond as measured at the normal pool
elevations shall only account for a maximum of ten (10) percent of consolidated
open space requirement;
vi. Natural stone or brick veneer is required on headwalls, bridges, wall, culverts,
retaining walls, and like structures; and
vii. Meets the amenity requirements set forth in Subsection 4.13.03(E)(2-3).
(G) Criteria for Approval
(1) Open Space Recommendation.
The Director shall recommend approval of the proposed open space plan when the applicant
demonstrates that:
Figure 4.13.03.20: Example of Stone/Brick
Infrastrucutre Veneer 
Results
S:\Case Files\aaaa_Result Memos\2017 Memos\07-06-17 CC\ZA17-0001 CC PH Result Memo 07-06-17.docx
Page 12 of 12
a. The open space plan has been submitted and found to be in compliance with all
applicable City ordinances and standards; and
b. The applicant has received approval from the Director for instances requiring Director
approval; or
c. In the event that the proposed open space plan fails to comply with this section, the
applicant shall provide documentation stating the reasons for non-compliance and
provide an acceptable alternative proposal that meets the intent of this section for
quality, usable and consolidated open space.
(2) Criteria for Open Space Approval.
The Planning & Zoning Commission shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions the
proposed open space plan based upon the criteria listed in Subsection 4.13.03.(G)(1)(a-c). 
Frisco Enterprise 08/04/17 08/11/17 2
Celina Record 08/04/17 08/11/17 2
Internet 08/04/17 08/11/17 2
LEGAL: ORD.
Inside 401es' Manager of the Frisco Enterprise, Celina Record, Internet
8-51
day of , 201
STARLOCAL
MEDIA
Frisco Enterprise, Celina Record, Internet
AFFIDAVIT OF LEGAL NOTICE
I, Nick Souders, Inside Sales Manager of the Frisco Enterprise, Celina Record, Internet a newspaper printed
in the English language in Collin County, State of Texas, do hereby certify that this notice was Published in
the Frisco Enterprise, Celina Record, Internet on the following dates, to-wit
$126.00
(Cost)
Subscribed and sworn on this
Notary Public, State of Texas 
Run dates:
Class:
Ad ID:
Ad Taker:
Sales Person:
Inserts:
Words:
Lines:
Columns:
Depth (Inches):
08/04/17 to 08/11/17
1710
1013416
JCRAGHEAD
005
6
143
26
3
3.0
08/03/17
STALOCAL . II MEDIA
Classified (972) 422-SELL
www.starlocalmedia.com Recruitment: (972) 578-WORK
624 Krona Drive, Suite 170, Plano, TX 75074 Legals: (972) 398-4233
Name: KRISTI MORROW
Company: CITY OF FRISCO/CITY SECRETARY
Address: 6101 FRISCO SQUARE BLVD
ATTN: ACCTS. PAYABLE
FRISCO, TX 75034-3253
Account ID: 52740
Account #:
Telephone: (972) 292-5025
Fax: (972) 292-5028
E-mail: kmorrow@friscotexas.gov
Publications:Frisco Enterprise, Celina Record, Internet
Payments: Method Card Name Last 4 Expire Check Amount
Type on Card Digits Date Number Paid
$126.00
- $0.00
$126.00
Net:
Paid Amount:
Amount Due:
LEGAL NOTICE
CITY OF FRISCO
PUBLIC NOTICE
Notice is hereby given that the Frisco City Council adopted the following Ordinance at a regularly scheduled meeting held on Tuesday, August 1, 2017.
ORDINANCE NO. 17-08-51: AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF FRISCO, TEXAS, AMENDING FRISCO'S ZONING ORDINANCE, ORDINANCE NO. 11-04-09, AS AMENDED,
SUBSECTION 4.13.03 (NONRESIDENTIAL OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS) OF SECTION 4 (SITE DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS), BY
MODIFYING CERTAIN REGULATIONS GOVERNING NONRESIDENTIAL OPEN SPACE AND ESTABLISHING NEW REQUIREMENTS FOR
CONSOLIDATED AND USABLE OPEN SPACE IN NONRESIDENTIAL
DEVELOPMENTS; PROVIDING A PENALTY CLAUSE, SAVINGS/REPEALING CLAUSE, SEVERABILITY CLAUSE AND AN EFFECTIVE
DATE; AND PROVIDING FOR THE PUBLICATION OF THE CAPTION
HEREOF.
A copy of this Ordinance may be read or purchased in the Office of
the City Secretary, City of Frisco, 6101 Frisco Square Blvd, Frisco,
Texas 75034 or may be viewed at wvvw.friscotexas.gov . 