CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF FREDERICKSBURG, TEXAS 
____________ 
Adopted: April 4, 2005 
Effective: April 4, 2005 
____________ 
Published in 2005 by Order of the City Council 
Republished in 2010 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
FREDERICKSBURG, TEXAS 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Timothy M. Crenwelge 
Mayor 
____________ 
Ann Brey 
Dan Mittel 
Tim Dooley 
Kevin Mac Withey 
City Council 
____________ 
Gary Neffendorf 
City Manager 
____________ 
Pat McGowan 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Shelley Britton 
City Secretary 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
FREDERICKSBURG, TEXAS 
AT THE TIME OF THIS REPUBLICATION 
____________ 
Tom Musselman 
Mayor 
____________ 
Kevin Mac Withey 
Tim Dooley 
Graham Pearson 
Bjorn Kirchdorfer 
City Council 
____________ 
Gary Neffendorf 
City Manager 
____________ 
Pat McGowan 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Shelley Britton 
City Secretary 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Fredericksburg, Texas. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1992 Code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1992 Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
This 2010 republication includes all amendatory legislation through Ord. No. 20-001, adopted March 22, 2010, and was accomplished under the supervision of Colleen Dalton, Editor. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Daniel F. Walker, Code Attorney, and Yolanda Vickers, Legal Tech Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Shelley Britton for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Fredericksburg, Texas. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Fredericksburg, Texas. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Fredericksburg, Texas. 2005. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 15-004 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Fredericksburg, Texas; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Dispensing With Mental State Except Where Required; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF FREDERICKSBURG, TEXAS: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Fredericksburg, Texas," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 50, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted which were included in prior versions of the Code of Ordinance of the City of Fredericksburg on or before June 7, 2004, and not included in the Code adopted by this Ordinance or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished in accordance with Section 1-6 of the Code of Ordinances hereby adopted. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Section 1-7 of this Code shall read as follows: Unless a culpable mental state is required by state statute or is otherwise specifically set out in the definition of a particular offense, or is otherwise specifically required by other law or regulation superceding city ordinances or judicial decision, a particular culpable mental state is specifically dispensed with for offenses of this code. Offenses under this Code may be prosecuted without alleging or proving any culpable mental state. In the event a culpable mental state is required and is not specified for the particular action, it shall be that of criminal negligence as defined in section 6.03 of the Texas Penal Code, or its successor statute, or the minimum level of culpable mental state required by any law or regulation superceding city ordinances or judicial decision, whichever is the lesser burden of proof. A culpable mental state need not be pled in any instrument or document charging a violation of any portion of this Code. 
Section 6. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 7. Ordinances adopted after June 7, 2004, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 8. This ordinance shall become effective upon its passage. 
Passed and adopted by City Council this 4th day of April, 2005. 
;sigr; Timothy M. Crenwelge\Timothy M. Crenwelge, Mayor 
ATTEST: 
/s/ Shelley Britton 
      Shelley Britton, City Secretary 	
 	 
APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
/s/ Pat McGowan 
      Pat McGowan, City Attorney 	
 	 
Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the city council, held on the 4th day of April, 2005. 
/s/ Shelley Britton 
      Shelley Britton, City Secretary 	
 	 
 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
CITY OF FREDERICKSBURG CHARTER 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Cities of 5,000+ population, charters, Tex. Const. Art. XI, Sec. 5; charter adoption and amendment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 9.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - FORM OF GOVERNMENT AND BOUNDARIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Form of government in home rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 26.001. 
 
Sec. 1.01. - Form of Government. 
The municipal government provided by this charter shall be known as the "council-manager government." Pursuant to its provision and subject only to the limitation imposed by the State Constitution and by this charter, all powers of the city shall be vested in an elective council, hereinafter referred to as the "city council" which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies, and employ the city manager, who shall execute the laws and administer the government of the city. All powers of the city shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this charter, or if the manner be not prescribed by ordinance, the State Constitution or the laws of the State of Texas.  
Sec. 1.02. - Boundaries. 
The boundaries of the City of Fredericksburg shall be the same as have heretofore been established and as they existed on the day of ratification of this charter, which boundaries are more fully set out and described by the official city map of the City of Fredericksburg.  
Sec. 1.03. - Extension of Boundaries. 
The boundaries of the City of Fredericksburg may be enlarged and extended by the annexation of additional territory, regardless of the size and configuration, by any of the methods hereinafter designated: 
(a)  Annexation of Lands on Petition of Owners. The owner or owners of any land contiguous and adjacent to the city may, by petition in writing to the city council, request the annexation of such contiguous and adjacent land, describing it by metes and bounds. The city council shall thereafter hear such petition and the arguments for and against the same, and grant or refuse such petition as the city council may see fit. If the city council grants such petition, it may by proper ordinance, under such procedural rules as may be prescribed by law, receive and annex such territory as a part of the city. 
(b)  Annexation of Lands by Ordinance. The city council may by ordinance annex territory contiguous and adjacent to the city subject to such procedural rules as may be prescribed by state law, with or without the consent of the inhabitants or owners thereof. 
(c)  Annexed Territory to Become Part of City. Upon completion of any of the procedures hereinabove provided, the territory so annexed shall become a part of the city, and said land and its residents and future residents shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges of other citizens of the city and shall be bound by the act, ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the city. 
State Law reference— Annexation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 43.001 et seq.; map of municipal boundaries, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 41.001.  
Sec. 1.04. - Contraction of Boundaries. 
Whenever there exists within the corporate limits of the City of Fredericksburg adjoining the other boundaries thereof any territory not suitable or necessary for orderly planning and development of the city, the city council may, if uninhabited, or if the same be inhabited, upon a petition signed by a majority of the qualified voters residing in such territory, by ordinance duly passed, deannex such property as a part of said city; and from and after the entry of such ordinance said territory shall cease to be a part of said city.  
ARTICLE II. - POWERS OF THE CITY 
 
Sec. 2.01. - General Powers. 
The city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the constitution and laws of this state, as fully and completely as though they were especially enumerated in this charter. All such powers, whether expressed or implied, shall be exercised and enforced in the manner prescribed by this charter, and, when not prescribed herein, in such manner as may be provided by ordinance or resolution of the council of the City of Fredericksburg. 
The enumeration of particular powers in this charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive, but in addition to the powers enumerated herein, implied thereby or appropriate to the exercise thereof, the city may have and shall exercise all other powers which, under the Constitution of the State of Texas, it would be competent for the charter specifically to enumerate. The City of Fredericksburg shall have and exercise all the powers conferred upon cities by what is known as the Home Rule Amendment to the Constitution of the State of Texas and the enabling act and all other laws passed or which may hereafter be passed by the legislature in relation to such matter. 
The City of Fredericksburg may exercise any of its powers or perform any of its functions, and may participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by contract or otherwise with the Government of Texas or agency thereof, or with the Federal Government or any agency thereof, or with the government of any county, city or political subdivision to accomplish any lawful municipal purpose. 
State Law reference— Home-rule municipality has full power of local self-government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 51.072.  
Sec. 2.02. - Eminent Domain. 
The city shall have the full power and right to exercise the power of eminent domain where necessary or desirable to carry out any of the powers conferred upon it by this charter or by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas. The city may exercise the power of eminent domain in any manner authorized or permitted by the Constitution and laws of the state. The power of eminent domain hereby conferred shall include the right of the city to take the fee in land so condemned and such power and authority shall include the right to condemn public property for such purposes. The city shall have and possess the power of condemnation for any municipal or public purposes even though not specifically enumerated in this charter. 
State Law reference— Municipal power of eminent domain, procedure, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 251.001—251.002; eminent domain, V.T.C.A., Property Code § 21.001 et seq.  
ARTICLE III. - THE CITY COUNCIL 
 
Sec. 3.01. - Number, Selection and Term. 
The legislative and governing body of the city shall consist of a mayor and four (4) councilmembers and shall be known as the "City Council of the City of Fredericksburg." The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected from the city at large. The term for the mayor and councilmembers shall be two years. Each member of the city council shall serve until his successor is elected and qualified. The mayor or councilmembers may be elected to an unlimited number of terms, but to no more than four consecutive terms, in the same office. 
The terms of the councilmembers shall be staggered so that two (2) members will be elected to a regular term each year. All elections shall be held in the manner provided in Article VI of this charter. Regular terms of office shall commence on May 15th of each year.  
Sec. 3.02. - Qualifications. 
Each member of the city council shall be eligible to be a candidate for public elective office in the State of Texas, a qualified voter of the State of Texas, a resident citizen of the City of Fredericksburg and shall have been such resident citizen of the City of Fredericksburg for a period of not less than twelve months immediately preceding his election, and shall not be indebted to the City of Fredericksburg provided, however, that any person with the above qualifications, except as the residence, who shall have been a resident for a period of not less than twelve months immediately preceding his election of any of the territory not formerly within the corporate limits of said city, but which is annexed under the provisions of this charter, shall be eligible for said office. If any councilmember fails to maintain the foregoing qualifications, the city council must at its next regular meeting declare a vacancy to exist and shall fill said vacancy as set forth in Section 3.07 of this charter. If any councilmember shall be absent from three consecutive regular meetings without valid excuse, the city council may declare a vacancy to exist and fill said vacancy as set forth in Section 3.07 of the charter. 
(Amendment passed by voters, May 7, 2016)  
Sec. 3.03. - Council to be Judge of Election, Qualifications. 
The city council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its own members.  
Sec. 3.04. - Compensation. 
Compensation shall be set by municipal ordinance. Commencing June 1, 2017, the city council shall receive the following compensation: mayor, $850.00 per month and each councilmember, $550.00 per month. In addition, each shall be paid for any actual and necessary expenses incurred while in the discharge of the duties of the office, upon presentation of an itemized statement of such expense to the city council and approved by the city council. Any adjustments to salary compensation shall be by municipal ordinance. Any increase in salary compensation by ordinance shall not become effective until the date of commencement of terms of office of the councilmembers or mayor elected at the next scheduled regular election. 
(Amendment passed by voters, May 7, 2016)  
Sec. 3.05. - Mayor Pro Tem. 
At its first regular meeting after election each year, the city council shall elect from among its members a mayor pro tem who shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. In the absence or inability of the mayor to perform the duties of the office, the mayor pro tem shall perform the duties of office and in this capacity shall be vested with all of the powers conferred on the mayor.  
Sec. 3.06. - Emergency Power of Mayor. 
In time of danger or emergency, the mayor may, with the consent of the city council, take command of the police and govern the city by proclamation and maintain order and enforce all laws.  
Sec. 3.07. - Vacancies. 
When a vacancy occurs in the city council, the remaining members of the council shall, within thirty (30) days, appoint a qualified person to fill the vacancy until the next regular city election, at which time the unexpired term of such vacancy shall be filled by election.  
Sec. 3.08. - Powers of the City Council. 
All powers and authority which are expressly or impliedly conferred on or possessed by the city shall be vested in and exercised by the city council.  
Sec. 3.09. - City Council Not to Interfere in Appointments. 
Neither the city council nor any of its members shall in any manner dictate the appointment or removal of any city administrative officers or employees whom the city manager or any of his subordinates are empowered to appoint, unless otherwise provided in this charter, but the city council may express its views and fully and freely discuss with the city manager anything pertaining to appointment and removal of such officers and employees.  
Sec. 3.10. - Meetings of the City Council. 
City council meetings shall be held at city hall or at such place as the city council shall designate and the city council shall meet regularly at least once in every month at such time as the city council may prescribe by rule. Special meetings may be on the call of the mayor or two councilmembers and whenever practicable upon not less than twelve hours' notice to each councilmember; provided, however, that all meetings shall be open to the public, except for closed and/or executive meetings and sessions as provided and authorized by the Statutes of the State of Texas, as now or hereafter amended, and written public notice thereof given as required by the Statutes of the State of Texas, as now or hereafter amended.  
Sec. 3.11. - Rules of Procedure. 
The city council shall determine its own rules and order of business and shall provide for keeping of minutes of its proceedings. These minutes shall be a public record. Voting, except on procedural motions, shall be by roll call and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the minutes. Three members of the city council shall constitute a quorum, but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time and may compel the attendance of absent members in the manner and subject to the penalties prescribed by the rules of the city council. At the beginning of each term of office the city council shall adopt rules of order which shall govern all meetings of the city council. No action of the city council, except as otherwise provided in the preceding sentence, and Section 3.02 of this charter shall be valid or binding unless adopted by the affirmative vote of a majority of the entire city council. Copies of the rules of order adopted by the city council shall be available in the office of the city secretary for examination by interested persons. The mayor shall be a voting member of the city council.  
Sec. 3.12. - Procedure for Passage of Ordinances. 
The city council shall legislate by ordinance, and the enacting clause of every ordinance shall be "Be it ordained by the city council of the City of Fredericksburg." The city attorney shall approve all ordinances adopted by the city council, as to the legality thereof, or shall file with the city secretary his written legal objections thereto. Evidence of the approval of an ordinance by the city attorney may be by notation on the ordinance itself, or by separate paper or instrument. Every ordinance enacted by the city council shall be signed by the mayor, mayor pro tem or two councilmembers and shall be filed with and recorded by the city secretary. All proposed ordinances shall be read in open meeting of the city council, provided that all readings of any ordinance may be by descriptive caption only, except that one member of the council may require a complete reading of any ordinance upon the reading thereof, and all ordinances shall be posted at city hall. 
Except as otherwise provided by law or this charter, the city secretary shall give notice of the enactment of every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine or forfeiture for any violation of any of its provisions, and of every other ordinance required by law or this charter to be published, by causing the said ordinance, or its caption and penalty, to be published at least one time within ten (10) days after final passage thereof in the newspaper of general circulation of the City of Fredericksburg. The affidavit of such publication by the publisher of such newspaper taken before any officer authorized to administer oaths and filed with the city secretary, shall be conclusive proof of the legal publication and promulgation of such ordinance in all courts. All ordinances shall become effective upon the date stated on the ordinance; if no date is stated, then the ordinance shall become effective ten (10) days after its passage. 
(Amendment passed by voters, May 7, 2016)  
Sec. 3.13. - Official Bonds for City Employees. 
The city manager and the city secretary and such other city officers and employees as the city council may require, shall, before entering upon the duties of their offices, enter into a good and sufficient fidelity bond in a sum to be determined by the city council, payable to the City of Fredericksburg and conditioned upon a faithful discharge of the duties of such persons and upon a faithful accounting for all monies, credits and things of a value coming into the hands of such persons, and such bonds shall be signed as surety by some company authorized to do business under the laws of the State of Texas, and the premium of such bonds shall be paid by the City of Fredericksburg, and such bonds must be acceptable to the city council.  
Sec. 3.14. - Investigation by the City Council. 
The city council shall have the power to inquire into the conduct of any office, department, agency, officer or employee of the city and to make investigations as to municipal affairs, and for that purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and compel the production of books, papers, and other evidence. Failure to obey such subpoena or to produce such books, papers or other evidence as ordered under the provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by fine not to exceed two hundred ($200.00) dollars and/or cancellation of a faithful performance bond.  
Sec. 3.15. - Audit and Examination of City Books and Accounts. 
The city council shall cause an annual audit to be made of the books and accounts of each and every department of the city. A complete audit in accordance with standards set by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants shall be made at the end of each fiscal year, and at such other times as may be necessary, by an Independent Certified Public Accountant who shall be selected by the city council. The audit report shall be filed with the city council and shall be available for public inspection and a summary thereof shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation of the City of Fredericksburg. The auditor selected shall not maintain or keep any of the city accounts or records. 
State Law reference— Audit of municipal finances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 103.001—103.004.  
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES 
 
Sec. 4.01. - City Manager. 
(a)  Appointment and Qualification. The city council shall appoint a city manager who shall be the chief administrative officer of the city and shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all the affairs of the city. He shall be chosen by the city council solely on the basis of his executive and administrative training, experience, ability and character. No member of the city council shall, during the time for which he is elected and for one (1) year thereafter, be appointed city manager. 
(b)  Term and Salary. The city manager shall not be appointed for a definite term but may be removed at the will and pleasure of the city council by a vote of the majority of the entire council. The action of the city council in suspending or removing the city manager shall be final; it being the intention of this charter to vest all authority and fix all responsibility of such suspension or removal in the city council. In case of the absence or disability of the city manager, the city council may designate some qualified person to perform the duties of the office during such absence or disability. The city manager shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by the city council. 
(c)  Powers and Duties. The powers herein conferred upon the city manager shall include but shall not be limited to the following: 
(1)  To effectively enforce all state laws and city ordinances. 
(2)  To appoint and remove any officer or employee of the city and establish compensation for officers and employees except those officers and employees whose appointment or election is otherwise provided for by law or this charter. 
(3)  To prepare and submit the annual budget and a five (5) year capital improvement program to the city council. 
(4)  To submit to the city council monthly a report on the finances and administrative activities of the city and a complete report as of the end of each fiscal year. 
(5)  To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this charter or required of him by the city council, not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter.  
Sec. 4.02. - Other Departments. 
The city council may create, abolish or consolidate such offices and departments as it may deem to be to the best interest of the city and may divide the administration of any such departments and may discontinue any offices or departments at its discretion, except those established by this charter.  
Sec. 4.03. - City Attorney. 
The city council shall appoint a city attorney who shall hold office at the pleasure of the city council, and whose compensation shall be fixed by the city council. The city attorney shall be a licensed attorney in the State of Texas. The city attorney shall be the legal advisor of and the attorney and counsel for the city, shall represent the city in legal matters and shall perform other duties as prescribed by this Charter, by ordinance or other law. The city attorney shall have such staff as shall be approved by the city council. 
(Amendment approved by voters, May 7, 2016)  
ARTICLE V. - MUNICIPAL COURT 
 
Sec. 5.01. - Municipal Court. 
There shall be established and maintained a court designated as a "municipal court" for the trial of misdemeanor offenses and other matters, with all such powers and duties as are now or hereafter may be prescribed by laws of the State of Texas. 
(Amendment approved by voters, May 7, 2016)  
Sec. 5.02. - Judge of the Municipal Court. 
(a)  The judge of the municipal court, and any assistant judges, shall hold their offices at the pleasure of the city council, and shall receive such salary as may be fixed by the city council. 
(b)  In the case of the disability or absence of the judge of the municipal court, the city council shall appoint a qualified successor. 
(Amendment approved by voters, May 7, 2016)  
Sec. 5.03. - Clerk of the Municipal Court. 
(a)  A clerk of the municipal court shall be appointed by the judge of the municipal court with the approval of the city manager. 
(b)  The clerk of the municipal court and his deputies shall have the power to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of said court thereto, and generally do and perform any and all acts usual and necessary by the clerk of said court in issuing process of said court and conducting the business thereof. 
(Amendment approved by voters, May 7, 2016)  
ARTICLE VI. - ELECTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Application for home-rule city office, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 143.005; age and residency requirements for home-rule city office, V.T.C.A., Election Code § 141.003. 
 
Sec. 6.01. - Elections. 
The regular city election shall be held annually on the first Saturday in May or at such other times as may be specified by state law, at which time officers will be elected to fill those offices which become vacant that year. The city council shall fix the place for holding such election. The city council may, by ordinance or resolution, order a special election, fix the date and place for holding same, and provide all means for holding such special election. Notice of the election shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation of the city of Fredericksburg, such publication to be not less than thirty (30) days before the election.  
Sec. 6.02. - Regulation of Elections. 
All elections shall be held in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas regulating the holding of municipal elections and in accordance with the ordinances adopted by the city council for the conduct of elections. The city council shall appoint the election judges and other election officials.  
Sec. 6.03. - Filing for Office. 
Any person having the qualifications set forth for councilmember under Section 3.02 of this charter shall have the right to file an application to have his name placed on the official ballot as a candidate for any elective office, and such application in writing signed by such candidate, filed with the city secretary not less than forty-five (45) days prior to the date of election, shall entitle such applicant to a place on the official ballot.  
Sec. 6.04. - The Official Ballot. 
The names of all candidates for office, except such as may have withdrawn, died or become ineligible, shall be printed on official ballots without party designations in the order determined in a drawing of lots (for each position) conducted by the city secretary. All official ballots shall be printed at least twenty (20) days prior to the date of any general or special election, and shall provide a space for write-in candidates. Absentee voting shall be governed by the general election laws of the State of Texas.  
Sec. 6.05. - Candidates Elected. 
(a)  The candidate in the regular city election who receives the greatest number of votes cast for the office of mayor shall be declared elected. In the event of a tie vote between the candidates receiving the highest number of votes cast for the office of mayor, the city council shall within five (5) days order a special election between the tied candidates to be held between thirty (30) and forty-five (45) days after the said election at which the tie vote was cast. 
(b)  The candidates in the regular city election who receive the greatest and second greatest number of votes cast for the office of councilmember shall be declared elected. In the event there is a tie vote between candidates so that two candidates for council member do not receive the greatest and second greatest number of votes, the city council shall within five (5) days order a special election between the tied candidates to be held between thirty (30) and forty-five (45) days after the said election at which the tie vote was cast. 
(c)  The candidate in the regular city election who receives the greatest number of votes cast for the unexpired term of any office shall be declared elected. In the event of a tie vote between the candidates receiving the highest number of votes cast for such office, the city council shall within five (5) days order a special election between the tied candidates to be held between thirty (30) and forty-five (45) days after the said election at which the tie vote was cast.  
Sec. 6.06. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— At an election held on May 7, 2016, voters approved the removal of § 6.06, Election of Mayor and Councilmembers.  
Sec. 6.07. - Laws Governing City Elections. 
All city elections shall be governed by the laws of the State of Texas governing general and municipal elections.  
Sec. 6.08. - Conducting and Canvassing Elections. 
The election judges and other necessary election officials for conducting all such elections shall be appointed by the city council. The election judges shall conduct the elections, determine, record and report the results as provided by the general election laws of Texas. Within five (5) days or as soon as practical after an election, the city council shall meet, open the returns, canvass and officially declare the results of the election as to candidate and questions. The mayor shall issue certificates of election to candidates elected as hereinbefore provided.  
Sec. 6.09. - Oath of Office. 
Every officer of the city shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take and subscribe to an oath or affirmation of office to be filed and kept in the office of the city secretary.  
ARTICLE VII. - RECALL OF OFFICERS 
 
Sec. 7.01. - Scope of Recall. 
Any person holding an elected office, whether elected to office by the qualified voters of the city or appointed by the city council to fill a vacancy, shall be subject to recall and removal from office by the qualified voters of the city.  
Sec. 7.02. - Petitions for Recall. 
Before the question of recall of such officer shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the city, a petition demanding such question to be so submitted shall first be filed with the person performing the duties of city secretary; which said petition shall be signed by qualified voters of the city equal in number at least thirty percent (30 percent) of the number of votes cast at the last regular election of the city, but in no event less than two hundred (200) such petitioners. Each signer of such recall petition shall personally sign his name thereto in ink or indelible pencil, and shall write after his name, his place of residence, giving name of street and number of place of residence, and shall also write thereon the day, the month and year his signature was affixed.  
Sec. 7.03. - Form of Recall Petition. 
The recall petition mentioned above must be addressed to the city council of the City of Fredericksburg, must distinctly and specifically point out the ground or grounds upon which such petition for removal is predicated, and if there be more than one ground, shall specifically state each ground with such certainty as to give the officer sought to be removed notice of the matters and things with which he is charged. The signature shall be verified by oath in the following form: 
"State of Texas 
County of Gillespie 
I, _______ being first duly sworn, on oath depose and say that I am one of the signers of the above petition; and that the statements made therein are true, and that each signature was made in my presence on the day and date it purports to have been made, and that each voter is a resident and registered voter within the City of Fredericksburg, and I solemnly swear that the same is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be, and has stated to me that he or she knows the contents of this petition. 
Signed:_______ 
Sworn to and subscribed before, this the ___ day of _______, 20 ___. 
___________ 
Notary Public, Gillespie County, Texas" 
(Amendment approved by voters, May 7, 2016)  
Sec. 7.04. - Various Papers Constituting Petition. 
The petition may consist of one or more copies, or subscription lists, circulated separately, and the signatures thereto may be upon the papers or paper containing the form of petition, or upon the papers on paper containing the form of petition, or upon any other papers attached thereto. Verifications provided for in the preceding section of this article may be made by one or more petitioners, and the several parts of copies of the petition may be filed separately and by different persons; but no signatures to such petition shall remain effective or be counted which were placed thereon more than forty-five (45) days prior to the filing of such petition or petitions with the person performing the duties of the city secretary. All papers comprising a recall petition shall be filed with the person performing the duties of city secretary on the same day, and the said secretary shall immediately notify, in writing, the office so sought to be removed, by mailing such notice to his Fredericksburg address.  
Sec. 7.05. - Presentation of Petition to City Council. 
Within thirty (30) days after the date of the filing of the papers constituting the recall petition, the person performing the duties of city secretary shall verify that the petition is in the correct form and is signed by the required number of registered voters. The city secretary will present such petition, along with his findings, to the city council. The city council will determine the validity of the petition, and act on it according to the council's determination of its validity. 
(Amendment approved by voters, May 7, 2016)  
Sec. 7.06. - Public Hearing to be Held. 
The officer whose removal is sought may, within five (5) days after such recall petition has been presented to the city council, request that a public hearing be held to permit him to present facts pertinent to the charges specified in the recall petition. In this event, the city council shall order such public hearing to be held, not less than five (5) days nor more than fifteen (15) days after receiving such request for a public hearing.  
Sec. 7.07. - Election to be Called. 
If an officer whose removal is sought does not resign, then it shall become the duty of the city council to order an election and fix a date for holding such recall election, the date of which election shall be the next uniform election date following the date of the public hearing provided that the timing permits compliance with applicable election laws, otherwise, the date of the election shall be the following uniform election date. 
(Amendment approved by voters, May 7, 2016)  
Sec. 7.08. - Ballots in Recall Election. 
Ballots used at recall election shall conform to the following requirements: 
(a)  With respect to each person whose removal is sought, the question shall be submitted: "Shall (name of person) be removed from the office of (name of office) by recall?" 
(b)  Immediately below each such question there shall be printed the following words, one above the other, in the order indicated: 
"Yes" 
"No"  
Sec. 7.09. - Result of Recall Election. 
If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be "No," that is, against the recall of the person named on the ballot, he shall continue in office for the remainder of his unexpired term, subject to recall as before. If a majority of the votes cast at such an election be "Yes," that is, for the recall of the person named in the ballot, he shall, regardless of any technical defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed from office and the vacancy filled as provided in Section 3.07 of this charter.  
Sec. 7.10. - Restrictions on Recall. 
No recall petition shall be filed against any officer of the City of Fredericksburg within three (3) months after his election, nor within three (3) months after an election for such officer's recall.  
Sec. 7.11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— At an election held on May 7, 2016, voters approved the removal of § 7.11, Failure of City Council to Call an Election.  
ARTICLE VIII. - LEGISLATION BY THE PEOPLE, INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM 
 
Sec. 8.01. - General Power. 
Qualified voters of the City of Fredericksburg shall have the power to direct legislation by initiative and referendum as provided by the city charter.  
Sec. 8.02. - Initiative. 
Registered voters of the City of Fredericksburg may initiate legislation by submitting a petition addressed to the city council which requests the submission of a proposed ordinance or resolution to a vote of the registered voters of the city. Said petition must be signed by registered voters of the city equal in number to ten percent (10%) of the number of registered voters of the City Fredericksburg or two hundred (200), whichever is greater, and each copy of the petition shall have attached to it a copy of the proposed legislation. The petition shall be signed within the same time as recall petitions are signed, in the same manner as recall petitions are signed, and shall be verified by oath and presented to the city secretary in the manner and form as recall petitions are verified and preserved as provided in this charter. The petition may consist of one or more copies as permitted for recall petitions. Such petition shall be filed with the person performing the duties of city secretary. Within thirty (30) days after the filing of such petition, the person performing the duties of city secretary verify that the petition is in the correct form and is signed by the required number of registered voters. The city secretary will present such petition and proposed ordinance or resolution, along with his findings, to the city council. The city council will determine the validity of the petition, and act on it according to the council's determination of its validity. Upon presentation to the city council of the petition and draft of the proposed ordinance or resolutions, and following the determination of the city council of its validity, it shall become the duty of the city council, within ten (10) days or at the next regular council meeting, whichever is later, after the receipt thereof, to pass and adopt such ordinance or resolution without alteration as to meaning or effect, or to call a special election, to be held on the next uniform election date provided that the timing permits compliance with applicable election laws, otherwise, the date of the election shall be the following uniform election date. 
(Amendment approved by voters, May 7, 2016)  
Sec. 8.03. - Referendum. 
Registered voters of the City of Fredericksburg may require that any ordinance or resolution, in whole or in part, with the exception of ordinances or resolutions issuing bonds (except as required by state law), levying taxes or appropriating money, passed by the city council be submitted to the voters of the city for approval or disapproval, by submitting a petition for this purpose within thirty (30) days after its publication. Said petition shall be addressed, prepared, dated, signed and verified as required for petitions initiating legislation as provided in this charter and shall be submitted to the person performing the duties of city secretary. Within thirty (30) days after the filing of such petition, the person performing the duties of city secretary shall verify that the petition is in the correct form and is signed by the required number of registered voters. The city secretary will present such petition and proposed ordinance or resolution, along with his findings, to the city council. The city council will determine the validity of the petition, and act on it according to the council's determination of its validity, and following the determination of the city council on its validity, the city council shall within ten (10) days or at the next regular council meeting, whichever is later, reconsider such ordinance or resolution, in whole or in part as stated in the petition, and if it does not entirely repeal same, shall submit it to popular vote as provided in Section 8.02 of this charter. Pending the holding of such election, such ordinance or resolution, or part thereof as stated in the petition, shall be suspended from taking effect and shall not later take effect unless a majority of the registered voters voting thereon at such election shall vote in favor thereof. 
(Amendment approved by voters, May 7, 2016)  
Sec. 8.04. - Voluntary Submission of Legislation by the Council. 
The city council, upon its own motion and by a majority vote of its members, may submit to popular vote at any election for adoption or rejection any proposed ordinance or resolution or measure or may submit for repeal any existing ordinance, resolution or measure, in the same manner and with the same force and effect as provided in this Article for submission on petition, and may at its discretion call a special election for this purpose.  
Sec. 8.05. - Form of Ballots. 
The ballots used when voting upon such proposed and referred ordinances, resolutions, or measures, shall set forth their nature sufficiently to identify them and shall set forth upon separate lines the words: 
"FOR THE ORDINANCE," and 
"AGAINST THE ORDINANCE," or 
"FOR THE RESOLUTION," and 
"AGAINST THE RESOLUTION."  
Sec. 8.06. - Publication or Proposed and Referred Ordinances. 
The person performing the duties of city secretary shall publish at least once in a newspaper of general circulation of the city the proposed or referred ordinance or resolution within fifteen (15) days before the date of the election, and shall give such other notices and do such other things relative to such election as are required in general municipal elections or by the ordinance or resolution calling such election.  
Sec. 8.07. - Adoption of Ordinances. 
If a majority of the qualified voters voting on any proposed ordinance or resolution or measure shall vote in favor thereof, it shall thereupon, or at any time fixed therein, become effective as a law or as a mandatory order of the city council.  
Sec. 8.08. - Inconsistent Ordinances. 
If the provisions of two or more proposed ordinances or resolutions approved at the same election are inconsistent, the ordinance or resolution receiving the greatest number of votes shall prevail.  
Sec. 8.09. - Ordinances Passed by Popular Vote, Repeal or Amendment. 
No ordinance or resolution which may have been passed by the city council upon a petition or adopted by popular vote under the provisions of this Article shall be repealed or amended except by the city council in response to a referendum petition or by submission to popular vote as provided in Section 8.04 of this charter.  
Sec. 8.10. - Further Regulations by City Council. 
The city council may pass ordinances or resolutions providing other and further regulations for carrying out the provisions of this Article consistent within.  
Sec. 8.11. - Franchise Ordinances. 
Nothing contained in this Article shall be construed to conflict with any of the provisions of Article XI of this charter, pertaining to ordinances granting franchises when valuable rights shall have accrued thereunder.  
ARTICLE IX. - MUNICIPAL PLANNING AND ZONING 
 
Sec. 9.01. - Planning and Zoning Commission. 
There shall be a city planning and zoning commission which shall consist of nine (9) members. The planning and zoning commission shall have all authority and duties as provided in state law and, or as otherwise determined by the city council. 
(Amendment approved by voters, May 7, 2016)  
Sec. 9.02. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— At an election held on May 7, 2016, voters approved the removal of § 9.02, Comprehensive City Plan.  
ARTICLE X. - MUNICIPAL FINANCE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal budget, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 102.001—102.111; general fiscal powers of home-rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 101.022. 
 
Sec. 10.01. - Fiscal Year. 
The fiscal year of the City of Fredericksburg shall begin the first day of October and shall end the last day of September of each calendar year.  
Sec. 10.02. - Preparation and Submission of Budget. 
The city manager shall submit a proposed budget containing a complete financial plan for each fiscal year. Such a budget shall be submitted to the city council not more than one hundred twenty (120) days but not less than sixty (60) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year. The budget shall contain the following: 
(a)  A budget message shall outline the proposed financial policies of the city for the fiscal year, shall set forth the reasons for any major changes in expenditure and revenue items from the previous fiscal year, and shall explain any major change in financial policies. 
(b)  Revenue summary. 
(c)  Departmental expenditure summary. 
(d)  Departmental budget. 
(e)  Schedule of outstanding bonded debt. 
(f)  Schedule of capital outlays by department. 
(g)  Review of property valuations. 
(h)  An analysis of tax rates. 
(i)  Tax levies and tax collection by year for the last three (3) years. 
(j)  The appropriation ordinance. 
(k)  The tax levying ordinance. 
(l)  A provision for financing the current capital improvement program. 
(Amendment approved by voters, May 7, 2016)  
Sec. 10.03. - Anticipated Revenues and Expenditures Compared With Other Years. 
In preparing the budget, the city manager shall place in parallel columns opposite the several items of revenues and expenditures, the actual amount of each item for the last complete fiscal year, the estimated amount for the current fiscal year, and the proposed amount for the ensuing fiscal year.  
Sec. 10.04. - Budget—A Public Record. 
The budget and all supporting schedules shall be a public record. It shall be filed with the person performing the duties of city secretary, and it shall be submitted to the city council. The city council shall make copies available for all interested persons.  
Sec. 10.05. - Public Hearing on Budget. 
The city council shall fix the time and place for a public hearing on the budget, and shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation of the City of Fredericksburg, at least fifteen (15) days before the date of such hearing, a notice of the hearing setting forth the time and place thereof. At any time and place set forth in the notice required by this section, or at any time and place to which such public hearing shall from time to time be convened, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the budget submitted and all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard for or against any item or the amount of any item therein contained.  
Sec. 10.06. - Proceedings on Budget After Public Hearing. 
After the conclusion of such public hearing, the city council may increase or decrease the items of the budget, except items in proposed expenditures fixed by law. If the city council increases the total proposed expenditures, it shall also provide for an increase in the total anticipated revenue to at least equal such proposed expenditures.  
Sec. 10.07. - Adoption of Budget. 
The budget shall be adopted by the affirmative vote of a majority of the entire city council.  
Sec. 10.08. - Date of Final Budget. 
The budget shall be finally adopted not later than the beginning of the fiscal year, and should the city council fail to so adopt a budget, the then existing budget together with its tax-levying ordinance and its appropriation ordinance, shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items in it provided accordingly, until such time as the council adopts a budget for the balance of the fiscal year.  
Sec. 10.09. - Effective Date of Budget, Certification, Copies Made Available. 
Upon final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the fiscal year. A copy of the budget as finally adopted shall be filed with the person performing the duties of the city secretary and the County Clerk of Gillespie County. The final budget shall be printed, mimeographed or otherwise reproduced, and copies shall be made available for the use of all offices, departments and agencies for the use of interested persons and civic organizations.  
Sec. 10.10. - Budget Established Appropriations. 
From the effective date of the budget, the several amounts therein as proposed expenditures shall be and become appropriated to the several objects and purposes therein stated.  
Sec. 10.11. - Budget Establishes Amount to be Raised by Taxation. 
From the effective date of the budget, the amount stated therein as the amount to be raised by taxation shall constitute a determination of the amount of levy for the purposes of the city in the corresponding tax year; provided however, that in no event shall such levy exceed the legal limit provided by the laws and Constitution of the State of Texas.  
Sec. 10.12. - Estimated Expenditures Shall Not Exceed Estimated Resources. 
The total estimated expenditures of the general fund, available utility fund, and debt service shall not exceed the total estimated resources (prospective income plus cash on hand). The classification of revenue and expenditure accounts shall conform to the uniform classification as promulgated by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants or some other nationally accepted classification.  
Sec. 10.13. - Other Necessary Appropriations. 
The city budget may be amended and appropriations altered in accordance therewith in case of public necessity, the actual fact of which shall have been determined and declared by the city council.  
Sec. 10.14. - General Obligation Bonds and other Debt. 
The city shall have the power to borrow money on the credit of the city and to issue general obligation bonds, certificates of obligation, tax limited notes or any other debt instruments not prohibited by the constitution, and laws of the State of Texas, for permanent public improvements or for any other public purpose not prohibited by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, and to issue refunding bonds to refund outstanding bonds of the city previously issued. All bonds shall be issued in conformity with the laws of the State of Texas. 
(Amendment approved by voters, May 7, 2016)  
Sec. 10.15. - Revenue Bonds. 
The city shall have the power to borrow money for the purpose of constructing, purchasing, improving, extending or repairing of public utilities, recreational facilities or any other self-liquidating municipal function not prohibited by the constitution, and laws of the State of Texas and to issue bonds to evidence the obligation created thereby. Such bonds shall be a charge upon and payable solely from the properties, or interest therein pledged, or the income therefrom or both. The holders of the revenue bonds shall never have the right to demand payment thereof out of monies raised to or to be raised by taxation. Revenue bonds may be issued secured by revenue but backed by taxation as a combination bond, in which case the holders of such bonds shall have the right to demand payment thereof out of monies raised to or to be raised by taxation according to the terms of such bonds. All such bonds shall be issued in conformity with the laws of the State of Texas. 
(Amendment approved by voters, May 7, 2016)  
Sec. 10.16. - Sales of Bonds and Bonds Incontestable. 
No bond (other than refunding bonds issued to refund and in exchange for previously issued outstanding bonds) issued by the city shall be sold for less than par value and accrued interest. All bonds of the city, having been issued and sold and having been delivered to the purchaser thereof, shall thereafter be incontestable, and all bonds issued to refund in exchange for outstanding bonds previously issued shall, after said exchange, be incontestable.  
Sec. 10.17. - Competitive Bidding. 
The City of Fredericksburg shall take competitive bidding in accordance with Chapter 252 of the Texas Local Government Code. 
(Amendment approved by voters, May 7, 2016)  
Sec. 10.18. - Enterprise Fund Usage. 
The City of Fredericksburg shall not use proceeds or reserves from an Enterprise Fund (including, by [but] not limited to, the Electric, Water and Sewer, Solid Waste, and Drainage funds) except for expenditures within the purpose of the fund unless approved by the voters in elections that specify the amount and the fund from which the money will be withdrawn. 
(Amendment of May 10, 2014)  
ARTICLE XI. - FRANCHISES AND PUBLIC UTILITIES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— General powers of municipal utility systems, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 402.001; certain public services and utilities in home-rule municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 402.002. 
 
Sec. 11.01. - Powers of the City. 
The City of Fredericksburg shall have the full power, to the extent the same is conferred by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, to own, lease, operate, prohibit, regulate and control any public utility within or without the limits of the city and to provide for the compensation and rental to be paid to the city by any public utility for the use of its streets, highways and public areas. 
In addition to the city's power to buy, construct, lease, maintain, operate, and regulate public utilities and to manufacture, distribute, and sell the output of such utility operations, the city shall have such regulatory and other powers as may now or hereafter be granted under the constitution of the State of Texas.  
Sec. 11.02. - Franchise Powers of the City Council. 
The city council shall have the power by ordinance to grant, amend, renew, and extend all franchises of all public utilities of every character, including cable television, operating within the City of Fredericksburg. All ordinances granting, amending, renewing, or extending franchises for public utilities shall be read at two (2) separate regular meetings of the city council and shall not be finally passed until thirty (30) days after the first reading; and no such ordinance shall take effect until thirty (30) days after its final passage; and, pending such time, the full text of such ordinance shall be published once a week for three (3) consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Fredericksburg and the expense of such publication shall be borne by the proponent of the franchise. No public utility franchise shall be granted for a term of more than twenty (20) years. 
(Amendment approved by voters, May 7, 2016)  
Sec. 11.03. - Franchise Value Not to be Allowed. 
Franchises granted by the city under this charter shall be considered to be of no value in fixing reasonable rates and charges for utility service within the city, and in determining the just compensation to be paid by the city for public utility property which the city may acquire by condemnation or otherwise.  
Sec. 11.04. - Right of Regulation. 
All grants, renewals, extensions, or amendments of public utility franchises, whether so provided in the ordinance or not, shall be subject to the right of the city council: 
(a)  To repeal the same by ordinance at any time upon the failure of the grantee to comply with the terms of the franchise, the ordinance, this charter, any applicable statute of the State of Texas, or the rule of any applicable governmental body, such power to be exercised only after written notice to the franchise holder stating wherein the franchise holder has failed to comply with the terms of the franchise, and setting a reasonable time for correction of such failure, and such power shall be exercised only after the grantee has been given the opportunity for hearing. 
(b)  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates. 
(c)  To require such expansion, extension, and improvements of plants and facilities as are necessary to provide adequate service to the public; and to require that maintenance of facilities be performed at the highest reasonable standard of efficiency. 
(d)  To prescribe the accounts and accounting system to be used by a public utility so that they will accurately reflect the value of the property used in rendering its service to the public; and the expenses, receipts, and profits of all kinds of such franchises. It shall be deemed sufficient compliance with this paragraph if the franchise keeps its accounts in accordance with the uniform system established by an applicable federal or state agency for such service. To examine and audit, at any time, the accounts and other records of any utility; and to require annual and other reports including reports on operations within the City of Fredericksburg. 
(e)  To impose such reasonable regulations and restrictions as may be deemed desirable or conducive to the health, safety, welfare, and accommodation of the public. 
(f)  To require such compensation and rental as may be permitted by the laws of the State of Texas. 
(g)  To require the franchise holder to restore, at his expense, all public or private property to an equal or better condition than before damaged or destroyed by construction, maintenance, or removal by such franchise holder.  
Sec. 11.05. - Grant Not to be Exclusive. 
No grant or franchise to construct, maintain, or operate a public utility and no renewal or extension of such grant shall be exclusive.  
Sec. 11.06. - Consent of Property Owners. 
The consent of abutting and adjacent property owners shall not be required for the construction, extension, maintenance, or operation of any public utility; but nothing in this charter or in any franchise granted hereunder shall ever be construed to deprive any such property owner of any right of action for damage or injury to his property as is now or hereafter may be provided by law.  
Sec. 11.07. - Extensions. 
All extensions of public utility service within the city limits shall become a part of the aggregate property of the public utility, shall be operated as such, and shall be subject to all the obligations and reserved rights contained in this charter. The extension of any public utility shall be considered as a part of the original grant and shall be terminable at the same time and under the same conditions as the original grant.  
Sec. 11.08. - Other Conditions. 
All franchises heretofore granted are recognized as contracts between the City of Fredericksburg and the grantee, and the contractual rights as contained in any such franchise shall not be impaired by the provisions of this charter, except that the power of the city to exercise the right of eminent domain in the acquisition of any utility property is in all things reserved; and except the general power of the city, heretofore existing and herein provided for to regulate the rates and services of a grantee, shall include the right to require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and the maintenance of the plant and equipment at the highest reasonable standard of efficiency. All franchises hereafter granted shall be held subject to all terms and conditions contained in the various sections of this article whether or not such terms are specifically mentioned in the franchise.  
Sec. 11.09. - Accounts of Municipally-Owned Utilities. 
Accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated by the city in such manner as to show the true and complete financial results of each such city ownership and operation. The accounts shall show the actual capital cost to the city of each public utility owned, the cost of all extensions, additions, and improvements; and the source of the funds expended for such capital purposes. The accounts shall also show all assets and all liabilities of each utility appropriately subdivided by classes, depreciation reserved, other reserves and surplus, and revenues, operating expenses including depreciation, interest payments, rentals, and other disposition of annual income including the cost of any service furnished to any other city department. The city council shall annually cause an audit report to be made, by a certified public accountant, and shall publish in a newspaper of general circulation of the City of Fredericksburg, a summary of such report showing the financial results of such city ownership and operation, giving the information specified in this section and any other date the council shall deem to be pertinent.  
Sec. 11.10. - Sales of Electricity, Water, Sewer and Any Other Services. 
The city council shall have the authority and power to sell and provide electricity, water, sewer and/or other utility services to persons or firms outside the city limits of Fredericksburg and permit them to connect with city systems under contract with the city, under terms as are fair and reasonable and for the best interests of the city. The council shall have the authority to prescribe the kind of materials used where it furnishes such services, to inspect same and require them to be kept in good condition, at all times, and to make such rules and regulations as shall be necessary and proper, and to prescribe penalties for non-compliance.  
Sec. 11.11. - Regulations of Rates and Services. 
The city council shall have full power, after due notice and hearing, to regulate by ordinance the rates, charges, and fares of every public utility franchise holder operating in the city. Every franchise holder who shall request an increase in rates, charges or fares shall have, at a hearing of the council called to consider such request, the burden of establishing by clear, competent, and convincing evidence the value of its investment property allocable to service in the city, the amount and character of its expenses and revenues connected with the rendering of such service, and any additional evidence required by the council. If no agreement between the council and the franchise holder can be reached on such request for an increase in rates, charges, or fares, the council may select and employ rate consultants, auditors and attorneys to investigate and, if necessary, litigate such request. The franchise holder shall reimburse the city for its reasonable and necessary expenses so incurred.  
ARTICLE XII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 12.01. - Publicity of Records. 
All records and accounts of every office, department or agency of the city shall be open to the public in accordance with the open records laws of the United States and the State of Texas under such reasonable regulations as may be established by the city council. Records closed to the public by law shall not be considered records for the purpose of this section. 
(Amendment approved by voters, May 7, 2016)  
Sec. 12.02. - Personal Financial Interest. 
(a)  Any city officer, appointee, or employee who has a substantial financial interest, direct or indirect, or by reason of ownership of stock in any corporation, in any contract with the city or in the sale of land, material, supplies, or services to the city or to a contract supplying the city shall make known that interest to the city council and refrain from voting upon or otherwise participating in his capacity as a city officer, appointee, or employee in the making of such sale or in the making or performance of such contract. Any city officer, appointee, or employee who conceals such a substantial financial interest or violates the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall forfeit his office or position. Violation of this section with the knowledge, express or implied, of the person or corporation contracting with or making sale to the city shall render the contract or sale voidable. 
(b)  Where ownership of stock in corporation is involved, such stock ownership in an amount in excess of ten (10) percent of the stock of such corporation shall constitute substantial financial interest.  
Sec. 12.03. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Activities Prohibited. 
(1)  In appointments to and removal from any city office or employment, persons shall not be favored or discriminated against because of race, sex, political or religious opinions, or religious affiliations. 
(2)  No person who seeks appointment or promotion with respect to any city position or appointive city administrative office shall directly or indirectly give, render or pay any money, service, or other valuable thing to any person for or in connection with his test, appointment, proposed appointment, promotion or proposed promotion. 
(3)  No city official or employee, elected or appointed, shall orally, by letter, or otherwise solicit or assist in soliciting any assessment, subscription, or contribution for any political party or political purpose whatever from any subordinate city official or employee holding any compensated city position. 
(4)  No person who holds any compensated city position shall solicit or receive any contribution to the campaign funds of any candidate for municipal office or take any part in the management, affairs, or political campaign of any municipal candidate. 
(b)  Penalties. Any person who by himself or with others violates any of the provisions or paragraphs (1) through (3) of the preceding subsection (a) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than the maximum permitted by law. Any person who by himself or with others violates any of the provisions of paragraph (4) of the preceding subsection (a) shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than the maximum permitted by law. Any person convicted under this section shall be ineligible for a period of five (5) years thereafter to hold any city office or position and, if an officer or employee of the city, shall immediately forfeit his office or position. 
(Amendment approved by voters, May 7, 2106)  
Sec. 12.04. - Nepotism. 
No person related within the second degree of affinity, or within the third degree by consanguinity to any elected officer of the city, or to the city manager, shall be appointed to any office, position or clerkship or other service of the city. This prohibition shall not apply, however, to any person who shall have been employed by the city prior to and at the time of the election of the councilman or appointment of the city manager so related to him.  
Sec. 12.05. - Provisions Relating to Assignment, Execution and Garnishment. 
The property, real and person, belonging to the city shall not be liable to be sold or appropriated under any writ of execution or cost bill. The funds belonging to the city, in the hands of any person, firm or corporation, shall not be liable to garnishment, attachment, or sequestration; nor shall the city be liable to garnishment on account of any debt it may owe or funds or property it may have on hand or owing to any person. Neither the city nor any of its officers or agents shall be required to answer any such writ or garnishment on account whatever.  
Sec. 12.06. - City Not Required to Give Security or Execute Bond. 
It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceeding in which the City of Fredericksburg is a party, for any bond, undertaking, or security to be demanded or executed by or on behalf of said city in any of the state courts, but in all such actions, suits, appeals or proceedings same shall be conducted in the same manner as if such bond, undertaking or security has been given as required by law.  
Sec. 12.07. - Special Provisions Covering Damage Suits. 
Before the city shall be liable to damage claim or suit, for personal injury, or damage to property, the person who is injured or whose property is damaged, or someone in his behalf, shall give the city manager or the person performing the duties of city secretary, notice in writing, duly verified, within sixty (60) days after the occurrence of the alleged injury or damage, stating specifically in such notice when, where, and how the injury or damage was sustained and setting forth the extent of the injury or damage as accurately as possible. No action at law for damages shall be brought against the city for personal injury or damage to property prior to the expiration of thirty (30) days after the notice herein before described has been filed with the city manager or the person performing the duties of city secretary, and no later than two (2) years after the occurrence of the injury or damage to property. In case of injuries resulting in death, before the city shall be liable in damages therefor, the person or persons claiming such damages shall, after the death of the injured person, give notice as above required in case of personal injury, provided, however, that nothing contained shall be construed to mean that the City of Fredericksburg waives any rights, privileges, defense or immunities in tort actions which are provided under the common law, the constitution and general laws of the State of Texas. 
(Amendment approved by voters, May 7, 2016)  
Sec. 12.08. - Insurance and/or Pension Plan for City Employees. 
The city council shall have the power to make available a group insurance and/or a pension plan for any or all city employees as prescribed by the Texas Municipal Retirement System.  
Sec. 12.09. - Separability Clause. 
If any section or part of a section of this charter shall be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this charter nor the context in which such section or part of section so held invalid may appear, except to the extent that an entire section or part of section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section or part to which such holding shall directly apply.  
Sec. 12.10. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— At an election held on May 7, 2016, voters approved the removal of § 12.10, Effect of Charter on Existing Law.  
Sec. 12.11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— At an election held on May 7, 2016, voters approved the removal of § 12.11, Interim Municipal Government.  
Sec. 12.12. - Applicability of General Laws. 
The Constitution of the State of Texas, the statutes of said state applicable to home-ruled municipal corporations, as now or hereafter enacted or amended, this charter and ordinances enacted pursuant thereto shall, in the order mentioned, be applicable to the City of Fredericksburg. The city shall also have the power to exercise any and all powers conferred by the laws of the State of Texas upon any other kind of city, town or village, not contrary to the provisions of said home-rule statutes, charter or ordinances. The exercise of any such powers by the City of Fredericksburg shall be optional, and the city shall not be required to conform to the law governing any other cities, towns or villages unless and until by ordinance it adopts the same.  
Sec. 12.13. - Amending the Charter. 
Amendments to this charter may be framed and submitted to the voters of the city in the manner provided in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 9.004 as now existing or as may hereafter be amended.  
Sec. 12.14. - Construction of Charter. 
This charter shall not be construed as a mere grant of enumerated powers, but shall be construed as a general grant of power and as a limitation of power on the government of the City of Fredericksburg in the same manner as the Constitution of Texas is construed as a limitation on the powers of the legislature. Except where expressly prohibited by this charter, each and every power under Article XI, Section 5 of the Constitution of Texas, which it would be competent for the people of the City of Fredericksburg to expressly grant to the city, shall be construed to be granted to the city by this charter.  
Sec. 12.15. - Judicial Notice. 
This charter shall be deemed a public act, may be read in evidence without pleading or proof, and judicial notice shall be taken thereof in all courts and places.  
Sec. 12.16. - Review of Charter. 
This charter shall be reviewed at five (5) year intervals after the date of passage by the city council. If, in their opinion, any changes are necessary, such changes shall be submitted to the voters in accordance with Section 12.13 of this charter.  
Sec. 12.17. - Grammatical Construction. 
(a)  Whenever in this charter the singular is used, the plural shall be included; whenever the masculine gender is used, the feminine and neuter shall be included. 
(b)  Whenever in this Charter the term qualified voter is used it shall mean registered voter qualified in accordance with the provisions of Section 11.002 of the Elections Code of the State of Texas, who is a resident of the City of Fredericksburg. 
(Amendment approved by voters, May 7, 2016)  
Sec. 12.18. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— At an election held on May 7, 2016, voters approved the removal of § 12.18, Submission of Charter to Voters.  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to codify ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001. 
 
Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Fredericksburg, Texas," and may be so cited. They may be cited also as the "Fredericksburg Municipal Code." 
(Code 1992, § 1.101)  
Sec. 1-2. - Catchlines of articles and sections. 
The catchlines of the articles and sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the article or section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such articles or sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any such articles, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1992, § 1.102)  
Sec. 1-3. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following definitions and rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
Chapter. The word "chapter" when used to clarify the location of an ordinance, subsection, paragraph, or article, refers to that chapter of this Code of Ordinances in which they are found unless specifically and clearly the word is used in reference to a separate chapter. 
City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of Fredericksburg, in the County of Gillespie and State of Texas. 
City secretary, chief of police or other city officers. The words "city secretary," "chief of police" or other references to an officer or department shall be construed to mean the city secretary, chief of police or such other municipal officer or department, respectively, or their designee, for the specific purpose described, of the City of Fredericksburg, Texas. 
Code. The words "this Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of Fredericksburg, Texas as designated in section 1-1 above. 
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall not be counted. 
Council. The term "council" or "city council" shall mean the city council of the City of Fredericksburg. 
Councilmember. The word "councilmember" shall mean a member of the city council. 
County. The words "county," "the county," or "this county" shall mean Gillespie County, Texas. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, associations, corporations, and all other entities, as well as to males. 
Highway. The term "highway" shall include any street, alley, highway, avenue, public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass or causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
May. When used with reference to an act, the act referred to is permissive as opposed to mandatory. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Number (singular or plural). Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed". 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. Whenever the word "person" or its plural form are used in this Code it shall mean any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association of persons, owner, agent or occupant. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Public place. Whenever the word "public place" is used, unless otherwise specifically defined, it shall mean any public road, street, alley, park, square, building, or other property of the city or any other places to which people commonly resort for the purpose of business, recreation, or amusements. 
Roadway. The word "roadway" shall mean that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
Shall. When used with reference to an act, the act is mandatory as opposed to permissive. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature or subscription. The words "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when a person cannot write. 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Texas. 
Street. The term "street" shall include any highway, road, street, avenue, bridge, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel or causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
TCA; T.C.A.; Texas Admin. Code. These terms mean the Texas Administrative Code. 
Tenant or occupant. As applied to premises, includes any person, holding a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of such premises, alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
V.A.C.S. Abbreviation for Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes. 
V.T.C.A. Abbreviation for Vernon's Texas Codes Annotated. 
V.T.C.S. Abbreviation for Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes. 
Written or in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1992, § 1.103)  
Sec. 1-4. - Amendments or additions to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code, which amend, repeal, or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section, or article, or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following, but not necessarily the exact language: "that section _____ of the city code of the City of Fredericksburg, Texas, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "that the Fredericksburg City Code is hereby amended by adding a new section, to be numbered section _____, which section shall read as follows:…." The new section shall then be set out in full. The sections of this Code may be renumbered to accomplish such intention. 
(d)  In the event it is desired to delete an article from the Code of Ordinances, the following language shall be used: "That Chapter _______, Article _______, of the Code of Ordinances, City of Fredericksburg, Texas, is hereby deleted from said Code of Ordinances." 
(e)  It is hereby provided, however, that any subsequent ordinance which fails to amend this Code in the manner provided for herein, shall not be deemed invalid as a result of such failure to follow the procedure outlined in this article. 
(Code 1992, § 1.104)  
Sec. 1-5. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which have been repealed, shall be excluded from the code by omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(b)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency, or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing article or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this section," etc., as the case may be; and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1992, § 1.105)  
Sec. 1-6. - General penalty for violations of Code. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code, or in any ordinance of the city, an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful of an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever in such code or ordinance the doing of an act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00, except for: 
(1)  Violations of municipal ordinances that govern fire safety, zoning, public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, vegetation and litter violations in which the maximum fine shall be $2,000.00 for each offense. 
(2)  Violations of traffic laws and ordinances which are punishable as Class C misdemeanor which shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $200.00. 
However, no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or similar offense under the laws of the state. 
(b)  Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. Any violation of any provision of this Code which constitutes an immediate danger to the health, safety, and welfare of the public may be enjoined in a suit brought by the city for such purposes. 
(c)  In the event state law is amended to allow municipalities to increase fines, such minimum and maximum fine amount shall automatically be incorporated herein in substitution for the above stated sums. 
(Code 1992, § 1.106) 
State Law reference— Authority of governing body to assess fines, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001; health and safety ordinances of home-rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.011 et seq.  
Sec. 1-7. - Mental state. 
Unless otherwise specified in particular sections of this Code, or in any amendments to it, the mental state required to be proven in order to prove a violation in any applicable court is the same as that of criminal negligence or the minimum level of culpable mental state required by any law superceding city ordinances. A culpable mental state need not be pled in any instrument or document charging a violation of any portion of this Code.  
Sec. 1-8. - Corporate seal. 
The corporate seal of the city shall be a circle with the words, "City of Fredericksburg, Gillespie County, Texas" engraved around the margin thereof and with a five pointed star in the center. 
(Code 1992, art. 1.200)  
Sec. 1-9. - Section provisions to prevail; exceptions. 
(a)  At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations, insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(b)  This chapter shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval order, rule or regulation. 
(Code 1992, § 1.709)  
Sec. 1-10. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the articles, sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, article, or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, subsections, sections and articles of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, article, or section. 
(Code 1992, § 1.107)  
Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances, rights, etc., not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code, or the ordinance adopting this Code, shall affect: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this ordinance; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the city; 
(3)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict with the provisions of the Code; 
(4)  Any ordinance or resolution fixing salaries of officers or employees of the city, unless superseded; 
(5)  Any appropriation ordinance or resolution; 
(6)  Any right of franchise granted by the council to any person, firm or corporation; 
(7)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, closing, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(8)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing and prescribing the street grades of any city streets; 
(9)  Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; 
(10)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city, or providing regulations for the same; 
(11)  Any ordinance annexing property to the city; 
(12)  Any ordinances or amendments thereto concerning zoning, subdivisions, or land development; 
(13)  Any ordinance or resolution regulating the erection, alteration, repair, demolition, moving or removal of buildings or other structures; 
(14)  Ordinances or resolutions prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones, not inconsistent with this Code; 
(15)  Any ordinance or resolution fixing utility rates and charges, or any valid comprehensive fee schedule; 
(16)  Any ordinance of agreement with another political subdivision; 
(17)  Any ordinance concerning issuance of tax anticipation notes; 
(18)  Any current ordinance concerning personnel benefits including but not limited to participation in the Texas Municipal Retirement System or the Texas Municipal League intergovernmental employee benefits pool; 
(19)  Any ordinance in effect which establishes a requirement or procedure to obtain a municipal permit or license to conduct any commercial activity, construct or alter a building or structure, or otherwise obtain municipal permission or sanction as a precondition; 
(20)  Any ordinance in effect at time of adoption of this Code which imposes a tax; 
(21)  Any ordinance in effect which provides for regulation of adult-entertainment or sexually-oriented businesses; 
(22)  Any ordinance in effect which pertains to regulation of alcoholic beverages, including but not limited to hours of sale and the operation of private clubs; 
(23)  Any ordinance, resolution or order of the governing body accepting the designation by a state or federal entity to administer or enforce state or federal laws, regulations, or orders; 
(24)  Any ordinance concerning establishment and operation of the municipal court, including court fees; 
(25)  Any ordinance establishing historic districts, designating landmarks and establishing criteria, appointing a preservation officer or commission and prescribing duties, and otherwise pertaining to historic preservation; or 
(26)  Common law or statutory law defenses which may or may not be set forth in specific sections of this Code. 
(b)  Any other ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; or which is referred to elsewhere in this Code as continuing in effect; and all such ordinances and resolutions are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances and resolutions are on file in the city clerk or secretary's office.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Home-rule municipality has full power of local self-government, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 51.072; form of government in home-rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 26.001 et seq.; purchasing and contracting authority of municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 252.001 et seq.; general fiscal powers of home-rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 101.022; municipal budget, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 102.001—102.111; Public Funds Investment Act, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 2256.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Reporting of damage or injury. 
The city shall never be liable for any claim for property damage or for personal injury, whether such personal injury results in death or not, unless the person damaged or injured, or someone in his or her behalf, or in the event the injury results in death, the person or persons who may have a cause of action under the law by reason of such death injury, shall within 30 days from the date the damage or injury was received give notice in writing to the city manager of the following facts: 
(1)  The date and time when the injury or damage occurred and the place where the injured person or property was at the time when the injury was received. 
(2)  The nature of the damage or injury sustained. 
(3)  The apparent extent of the damage or injury sustained. 
(4)  A specific and detailed statement of how and under what circumstances the damage or injury occurred. 
(5)  The amount for which each claimant will settle. 
(6)  The actual place of residence of each claimant by street, number, city and state on the date the claim is presented. 
(7)  In the case of personal injury or death, the names and addresses of all persons who, according to the knowledge or information of the claimant witnessed the happening of the injury or any part thereof and the names of the doctors, if any, to whose case the injured person is committed. 
(8)  In the case of property damage, the location of the damaged property at the time the claim was submitted along with the names and addresses of all persons who witnessed the happening of the damage or any part thereof. 
(Code 1992, § 1.1001)  
Sec. 2-2. - Council shall first consider claim before lawsuit. 
No suit of any nature whatsoever shall be instituted or maintained against the city unless the plaintiff therein shall aver and prove that previous to the filing of the original petition the plaintiff applied to the city council for redress, satisfaction, compensation, or relief, as the case may be, and that the same was by vote of the city council refused. 
(Code 1992, § 1.1002)  
Sec. 2-3. - Serving of notice. 
All notices regarding claims required by this article shall be effectuated by serving them upon the city secretary at the administrative offices of the city. 
(Code 1992, § 1.1003)  
Sec. 2-4. - Councilmember shall not waive provisions of article. 
Neither the mayor, city council, nor any other officer or employee of the city shall have the authority to waive any of the provisions of this article regarding claims. 
(Code 1992, § 1.1004)  
Sec. 2-5. - Written notice shall be sworn. 
The written notice required under this article regarding claims shall be sworn to by the person claiming the damage or injuries or by someone authorized by him or her to do so on his or her behalf. Failure to swear to the notice as required herein shall not render the notice fatally defective, but failure to so verify the notice may be considered by the city council as a factor relating to the truth of the allegations and to the weight to be given to the allegations contained therein. 
(Code 1992, § 1.1005)  
Sec. 2-6. - Charges for copying of public records. 
Fees to be charged for copies made using the city machines and paper for any purpose other than city business will be in the amounts provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1992, art. 1.900)  
Sec. 2-7. - Returned check; handling charge. 
A returned check handling charge shall be made for each check returned to the city for reasons of non-sufficient funds, unavailable funds, account closed, payment withheld, invalid signature, improper preparation, or for any other reason. 
(Ord. No. 8-037, § 1.2000, 10-21-1996)  
Sec. 2-8. - Assessment of returned check charge. 
Where applicable, a returned check charge shall be added to the utility account bill of the person or entity presenting the check and shall become a part thereof, collectable by any and all means, including termination of service, as are any other account charges. The charge shall be as determined from time to time by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 8-037, § 1.2001, 10-21-1996)  
Secs. 2-9—2-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFICIALS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-21—2-35. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CITY SECRETARY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to create offices, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 26.041. 
 
Sec. 2-36. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The city secretary shall have all the powers and perform all the duties prescribed by law, and in addition thereto shall perform such services and comply with such regulations as may be prescribed by ordinance. The city secretary shall execute a bond to the city, in the amount of $5,000.00, and for such sureties, as are approved by the council, conditioned upon the faithful performance of his/her duties. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the city secretary to: 
(1)  Engross and enroll all motions, resolutions and ordinances of the city; 
(2)  Attest all commissions and licenses issued by the mayor; 
(3)  Preserve and keep in order all books, papers, documents and records of the council, and to keep a record of them; and 
(4)  Draw warrants. 
(c)  He/she shall have custody of all laws and ordinances of the city. 
(d)  He/she shall have custody of the seal of the city and shall affix the same to obligations of the city by order of the city council. 
(Code 1992, § 8.101)  
Sec. 2-37. - Secretary to maintain ordinance book. 
The city secretary shall maintain a book, to be provided by the city council, to be known as the ordinance book, in which he/she shall record all ordinances and regulations adopted by the city council. He/she shall attest therein with his/her official signature the date of passage and approval of each ordinance and regulation. He/she shall make and keep said book indexed in such manner as to make it convenient to find, at any time, any ordinance or regulation on any particular subject. He/she shall separately keep in a manner that the same may be easily accessible, all affidavits and authentications of the publisher, or other persons cognizant of the facts, showing the time and manner in which such ordinances or regulations were published. 
(Code 1992, § 8.102)  
Sec. 2-38. - Secretary to maintain city deed book. 
The city secretary shall maintain a book to be provided by the city council, for the recording of all deeds, leases, franchises and all other written instruments of like nature, and he/she shall record therein each of said instruments to or for any real property transferred to or by the city. 
(Code 1992, § 8.103)  
Sec. 2-39. - Miscellaneous duties. 
The city secretary shall perform all other and necessary duties that pertain to his/her office when required by the mayor and the city council, as though such service was particularly required by ordinance or this Code. 
(Code 1992, § 8.104)  
Secs. 2-40—2-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CITY ATTORNEY 
 
Sec. 2-51. - Appointment; oath; term of office. 
The city manager shall appoint a city attorney on July 1st of each year or as soon thereafter as practicable. He/she shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the city council. 
(Code 1992, § 8.401)  
Sec. 2-52. - Qualification. 
The city attorney shall be admitted to practice before the Bar of Texas and shall be duly licensed and competent to discharge the duties required of him/her by the statutes of the state and the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1992, § 8.402)  
Sec. 2-53. - General duties. 
It shall be the duty of the city attorney to: 
(1)  Institute, prosecute and defend all suits to which the city is a party, in all the courts in the state; 
(2)  To prosecute all writs of error and appeals, when in his/her opinion, the interests of the city require that appeal be taken; 
(3)  To prosecute all suits for the violation of any law of the state of which the municipal court has jurisdiction, and all suits for the violation of this Code; 
(4)  To conduct all criminal prosecutions in the municipal court, and to be present at all terms of the municipal court; 
(5)  To give legal advice to the officers of the city, the city council and its committees, upon questions arising or relating to the business of the city; 
(6)  To give his/her opinion in writing to the city council on legal questions pertaining to the business of the city, when so requested; 
(7)  To draw deeds, contracts, or articles of agreement to which the city is a party; 
(8)  He/she shall revise all ordinances before the final passage and see that they conform to the laws of the State of Texas, whenever the same shall be presented to him/her for that purpose; 
(9)  Attend any meeting of the city council when requested to do so; and 
(10)  Perform such other duties pertaining to his/her office and profession as the interests of the city may seem to require. 
(Code 1992, § 8.403)  
Sec. 2-54. - Authority to take affidavits. 
The city attorney shall have the power to take the affidavit or complaint of any credible person charging any other person with violation of the laws of the state. 
(Code 1992, § 8.404)  
Sec. 2-55. - Authority to issue subpoenas. 
The city attorney shall have the same authority as the mayor to issue subpoenas and it shall be his/her duty to issue subpoenas and compel the attendance of witnesses or other persons before him/her for the purpose of discovering any offenses against the city or state. 
(Code 1992, § 8.405)  
Secs. 2-56—2-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - TAX COLLECTOR AND ASSESSOR 
 
Sec. 2-71. - City manager to be tax assessor and collector. 
The city manager or his or her designee shall be assessor and collector of the taxes. All the duties and powers prescribed by the revised statutes of the state, and the ordinances of the city for the offices of assessor and collector of taxes shall be, and are conferred upon said manager or his or her designee. 
(Code 1992, § 8.501)  
Sec. 2-72. - Tax collector's seal. 
The seal of the city tax collector shall be the same as the corporation seal described in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Code 1992, § 8.502)  
Sec. 2-73. - Bond requirements. 
The city manager shall be responsible on his/her official bond for the correct assessment of all property, both real and personal, subject to taxation within the corporate limits of the city. He/she is hereby authorized and empowered to administer all oaths and affirmations necessary to obtain a full, complete and accurate assessment of such taxes. 
(Code 1992, § 8.503)  
Secs. 2-74—2-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC OFFICIAL AND EMPLOYEE INDEMNIFICATION FOR TORT LIABILITY AND LEGAL DEFENSE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Local government may provide legal counsel for defendant employees, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 102.004. 
 
Sec. 2-91. - Policy statement. 
(a)  The city will indemnify its employees for legal defense fees, expenses and costs, and damages payable by virtue of a final judgment or settlement arising from conduct of actions of the employee while within the course and scope of his/her employment and which actions were taken or performed in an objective and subjective good faith effort to perform such person's duties according to: 
(1)  Law; 
(2)  The policies and regulations lawfully imposed by the city; and 
(3)  Any lawful supervisory directives given to the employee, provided that: 
a.  The terms of any settlement are subject to the approval of the city. 
b.  Any employee shall be entitled to retain his or her own counsel at his or her own expense. 
(b)  The city will indemnify its employees for legal defense expenses and costs associated with defense of any criminal action filed against an employee arising from conduct or actions of the employee while in the course and scope of his/her employment (but not for the alleged criminal aspect of the conduct) which actions were taken or performed in an objective and subjective good faith effort to perform the employees duties according to: 
(1)  Laws; 
(2)  The policies and regulations lawfully imposed by the city; and 
(3)  Any lawful supervisory directives given to the employee. 
The city shall not thereby incur any liability arising from criminal prosecution and conviction. 
(Ord. No. 6-062, § 8.801, 11-23-1994)  
Sec. 2-92. - Responsibility. 
(a)  Legal representation by the city. 
(1)  The city has the right and duty to provide legal representation through either the city attorney, or in it discretion through the selection of outside legal counsel, to any employee sued in connection with any claim for damages or other civil action arising out of the course of scope of employment, provided that such individual is entitled to indemnification as herein set forth. 
(2)  The city shall approve or reject counsel selected by the covered defendant in any criminal matter, but shall endeavor to approve the selection of the defendant if the selection is reasonable. 
(b)  Responsibilities of the employee. 
(1)  Employees must comply in all respect with this policy in order to mature any rights to indemnity or defense expenses. 
(2)  An employee may have his or her own counsel assist in the defense at the sole expense of the individual. 
(3)  Employees shall cooperate fully with the city in preparation and presentation of the case and in the resolution of conflict of interest issues; failure to do so shall waive such individual's right to representation and indemnity. 
(c)  Indemnification by the city. 
(1)  The city shall provide indemnification to an employee found liable for the payment of any claim or damages, excluding punitive damages. 
(2)  Whether the acts were done in good faith and within the course and scope of employment, shall be determined by the city, and such determination shall be final for the purpose of initial representation and indemnity; if, however, representation and indemnity have been denied by the city but upon a trial of the merits it is determined that the individual was acting in good faith and within the scope of employment, indemnification shall be granted and reasonable legal expenses incurred in the defense of the claim reimbursed. 
(3)  The city shall not be liable for any settlement of any claim or suit effected without its consent. 
(4)  The city reserves the right to assert any defense and make any settlement it deems expedient. 
(Ord. No. 6-062, § 8.802, 11-23-1994)  
Sec. 2-93. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Employee. The term, as used in this policy, is defined as all elected and appointed officials, employees, and volunteers including firemen and policemen of the city. 
Course and scope of employment. The term, as used in this policy, shall also include legislative, governmental and judicial functions performed for the city, but shall not be construed to include the activities of contract-type agents, consultants or contractors. 
Indemnification. The term, as used in this policy, shall mean providing security against damages, and exemption from incurred liabilities. 
(Ord. No. 6-062, § 8.803, 11-23-1994)  
Sec. 2-94. - Procedures. 
(a)  When any employee of the city is served with process in an action, he or she shall request representation. The request shall be forwarded by the employee to the city attorney no later than the second day after service is made. Forwarding of the request does not relieve the employee of any duty or effect of the proceeding, and no right to representation at the city's expense shall mature, nor shall any attorney-client relationship be established until the appropriate determination has been made and the employee is notified of such determination. 
(b)  With the advice of the city attorney, the city manager (or mayor in the event the city manager is the defendant) shall determine whether or not to initially grant indemnity under this policy and shall ascertain whether to permit outside counsel for the employee. The city attorney shall advise the city manager if a conflict or potential conflict exists. If a conflict exists (being such a juxtaposition of interest, claims, defense, or issues between the city or its employees, which under known or probable facts, would cause an ethical violation in the event of dual representation by a single attorney), the city manager shall authorize the use of outside counsel and will either (1) designate counsel for the employee, or (2) approve the choice of the employee, if any. The city manager must approve all contracts with such counsel. The employee does not have to utilize an attorney designated by the city manager, but in utilizing his or her own attorney assumes the obligation to pay all costs, fees and expenses in the litigation. If only a potential conflict exists, the city attorney will so advise the city manager. The city manager shall make a determination for the city as to whether or not the city will waive the conflict and agree to accept any litigation risk resulting from dual representation of the employee and the city by the city attorney's office or other counsel. The city manager shall determine to either (1) allow the employee to choose between outside counsel and the city attorney's office or (b) to deny approval of outside counsel. 
(c)  Where time does not allow the completion of the conflict resolution process set forth in the subparagraph (b), the city manager will authorize the employee to contact the designated counsel to timely file an answer or to meet other procedural deadlines. The city will pay legal expenses for any attorney for such purpose, but reserves the right to consent to or reject continuing representation by such attorney. Should the employee elect to utilize an attorney of their own selection, he or she assumes the obligation to pay all costs, fees and expenses of the litigation. The city will pay an amount not to exceed $200.00 for the employee to consult with an attorney of his or her choice on the necessity or advisability of separate representation. 
(d)  Where initial representation has been denied, no legally enforceable claim to indemnity or to defense expenses shall arise until after expiration of 45 days from the date of final judgment or final approval of settlement. 
(Ord. No. 6-062, § 8.804, 11-23-1994)  
Secs. 2-95—2-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-111—2-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - GILLESPIE COUNTY—FREDERICKSBURG JOINT AIRPORT ZONING BOARD[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Adoption of airport zoning regulations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 241.011 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-131. - Joint airport zoning board created. 
There is hereby created the Gillespie County-Fredericksburg joint airport zoning board which board shall have the powers and exercise the duties set forth in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 241. 
(Code 1992, § 8.601)  
Sec. 2-132. - Composition; appointment; chairman. 
The Gillespie County-Fredericksburg joint airport zoning board shall be composed of five members, two to be appointed by the commissioners' court of Gillespie County, Texas, and two to be appointed by the city council of the City of Fredericksburg, Texas. The fifth member shall be elected by a majority of the members so appointed and said fifth member shall serve as chairman of the Gillespie County-Fredericksburg joint airport zoning board. 
(Code 1992, § 8.602)  
Secs. 2-133—2-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— The city's records management plan is set forth in Ord. No. 2019-24, Exh. A, adopted July 15, 2019, and is on file at the city secretary's office. 
 
Sec. 2-151. - Administration. 
(a)  Authority. The city council, pursuant to authorization of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.001 et seq., hereby finds and determines that a necessity exists for the photographic duplication of the public records of the city for the purpose of reducing space required for filing, storing, preserving, protecting and safekeeping such public records, and to that end, any officer or department head of the city is hereby authorized to have such records pertaining to his/her office or department duplicated in accordance with this article. 
(b)  Who may do work. The photographic duplication authorized by this article may be performed by the city or such duplication may be performed by any person or business qualified to perform such service in accordance with the requirements of the local government code and of this article. 
(c)  Supervision and approval of work. The duplication of public records as authorized by this article shall be under the control and direction of the officer or department head who is responsible for the safekeeping and preservation of such public records, and all duplication thereof shall be checked, approved and certified by such officer or department head as to the correctness and legibility of the copies. The officer or department head having custody of original records shall furnish such certification as may be necessary to be attached to or incorporated with the photographic duplication and such officer or department head shall check, approve and certify the correctness of the photographic duplication of the records of his/her office when such duplication is completed or is being done. 
(d)  Quality of materials and processes. All materials used in the photographic duplication of public records, and all processes of development, fixation and washing of such photographic duplicates, shall be of a quality approved for permanent photographic records by the National Bureau of Standards. 
(e)  Filing of duplicates. Photographic duplicates of public records made pursuant to this article shall be placed in conveniently accessible files under the supervision, control, custody and possession of the officer or department head who is responsible for such public records. 
(f)  Destruction of records after duplication. After the duplication of public records in accord with this article, the officer or department head under whose supervision such duplication was made may destroy such records; provided, however, that no public records may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of unless or until: 
(1)  The time for filing legal proceedings based on any such record shall have elapsed, and, in no event, shall any original public record be destroyed or otherwise disposed of until such public record is at least five years old. 
(2)  Provision has been made for preserving, safekeeping, using, examining, exhibiting, projecting and enlarging the public record whenever requested during regular office hours. 
(3)  Notice of such proposed destruction or disposition of original public records shall be first given to the state librarian, and if such records are, in his/her opinion, needed for the Texas state library, they shall be transferred thereto in the manner provided in V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 441. 
Nothing in this article shall authorize the destruction or disposition of any original public record if the retention thereof is required by law. 
(g)  Certified copies from duplicates. Certified copies may be provided from photographic duplicates of public records, even when the original of such record has not as yet been destroyed. A charge, as set forth in the fee schedule found in appendix A to this Code, to be charged for each page or part thereof shall be made for certified copies produced from a photographic duplicate of the original record; provided, however, where a specific charge is elsewhere provided by this article or other ordinance for certified copies of particular records, then such specific charge shall be controlling over the charge provided for in this article. Certification shall be made by the officer or department head having custody of the public record or by any person authorized by ordinance to act for such officer or department head during his/her absence, or any person holding a position authorized by state law to certify the correctness of a copy of a public record. 
(h)  Duplicates deemed to be original records. Photographic duplicates of public records made pursuant to this article shall be deemed to be original records for all purposes, including introduction in all courts or administrative agencies. A transcript, exemplification or certified copy thereof shall for all purposes recited herein be deemed to be a transcript, exemplification or certified copy of the original. 
(Code 1992, art. 1.800) 
State Law reference— Local Government Records Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.001 et seq.; designation of records management officer, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.025.  
Sec. 2-152. - Definition of municipal records. 
All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media, or other information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to them is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by the City or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby declared to be the records of the City and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. 
(Ord. No. 17-004, § 1, 2-5-2007)  
Sec. 2-153. - Additional definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Department head means the officer who by ordinance or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the City that creates or receives records. 
Essential record means any record of the City necessary to the resumption or continuation of its operations in an emergency or disaster, to the recreation of its legal and financial status, or to the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state. 
Permanent record means any record of the City for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as permanent. 
Records control schedule means a document prepared by or under the authority of the Records Management Officer listing the records maintained by the City, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that the records management program may require. 
Records management means the application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping. The term "records management" includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and space-effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems. 
Records management officer means the person designated in section 2-156. 
Records management plan means the plan developed under section 2-157. 
Retention period means the minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction. 
(Ord. No. 17-004, § 2, 2-5-2007)  
Sec. 2-154. - Municipal records declared public property. 
All municipal records as defined in section 2-153 are hereby declared to be the property of the City. No municipal official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such records even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 17-004, § 3, 2-5-2007)  
Sec. 2-155. - Policy. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all municipal records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for their management, from creation to ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted records management practice. 
(Ord. No. 17-004, § 4, 2-5-2007)  
Sec. 2-156. - Designation of Records Management Officer. 
The City Secretary, and the successive holders of such office, shall serve as the Records Management Officer for the City. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the director and librarian of the Texas State Library within 30 days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 17-004, § 5, 2-5-2007)  
Sec. 2-157. - Records management plan to be developed; approval of plan; authority of plan. 
(a)  The Records Management Officer shall develop a records management plan for the City for submission to the City Council. The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the municipality, and to properly preserve those records of the municipality that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the Records Management Officer to carry out his or her duties prescribed by state law and this article effectively. 
(b)  Once approved by the City, the records management plan shall be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the City, and records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed, or disposed of in accordance with the plan. 
(c)  State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this article and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the City records management program. 
(Ord. No. 17-004, § 6, 2-5-2007) 
Editor's note— The city's records management plan is set forth in Ord. No. 2019-24, Exh. A, adopted July 15, 2019, and is on file at the City Secretary's Office.  
Sec. 2-158. - Duties of Records Management Officer. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the Records Management Officer shall: 
(1)  Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its implementation; 
(2)  Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures; 
(3)  In cooperation with department heads identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each municipal office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to reestablish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense; 
(4)  Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the City; 
(5)  Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies; 
(6)  Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design and control system for the City; 
(7)  Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission to determine if the records management program and the municipality's records control schedules are in compliance with state regulations; 
(8)  Disseminate to the City Council and department heads information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local government records; 
(9)  Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of City records are carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program and the requirements of state law; 
(10)  Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control schedules or through records destruction authorization requests, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition; 
(11)  Report annually to the City Council on the implementation of the records management plan in each City department, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under subsection (10) of this section; and 
(12)  Bring to the attention of the City Council noncompliance by department heads or other municipal personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the Texas Local Government Records Act. 
(Ord. No. 17-004, § 7, 2-5-2007)  
Sec. 2-159. - Duties and responsibilities of department heads. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, department heads shall: 
(1)  Cooperate with the Records Management Officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established in the City for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this article; 
(2)  Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and duties for which the department head and his or her staff are responsible; and 
(3)  Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the City and the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 17-004, § 8, 2-5-2007)  
Sec. 2-160. - Records control schedules to be developed; approval; filing with state. 
(a)  The Records Management Officer, in cooperation with department heads, shall prepare records control schedules on a department by department basis listing all records series created or received by the department and the retention period for each series. Records control schedules shall also contain such other information regarding the disposition of municipal records as the records management plan may require. 
(b)  Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the Records Management Officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with the records retention schedules issued by the state and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records management program of the City. 
(c)  Before its adoption, a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by the department head and the City Council. 
(d)  Before its adoption, a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director and librarian as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing. The Records Management Officer shall submit the records control schedules to the director and librarian. 
(Ord. No. 17-004, § 9, 2-5-2007)  
Sec. 2-161. - Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule. 
(a)  A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 2-160 shall be implemented by department heads according to the policies and procedures of the records management plan. 
(b)  A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending lawsuit, or the department head requests in writing to the Records Management Officer that the record be retained for an additional period. 
(c)  Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the Records Management Officer from the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 17-004, § 10, 2-5-2007)  
Sec. 2-162. - Destruction of unscheduled records. 
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule, and the Records Management Officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved destruction authorization request. 
(Ord. No. 17-004, § 11, 2-5-2007)  
Secs. 2-163—2-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - ETHICS 
 
Sec. 2-201. - Policy. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City that the proper operation of democratic government requires that public officers and employees be independent, impartial and responsible only to the people of the city; that no officers, employees or members of any standing committee or board shall permit any interest, financial or otherwise, direct or indirect, or engagement in any business, transaction or professional activity to conflict with the proper discharge of their duties in the public interest; that public office not be used for illegal or improper personal gain; and that the city council at all times shall be maintained as a nonpartisan body. To implement such a policy, the City Council deems it advisable to enact the following standards of conduct for all officers and employees, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid and the sanctions set forth for failure to adhere to the standards of conduct. 
(b)  The city further recognizes that public servants are also members of society and, therefore, cannot and should not be without any personal and economic interest in the decisions and policies of government; that public servants retain their rights as citizens to interests of a personal or economic nature, and their rights to publicly express their views on matters of general public interest. It is not the intent of this article to prevent the exercise and enjoyment of public servants' rights as citizens of the community. 
(Ord. No. 23-012, 8-5-2013)  
Sec. 2-202. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Encourage high ethical standards by city officers and employees in conducting official business, and 
(2)  Establish minimum guidelines for ethical standards of conduct to be followed by city officers and employees, and 
(3)  Provide a mechanism for punishment of those officers and employees who violate the established standard of conduct. 
(Ord. No. 23-012, 8-5-2013)  
Sec. 2-203. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business entity means a sole proprietorship, partnership, firm, corporation, holding company, joint-stock company, receivership, trust, or any other entity recognized by law. 
City council or councilmember means the elected legislative and governing body of the city consisting of the mayor, mayor pro tem and councilmembers. 
Economic benefit means any money, real or personal property, contract rights, sale, lease, option, credit, loan, discount, employment, service or other tangible or intangible thing of value, whether similar or dissimilar to those enumerated, and shall include that for Family Members. 
Economic interest means a legal or equitable interest in real or personal property or a fiduciary obligation to such property or contractual right in such property that is more than minimal or insignificant for one's self or a Family Member, and would be recognized by reasonable persons to have weight in deciding a case or an issue. Service by a city official as an officer or director with decision or policy making authority, but not as a general volunteer or contributor, in an educational, religious, charitable, fraternal, or civic organization does create an economic interest in the property of that organization. Ownership of an interest in a mutual or common investment fund that holds securities or other assets is not an economic interest in the securities or other assets unless the city official participates in the management of the fund. A person does not have an economic interest in a matter if the economic impact on the city official is indistinguishable from the impact on the public or on the particular group affected by the matter. 
Employee means any person employed by the City including part-time and temporary employees. 
Family Member means the spouse, children, parents, spouse's parents and any other family member within two degrees of affinity or consanguinity of the Councilmember, Officer, City Official or employee. 
Officer or City Official means any appointive member of a city board, commission, or committee set up by city council action, ordinance, charter, state law, or federal law on a permanent or ad hoc basis. Officer or City Official shall also include the City Manager or Municipal Judge. 
Respondent means the person against whom a complaint is made; a person who allegedly violates this Chapter. 
Substantial interest means an interest in an entity or property if a Councilmember, Officer, City Official or employee of the City and/or any Family Member: 
(a)  owns ten percent or more of the stock of a corporation or ownership interest in any entity, trust or estate, or 
(b)  owns ten percent or more or $2,500.00 or more of the fair market value of a corporation or of any entity, trust or estate, or 
(c)  if funds received from any of the above described entities exceeds ten percent or more of the person's gross income for the previous year. 
A Councilmember, Officer, City Official or employee of the City and or any Family Member has a substantial interest in real property if he or she, owns or controls an interest in said property, and the interest owned or controlled interest has a market value of $2,500.00 or more. A prima facie determination of value will be the percentage of the property owned or controlled applied to the appraised value of the property by the Appraisal District records of the County in which the property is located for the year in which the complained of action occurs. 
(Ord. No. 23-012, 8-5-2013)  
Sec. 2-204. - Standards of conduct. 
(a)  General prohibitions. 
(1)  No Councilmember, Officer, City Official or Employee may act as surety for any person or business entity that has a contract with the city or as a surety on any bond required by the city for a city official. 
(2)  The provisions of this Article do not prohibit a Councilmember, Officer, City Official or Employee from representing his or her interest in his or her owner-occupied homestead before any city body, except the body of which the official is a member. 
(3)  Councilmembers, Officers and City Officials shall respect and adhere to the City Manager structure of the City of Fredericksburg's government as provided in state law and the City Charter. 
(4)  Councilmembers, Officers and City Officials, except Employees, shall not attend internal staff meetings or meetings between city staff and third parties unless invited by city staff or directed by the City Council. 
(5)  Councilmembers, Officers, City Officials and Employees shall refrain from abusive conduct, actions and language and shall not knowingly make a false statement of material fact relating to the character or motives of other members of the city council, boards, commissions, committees, city staff or the public. 
(6)  Councilmembers, Officers and City Officials shall make all reasonable efforts to attend all properly noticed public meetings where their attendance is required by state law or the City Charter. 
(7)  Officers and City Officials addressing the City Council or any other city board or commission as members of the general public during the public comments section, public hearing section or any other time during which public comments are taken during any open meeting shall identify themselves by name and disclose their position with the city. 
(8)  A Councilmember who serves on the board of a public or private nonprofit organization shall be permitted to take part in discussions of, but shall have no vote on any funding request or contract by that organization, unless the organization has a board of directors or trustees appointed in whole or in part by the city council. 
(9)  Councilmembers, Officers, City Officials and City Employees shall abide by the laws of the State and Federal Government, pay all taxes before delinquency, pay all City utility accounts prior to delinquency and not otherwise be indebted to the City of Fredericksburg. Bona fide disputes and the entering into payment plans which are kept current are defenses to this prohibition. 
Final conviction of a penal offense other than Class C offenses, or the equivalent, under Federal Law, the Texas Transportation Code or the Texas Penal code, except those involving moral turpitude or assault, shall be grounds for dismissal as to Officers, City Officials and City Employees. Final convictions for felonies shall be grounds for removal for Councilmembers. Failure to abide by other laws, shall be grounds for the imposition of other sanctions hereunder such as reprimands, fines, the recommendation of recall etc., which are listed in the Consequences of a Finding of Violation section. 
(b)  Prohibition against gifts. 
(1)  Councilmembers, Officers, City Officials and Employees of the City shall not accept or solicit any gift, favor, service, employment or other economic benefit from any person or business entity doing business with the City that might reasonably tend to: 
a.  influence him or her in the discharge of their official duties, or 
b.  influence or encourage him or her to grant any improper favor, service or thing of value, or 
c.  influence his or her judgment or discretion. 
(2)  Factors which may be considered in evaluating whether a gift is prohibited include the value of the gift, any preexisting relationship between the donor and donee, whether the benefit of the gift flows to the City or to an individual Councilmember, Officer, City Official or Employee and whether any consideration is given or expected in exchange for the gift. Those items or services that do not constitute prohibited gifts include, but are not limited to, political contributions made and reported in accordance with state law, awards publicly presented in recognition of public service, entertainment, meals or refreshments furnished to attendees of public events, appearances or ceremonies, or ceremonial gifts by other dignitaries or exchange program participants. 
(3)  Any item offered to a Councilmember, Officer, City Official or Employee may be accepted and donated to a charitable organization or be presented to the City. 
(c)  Substantial interest. Councilmembers, Officers, City Officials and Employees shall not vote on or participate in any decision-making process with regard to any matter concerning property or a business entity in which they have a direct or indirect Substantial Interest. 
(d)  Economic interest/Economic Benefit. Councilmembers, Officers, City Officials and Employees shall not vote on or participate in any decision-making process on a matter if he or she has an economic interest in the outcome of the matter under consideration or on a matter in which he or she may obtain an Economic Benefit. 
(e)  Conflict of interest. 
(1)  No former Councilmember, Officer, City Official or Employee shall represent or appear on behalf of themselves or on behalf of the private interests of others before the City Council or any city board, commission or committee when such person has a Substantial Interest, an Economic Interest, may receive and Economic Benefit or represent the private interest of others in any action or proceeding involving the city for a period of one year following the termination of his or her service or employment. 
(2)  No former city employee may, for a period of one year, for compensation, appear on behalf of any person other than a governmental entity, or make any appearance before, or negotiate with any City Officer or Employee in connection with any judicial or quasi-judicial proceeding, application, contract, claim, or charge relating to any matter that involved the employee's former employment. 
(3)  Except as specifically authorized below or by other city ordinance, no Councilmember, Officer, City Official or Employee may appear before the body of which he or she is a member to represent himself, herself or any other person or entity, nor may that Councilmember, Officer, City Official or Employee contact another member of such body regarding a matter which he or she is representing himself, herself or another. Such person may designate and be represented by a person of his or her choice in any such matter, other than a Family Member or member or employee of the same entity as such Councilmember, Officer, City Official or Employee. This prohibition shall not apply to a person who serves as an officer or director of an educational, religious, charitable, fraternal, or civic organization and has no economic interest in the property of that organization and who receives no compensation from such organization, nor to a person who has ownership of an interest in a mutual or common investment fund that holds securities or other assets unless such person participates in the management of the fund, nor to a person who has an economic interest in a matter if the economic impact on such person is indistinguishable from the impact on the public or on the particular group affected by the matter. 
(4)  A Councilmember, Officer, City Official or Employee shall recuse himself or herself from meetings, discussions or other participation in matters where he or she is an adverse party to that of the City or the body of which he or she is a member and in which matters confidential to the City or body are to be discussed. An adverse party is a party whose interests are opposed to another party in a legal action or threatened legal action, and/or a person whose presence would otherwise prevent privileged communication from taking place. 
(f)  Disclosure of interest and recusal. 
(1)  A Councilmember, Officer, City Official or Employee who has a Substantial Interest, an Economic Interest in the outcome of the matter under consideration or a Conflict of Interest regarding the matter under consideration shall disclose the same and shall recuse himself/herself from voting on or participating in the relevant decision-making process. 
(2)  Such Councilmember, Officer or City Official, if required by State Law, shall also promptly file an affidavit with the city secretary disclosing the nature and extent of the Interest, and the affidavit shall be included in the official minutes of the body, in accordance with state law. 
(3)  Upon recusal, a person who has disclosed having either a Substantial Interest, Economic Interest or a Conflict of Interest in the outcome of a matter under consideration shall leave the dais, if applicable, but may remain at the open meeting in the public seating area. 
(g)  Confidential information. Councilmembers, Officers, City Officials and Employees of the City shall not directly or indirectly disclose information that such person is privy to because of his or her position but which is otherwise unavailable to the public under the provisions of any applicable United States or Texas public information laws as the same may be amended from time to time, nor directly or indirectly use any information gained solely by reason of their official position or employment, for their own personal gain or benefit or for the private interest of others. 
(h)  Use of City property. Councilmembers, Officers, City Officials and Employees of the City shall not use city supplies, equipment, resources or facilities for any purpose other than to conduct official city business, unless otherwise provided for by law, ordinance or city policy. 
(Ord. No. 23-012, 8-5-2013)  
Sec. 2-205. - Administration of ethics complaints. 
(a)  The City Council of the City of Fredericksburg shall serve as the body which enforces the provisions of this Chapter as to Councilmembers, Officers and City Officials. The City Manager shall have jurisdiction of complaints involving Employees other than those who are Officers or Officials, and shall enforce the provisions of this Article with regard to them, and shall follow the City's personnel policies where they may conflict with the provisions hereof. This jurisdiction shall be exclusive for complaints arising solely from the provisions of this Article and non-exclusive for any other complaints regardless of the source of law for which a violation is alleged. 
(b)  The Council, at its discretion, may appoint one or more persons who are not members of the Council, and who are not City Employees, to fully participate in or advise on a particular case. In such event, the participation of such a person shall not be or create a waiver of any confidentiality or privilege. 
(c)  The city secretary shall serve as staff liaison and shall be responsible for taking the minutes of the meetings. 
(d)  Rules of procedure. 
(1)  The Council shall establish its own parliamentary procedure, provided that such is not in conflict with the specific provisions of state law, city charter or city ordinance, and provided that the terms of this Chapter are followed. 
(2)  A quorum of the Council is required for hearings hereunder. 
(3)  In the event a member of the Council is the Respondent, he or she shall not be a member of the body with regard to his or her ethics complaint. The quorum, voting requirements and the like shall be adjusted accordingly and set in advance of the hearing. 
(4)  The chairperson of the Council may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
(e)  Role of the City Attorney. 
(1)  The City Attorney shall serve as legal counsel and staff liaison to the Council or City Manager as applicable. When complaints are filed relating to the City Attorney, independent legal counsel shall be utilized to advise the Commission, take part in hearings and fill the role of the City Attorney in this section. When complaints are filed relating to the Mayor, City Councilmembers, City Manager, City Prosecutor or Municipal Court Judge, or when the City Attorney has a conflict of interest or is otherwise unable to fulfill this role, independent legal counsel shall be utilized at the request of the City Attorney to advise the Commission and take part in hearings. 
(2)  The City Attorney shall serve as ethics advisor to city Employees and Officers. As ethics advisor, the City Attorney is available to respond confidentially to inquiries relating to this section. Provided however, the City Attorney shall not be required to act in cases prohibited by the Texas Rules of Disciplinary Procedure or other relevant ethical considerations. 
(3)  The City Attorney shall receive all sworn complaints and conduct a preliminary analysis and review of the complaint. The City Attorney shall forward a legal review and recommendation to the Council for action as set forth below. If a Complainant alleges a violation by the City Attorney, the complaint must be sent to each member of the Council, with a copy to the City Manager. The City Manager shall employ independent counsel. 
(f)  Procedure for Complaints. 
(1)  Any person may file a complaint alleging possible violations of federal, state and city laws relating to the provisions of this Chapter. All complaints shall: 
a.  Be submitted in writing, on a form prescribed by and filed with the City Attorney; 
b.  Be signed under oath; 
c.  Be dated; and 
d.  Provide, with as much detail and specificity as possible, all information requested on the form, including the name and address of the Respondent, the provision(s) of law allegedly violated, facts constituting the alleged violations(s), copies of any evidence substantiating the allegations or the relevant facts, the names and addresses of potential witnesses, additional information, if any, and an address and telephone number at which the complainant may be reached during normal business hours. All such information shall be provided to the best of the complainant's knowledge and belief. 
(2)  Complaints and any evidence collected during the investigation of the alleged violation shall be kept confidential until the formal Council hearing, if any, at which time the provisions of the Texas Open Meetings Act shall control. The provisions of the Texas Open Records act shall also be applicable to all cases including those of Employees. 
(3)  A complaint shall be filed with the City Attorney within six months from the date on which the complainant knew of or should have known about the alleged violation. 
(4)  No later than 30 business days after receipt of the complaint, the City Attorney shall acknowledge receipt of the complaint in writing to the complainant and provide a copy of the complaint to the Respondent by certified mail. Respondent shall have 30 business days from receipt of the notice to submit a sworn written response to the City Attorney along with any information the Respondent desires to have considered. The City Attorney shall provide a copy of any sworn written response to the complainant, conduct a preliminary investigation and review the facts to determine whether there is a legal basis for the claim. The City Attorney shall submit in writing a preliminary analysis and recommendation to the Council or City Manager as applicable. The City Attorney shall make one of the following recommendations to the Council: 
a.  Enforcement shall not be taken, and stating the reasons therefor. If the Council/City Manager concurs with this recommendation and no further action is taken in the matter, the City Attorney may still refer the information to another agency or department for appropriate action. A determination by the Council/City Manager that no further action should be taken shall not prevent the City Manager or any other agency or department from initiating other enforcement action, including disciplinary action, based on the same allegations and facts; 
b.  An administrative enforcement hearing should be commenced. If the City Attorney makes this recommendation to the Council/City Manager then the City Attorney shall prepare a probable cause report to be presented with the recommendation which shall contain a summary of law, facts and evidence gathered through the investigation, including exculpatory and mitigating information of which he or she has knowledge. The evidence may include hearsay, including declarations of investigators or others relating to the statements of witnesses or concerning the examination of physical evidence; 
c.  A civil action pursuant to any local, state or federal law should be commenced. If the Council/City Manager concurs with this recommendation, then the City Attorney shall commence the appropriate civil action and the Commission shall take no further action; or 
d.  A referral to another agency for criminal or civil action is appropriate. If the Council/City Manager concurs with this recommendation, then the City Attorney shall refer the information to the appropriate agency and the Council shall take no further action. However, the City Manager may still take disciplinary action, and the determination of the Council shall not prevent the City Attorney from such referral. 
(g)  Notification of intent to take action. No later than 75 business days after receipt of the complaint by the City Attorney, the Council/City Manager shall notify the complainant and Respondent in writing if the Council/City Manager intends to schedule an administrative enforcement hearing or take other action concerning the complaint. If the Council/City Manager makes a determination that there is probable cause to schedule an administrative enforcement or other hearing, then the City Attorney shall serve, personally or by certified mail, Respondent with a copy of the probable cause report and notification that Respondent has the right to respond in writing to the probable cause report and to request a disposition conference with the City Attorney at which the Respondent may be present in person and represented by legal counsel or any representative of his or her choosing. 
(h)  Response to probable cause report. 
a.  Respondent may submit a written response to the probable cause report, in which it may request a disposition conference. The response may contain legal arguments, a summary of evidence, and any mitigating or exculpatory information. 
b.  Any response and request for a disposition conference must be filed not later than 15 business days following service of the probable cause report. If the probable cause report is not personally served, three business days shall be added to the prescribed period. 
(i)  Disposition conference. 
(1)  If requested, the disposition conference shall be held at a time fixed by the City Attorney and shall be held informally by the City Attorney. The Respondent shall be given at least ten business days notice of the date, time and location of the conference. 
(2)  Formal rules of evidence shall not apply to such a conference. 
(3)  The conference shall be closed to the public unless the Respondent otherwise requests and all other Respondents agree to a public conference. 
(j)  Ex parte communications. After a complaint has been filed and during the consideration of a complaint by the Council, neither a member of the Council nor the Council's appointees may not communicate directly or indirectly with any party or person about any issue of fact or law regarding the complaint, except at a meeting of the Council, nor may any Council member or appointee conduct an independent investigation or gathering of information. 
(k)  Administrative enforcement hearings before Council or City Manager. 
(1)  Administrative prosecution. The City Attorney shall prepare and present the case in support of the accusation to be heard at the hearing. 
(2)  Informal disposition. An informal disposition may be made of an administrative enforcement hearing by: 
a.  Stipulation; 
b.  Agreed settlement; or 
c.  Default. 
All informal dispositions through stipulation or agreed settlement shall be negotiated through a disposition conference pursuant to the above provision. The Council/City Manager has the right to accept or reject any stipulation or agreed settlement. In the event of an Agreed Settlement of agreed Stipulation, the sanctions shall be included in such agreement, and no further action will be taken. 
(3)  Open or closed hearing. If the Council/City Manager and Respondent do not informally dispose of the enforcement action, Respondent may request either a closed or open hearing and may have legal counsel present. If Respondent does not request a hearing, the Council/City Manager in any event shall conduct a hearing. The hearing shall be held as expeditiously as possible, but in any event no later than 120 days from the date the complaint was received. Respondent shall be given at least 14 days notice of the hearing. The notice shall be in substantially the following form but may contain additional information: 
"You are hereby notified that a hearing will be held before the City Council/City Manager at ___________ on the ___________ day of ___________ 20_____, at the hour of ___________, upon the charges made in the complaint filed against you on ___________. You may be present at the hearing, but need not be represented by counsel, you may present any relevant evidence, and you will be given full opportunity to cross-examine all witnesses testifying. If you choose not to attend this hearing a default may be taken." 
(4)  Default. If Respondent does not appear at a scheduled hearing the Council/City Manager may declare a default and make a determination without the need to reschedule a hearing. 
(5)  Waiver. If Respondent waives his or her right to a hearing the Council/City Manager may schedule a hearing without any further notice to Respondent. 
(6)  Standard of proof. The issue at the hearing shall be whether the violation alleged in the complaint occurred. The Council/City Manager shall make its decision based on clear and convincing evidence presented during the hearing. 
(7)  Finding of violation. An affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the Council, including appointees, if any, or an affirmative finding by the City Manager shall be required for the determination that a violation has occurred and to impose any sanction under this Chapter. If the Council/City manager determines that a violation has occurred, it, he or she shall state its, his or her finding(s) in writing, identifying the particular provision(s) which have been violated, make a sanctions determination and deliver a copy of the findings and Consequences determination to the complainant and Respondent within ten business days. 
(Ord. No. 23-012, 8-5-2013)  
Sec. 2-206. - Consequences of a finding of violation. 
(a)  One or more sanctions may be imposed as follows. It is specifically provided that the following are actions by the City and do not preclude action by any other agency or person with jurisdiction, and do not supersede penalties that may be imposed through State or Federal action. Sanctions may be imposed on entities based on the conduct of an employee or agent in violation of this Chapter. 
(b)  Sanctions: 
(1)  Disciplinary action. Employees and City Officers who are employees may be disciplined in accordance with City policies, including termination. Employees and others may be notified, warned, reprimanded, suspended or removed from office; 
(2)  Fines as set forth in section 1-6 of this Code of Ordinances; 
(3)  Suit for Damages or Injunctive relief; 
(4)  Disqualification from Contracting with the City or Lobbying. The time and manner shall be specified. It is a violation of this code for a person debarred from so contracting or lobbying to enter into, attempt to enter into or aid another in entering into or attempting to enter into a contract with the City during the term of disqualification; 
(5)  Void contract: if the violation involved the award of a contract, the Council may void the contract; 
(6)  Letter of notification may be used when the determination is that the violation was unintentional or inadvertent. The letter should advise the person to whom it is directed of any steps to be taken to avoid future violations; 
(7)  Letter of admonition may be used when the determination is that the violation was minor and may have been unintentional or inadvertent; 
(8)  Letter of reprimand may be used when the determination is that the violation was intentional or knowing. A letter of reprimand directed to a Councilmember may, at the Council's direction, be delivered to the City Secretary and published in a local newspaper of the largest general circulation; 
(9)  Referral to ethics training; or 
(10)  Recommendation for recall for Council members. A letter recommending recall directed to a Councilmember shall be delivered to the City Secretary and published in a local newspaper of the largest general circulation. 
(c)  In arriving at its determination, the Council/City manager shall consider the seriousness of the violation, the importance of deterrence, the impact on public confidence in government, the number of times the violation occurred, the mental state with which the violation was committed and any previous violations committed and any previous violations committed by Respondent. 
(d)  If the Council/City Manager determines that the conduct occurred, but the facts indicate that the violation was unintentional or de minimus, the Council/City Manager may dismiss the complaint and no sanction will be imposed. 
(Ord. No. 23-012, 8-5-2013)  
Chapter 4 - ANIMAL CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Health and safety of animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 821.001 et seq.; rabies control, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.001 et seq.; municipal authority to require restraint of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.033(a)(1); treatment of live birds, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 821.003; dangerous wild animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.101 et seq.; subchapter of state law does not preempt municipal regulation or prohibition of dangerous wild animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.116(b). 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, exception where the context indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned animal means any animal that has not been provided with one or more of the necessities of life including air, food, water or protection from the sun and other elements of nature, or has been left in the custody of another person without that person's consent. 
Adult animal means an animal that is six months of age or older. 
Animal means any live, vertebrate creature, domestic or wild. 
Animal control authority/officer means the office and person designated by the city as the animal control authority, whether one or more, or his or her designee. 
Animal control facility means a facility operated by the city for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter or state law. 
At-large. The term "at-large" means: 
(1)  Off premises. Any animal which is not restrained by means of a leash of sufficient strength and not more than six feet in length to control the actions of such animal while off the owner's property. 
(2)  On premises. Any animal not confined on the premises of the owner by a substantial fence of sufficient strength and height to prevent the animal from escaping therefrom. 
Cat means a domesticated animal that is a member of the feline family ( Felis domesticus ). 
City means the City of Fredericksburg, Texas. 
Commercial animal establishment means any pet shop, auction, riding school or stable, zoological park, circus, recurring animal exhibition or kennel. 
Commercial breeder means any person who: 
(1)  Breeds dogs or cats; 
(2)  Sells or otherwise transfers possession of the offspring of a breeding dog or cat to another person for the purpose of breeding, show, personal pet or resale to a third person; and 
(3)  Sells or otherwise transfers possession of more than 12 dogs or 12 cats, or two litters, whichever is greater, or any combination within any 12-month period, for the purpose as described in subsection (1) of this definition. 
Currently vaccinated means vaccinated against rabies and satisfying the following criteria: 
(1)  The animal must have been at least three months of age at the time of vaccination; 
(2)  At least 30 days have elapsed since the animal was vaccinated; and 
(3)  Not more than 12 months have elapsed since the date of the most recent vaccination of the animal. 
Dangerous animal means any animal that inflicts bodily injury on any person or animal subject to the further provisions of this chapter. 
Dog means a domesticated animal that is a member of the canine family ( Canis familiaris ). 
Enforcement officer means any person designated by the city to represent and act for the city in the impounding of animals, controlling of animals running at large, and as otherwise required to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to enforce all regulations relating to animals as authorized by the state. This person will be a member of the animal control authority or any member of the city police department. 
Kennel means: 
(1)  Any lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises where five or more adult animals are kept; and 
(2)  Any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling dogs, cats, or other animals. 
Livestock means all domesticated animals including, but not limited to, horses, cows, mules, goats, sheep, pigs, hogs, rabbits, and pigeons, and does not include dogs and cats. 
Microchip means a computer chip, preprogrammed with a unique alphanumeric combination code, which is inserted into the animal. 
Notice/official notice, whenever notice is required by the animal control authority or an enforcement officer, means notice by personal service, certified mail return receipt requested, or written notice left at the entrance to the premises where the animal is harbored. 
Owner means any person, trust, partnership, corporation, or any other entity owning, keeping, or harboring one or more animals. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered for three consecutive days or more. Persons feeding feral cat colonies shall not be construed as owning, harboring, or keeping those cats. 
Pet means any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility. 
Restraint means secured by a leash, lead, cord, chain or rope six feet or less in length, or secured within a kennel or pen, or secured within the fenced real property limits of its owner, and may not come any closer than six feet to a public walkway or sidewalk when the restraint lead is stretched to full length. 
Secure enclosure means a fenced pen, kennel or structure that is locked and capable of preventing the entry of the general public, including children; capable of preventing the escape or release of an animal; clearly marked as containing a quarantined/dangerous animal; and in conformance with any additional requirements for enclosures, as established and provided in writing to the owner by the animal control authority. Enclosures described in section 4-20 are not secure enclosures for animals determined to be dangerous. 
Tract means a contiguous parcel of land under common use or ownership. 
Undeveloped property means any land that is not improved or actually in the process of being improved with residential, commercial, industrial, church, park, school, or governmental facilities or other structures or improvement intended for human use occupancy and the grounds maintained in association therewith. The term "undeveloped property" shall be deemed to include property developed exclusively as a street or highway or property used for commercial agricultural purposes. 
Vaccination means an injection of United States Department of Agriculture approved rabies vaccine administered every 12 months or as prescribed by the Texas Board of Health by a licensed veterinarian. 
Veterinary hospital/clinic means any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of diseases and injuries of animals. 
Wild/prohibited animal means any live animal, other than a common domestic species, regardless of the state or duration of captivity, which can be normally found in the wild state, or may pose a potential physical or disease threat to the public or that is protected by international, federal, or state regulations, including those listed in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.101 of the State of Texas, per section 4-11(a), and the following if not so listed: 
(1)  Class reptillia. Family heldermatidea (venomous lizards); Family viperidae (rattlesnakes, copperheads, cottonmouths, other pit vipers and true vipers); Family elapidae (coral snakes, cobras, mambas, and other elapids); the following listed species of Family colubridae dispholidus typus (boomslang), Hydrodynastes gigas (watercobra), Bioga (mangrove snake), and Thelotornis (African twig snake) only; Order phidia, Family boidae (racers, boas, water snakes, and pythons); and Order crocadilla (crocodiles, alligators, caimans, and gavials); 
(2)  Class aves. Order falconiforms (hawks, eagles, and vultures); Subdivision ratitae (ostriches, rheas, cassowaries, and emus); and Order strigiforms (owls); 
(3)  Class mammalia. Order carnivora, Family felidae (ocelots, margays, tigers, jaguars, leopards, and cougars), except commonly accepted domesticated cats; Family canidae (wolves, wolf-dogs, hybrids, dingos, coyotes, and jackals), except domesticated dogs; Family mustelidae (weasels, skunks, martins, mink, and badgers), except domestic ferrets (Mustela putorius furo); Family procyonidae (raccoons); Family ursidae (bears); Order marsupialia (kangaroos, wallabies and common opossums); Order edentata (sloths, anteaters, and armadillos); Order proboscidea (elephants); Order primata (monkeys, chimpanzees, and gorillas); Order rodentia (porcupines); and Order ungulata (antelope, deer, bison, and camels), unless the Order ungulata are located on premises which meet the definition of the farm/ranch; 
(4)  Animals not listed. The animal control officer may declare any species of animal not listed in this definition as prohibited if the confinement of the animal within the city can be shown to constitute a threat to public health and safety, and does not mean any bird kept in a cage of aviary that is not regulated by international, federal, or state law, or a gerbil, hamster, guinea pig, or laboratory mouse or rat. 
Zoological park means any facility other than a pet shop or kennel, displaying or exhibiting one or more species of nondomesticated animals, operated by a person, partnership, corporation, or governmental agency. 
(Ord. No. 16-001, § 4-1, 1-23-2006)  
Sec. 4-2. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in section 1-6. Any punishment provided for in the state statutes, such as cruelty to animals under V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 42.09 of the State of Texas, or civil penalties permitted to be assessed, may be applied whenever a violation of this chapter is also a violation of state law. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties provided in subsection (a) of this section, procedures and penalties, both civil and penal, set forth in the state laws with regard to the treatment, registration, keeping or use of animals which are permitted to be adopted by municipalities are specifically adopted hereby by the city. Each day a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  The city shall be entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under the authority of other ordinances or state law. 
(Ord. No. 16-001, § 4-2, 1-23-2006)  
Sec. 4-3. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by any enforcement officer, and such person shall have the authority to issue citations to persons violating the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or persons to interfere with an enforcement officer in the performance of his or her duties as prescribed by this chapter. 
(c)  Those enforcing the provisions of subsection (a) or (b) of this section shall have the right to pursue and apprehend animals running at-large onto private property, while enforcing the provisions of this chapter, and shall not be guilty of trespass while doing so. 
(Ord. No. 16-001, § 4-3, 1-23-2006)  
Sec. 4-4. - Payment of fees. 
(a)  The City Secretary or his/her designee shall be responsible for collecting all fees established and levied in accordance with this chapter. The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall have the authority to refund or waive fees under this chapter. Any refund or waiver of fees shall be documented by the Chief of Police or his/her designee. All fees applicable to this chapter shall be established by ordinance of the City Council, and are set forth in appendix A of this Code. 
(b)  Fees imposed by subsection (a) of this section shall not be required for dogs trained to assist auditory or visually impaired persons or for government police dogs. 
(Ord. No. 16-001, § 4-4, 1-23-2006)  
Sec. 4-5. - Dog and cat permits and tags. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor any dog or cat within the city unless a current registration permit has been issued for such animal in accordance with this section. 
(b)  The owner, keeper or harborer of any dog or cat within the city shall make application to the Animal Control Authority of the city for a registration permit for such dog or cat. Such application shall contain information on the dog's or cat's description, including whether the animal is neutered or spayed, date of vaccination, and name, address and telephone number of the owner, keeper or harborer. The owner, keeper or harborer shall also present to the Animal Control Authority of the city a current certificate of vaccination issued for such dog or cat in accordance with section 4-8. 
(c)  The application described in this section shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee, and an application shall not be complete unless accompanied by said fee. 
(d)  Registration shall be coterminus with the current rabies vaccination certificate. 
(e)  With proof of sterilization and payment of a one-time fee, the registration shall be valid for the life of the animal, provided annual proof of rabies vaccination is supplied. 
(f)  Upon the owner's compliance with the above provisions of this section, the Animal Control Authority or his or her representative shall register the dog or cat and issue a metal registration tag, which shall be attached to the dog's or cat's collar, and which shall be worn by the dog or cat at all times. 
(g)  If a permit tag issued under this section is lost or stolen, it may be replaced by payment of the appropriate fee and presentation of the registration permit. If the tag and registration permit are lost or stolen, a new permit must be purchased at the fee established for a new application. 
(h)  Any false statement in a rabies certification or application for a permit under this section shall be a violation of this chapter and shall render the permit issued for such dog or cat null and void, and the animal shall then be subject to being impounded in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any animal subject to the terms of this section to be in a public place without its own tag, issued pursuant to a then current permit, secured to the animal or to transfer or use any permit or tag for any animal other than the animal for which it was issued. 
(Ord. No. 16-001, § 4-5, 1-23-2006)  
Sec. 4-6. - Exemptions from permit and tag requirements. 
The following are exempt from permit and tag requirements: 
(1)  Veterinary hospitals/clinics and government operated control facilities or shelters; 
(2)  An animal brought into the city for not more than 240 hours for breeding, trial or show, provided the person in possession of such animal proves vaccinations are current for such animal; 
(3)  A circus, carnival or zoo that is licensed under the federal Animal Welfare Act (7 USC 2131 et seq.) and that furnishes proof to the Enforcement Officer that an inspection by the federal agency administering that Act has been performed within the previous calendar year; 
(4)  A zoo that is operated by a political subdivision of the state or that is accredited by the American Association of Zoological Parks and Aquariums, provided that its accreditation is current; 
(5)  Farm/ranch premises where nonindigenous ruminates are bred and raised as to such non-indigenous ruminates; and 
(6)  An organization sponsoring, and all persons participating in, exhibitions or domestic livestock shows and rodeos or horse racing as to the animals exhibited or raced. 
(Ord. No. 16-001, § 4-6, 1-23-2006)  
Sec. 4-7. - Permit revocation. 
The enforcement officer may revoke the permit of any animal regulated by this chapter if the animal is found not to comply with this chapter or is found in circumstances which do not comply with any law governing the protection and keeping of animals. 
(Ord. No. 16-001, § 4-7, 1-23-2006)  
Sec. 4-8. - Vaccination of animals capable of transmitting rabies. 
The owners of all animals capable of transmitting rabies, except goats, sheep, horses and cows, shall have such animals vaccinated, before such animals reach the age of four months and every 12 months thereafter or as prescribed by the Texas Board of Health, against rabies with a vaccine approved by the United States Department of Agriculture, and administered by a licensed veterinarian who shall issue to the owner of the animal a vaccination certificate. The owner shall retain such certificate until the vaccination is renewed. At the time of vaccination, a metal tag shall be issued by the veterinarian showing the name of the veterinary clinic, tag number, and year of issuance. Such vaccination tag shall be worn by the animal for which it was issued in the same manner as, and with the same requirements as, the tag issued for an animal's annual permit as described in section 4-5. 
(Ord. No. 16-001, § 4-8, 1-23-2006)  
Sec. 4-9. - Rabies control. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner or harborer of any animal or practicing veterinarian to report to the Animal Control Authority all suspected cases of rabies. The report shall be made immediately upon diagnosis or suspicion of rabies in animals. 
(b)  Should a potential outbreak of rabies within the city be suspected and the danger to the public safety from rabid animals be urgently imminent, the Animal Control Authority, Health Officer, or City Manager may issue a quarantine order covering a period of 240 hours ordering persons owning, keeping, or harboring dogs, cats or other animals to muzzle the same or confine them for such time as may be specified in such quarantine proclamation. Upon the issuance of such order and posting of such notice in the same location where City Council meeting notices are posted, persons owning or harboring such animals shall confine them to their premises unless they are effectively muzzled and under the control of an adult person by leash, cord, chain, or rope. Animals found at large in violation of this subsection may be destroyed by an Enforcement Officer if such officer is unable with reasonable effort to apprehend such animals for impoundment. The City Council may extend, revise or revoke such order, as it determines. 
(Ord. No. 16-001, § 4-9, 1-23-2006)  
Sec. 4-10. - Bites by animals. 
(a)  The Enforcement Officer may investigate reports in which animals have bitten persons or animals. It shall be the responsibility of such officer, or other officer if he or she is not the investigating officer, to obtain details on the bite cases and to conduct a follow-up investigation of the biting animal, if he or she so determines, to determine if it is suffering from rabies. 
(b)  The Enforcement Officer shall determine whether or not the animal suspected of biting is to be placed under quarantine and watched to determine if the animal is capable of transmitting or exposing humans or other animals to rabies. The quarantine for all animals shall be for a period not less than 240 hours. 
(c)  The owner of the animal required to be quarantined under subsection (b) of this section shall surrender the animal to the Enforcement Officer immediately, or otherwise arrange for the Officer to pick up and retain such animal in a separate kennel, at the animal control facility or in quarters supervised by a veterinarian for the period of the quarantine. After the animal has been released from quarantine, the owner may redeem the animal from the animal shelter or other quarters upon payment of the applicable fees, and verification by the Animal Control Authority that the animal's vaccination and permit are current. 
(d)  In lieu of animal quarantine at the animal shelter or other quarters, the Enforcement Officer may authorize the animal to be kept on the owner's premises, known as residence quarantine, upon the following conditions, to be determined in the Enforcement Officer's sole discretion: 
(1)  The animal was currently vaccinated at the time of the bite; 
(2)  The animal was not at-large at the time of the bite; 
(3)  The animal was currently registered with the city at the time of the bite; 
(4)  When quarantined at home, the animal must be restrained in an area where it will not come in contact with any persons or animals; 
(5)  The animal must be made available to the Animal Control Authority for periodic inspections at his or her discretion; 
(6)  The owner agrees to observe the animal for any signs of illness or a personality change, and report such signs or change to the Animal Control Authority; 
(7)  The animal may not be moved from the quarantine location without prior notification and approval of the Animal Control Authority; 
(8)  The animal will remain under quarantine until the owner is notified that the final health inspection has been made, all outstanding fees are paid and the animal has been cleared by the Animal Control Authority. The Animal Control Authority may require a veterinarian's certificate, stating that in his or her opinion such animal is not rabid and exhibits no symptoms of rabies, prior to release of the animal from quarantine. Contact may be made by telephone, personal service, or certified mail; 
(9)  The animal may not receive a vaccination for rabies during the quarantine period; and 
(10)  Failure to comply with all of the conditions of residence quarantine listed in subsections (d)(1) through (9) of this section, or as directed by the Enforcement Officer, is a violation of this chapter and will result in the animal being impounded at the animal control facility for the duration of the quarantine period. 
(e)  After the animal has been released from quarantine, the owner will have five days in which to have the animal registered with the city by the purchase of a city registration tag. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the enforcement of this section or to fail or refuse to surrender to an Enforcement Officer any animal involved or suspected of being involved in a bite case, or to otherwise fail or refuse to provide for the quarantine of animals as may be authorized by this chapter. 
(g)  If an owner fails or refuses to surrender an animal to the Enforcement Officer for quarantine under this chapter, such Officer may apply to any judge of the city municipal court for a warrant to seize the animal. The Officer executing the warrant shall cause the animal to be impounded at the city animal shelter or other facility as the Officer shall determine. 
(Ord. No. 16-001, § 4-10, 1-23-2006)  
Sec. 4-11. - Dangerous animals. 
(a)  The provisions of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code §§ 822.001 through 822.005 (subchapter A), 822.011 (subchapter B), and 822.041 through 822.047 (subchapter D) of the State of Texas are hereby adopted and incorporated in this Code as though the same were fully set out in this section. Any future modifications of such state laws shall automatically be incorporated in this section. References in this chapter to any such sections will mean the relevant sections of the state health and safety code, a current copy of which is on file in the City Clerk's office. 
(b)  Whenever in the incorporated sections stated in subsection (a) of this section reference is made to the animal control authority, it shall refer to the Animal Control Authority of the City of Fredericksburg or any Enforcement Officer as defined in section 4-1. 
(c)  The definition of dangerous dog contained in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.041 is hereby modified to include attacks on or injuries to other animals as well as persons, and such definition and the provisions of such sections shall include and be applicable to all animals in addition to dogs, but shall not be construed to permit animals to be kept where otherwise prohibited. 
(d)  The time period for compliance with the requirements of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.042 is hereby amended to 72 hours, provided that the animal shall be immediately restrained as required in such section. An owner of a dangerous dog may, as an alternative to the provisions of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.042, remove the dangerous animal from the City limits, or surrender the animal for humane destruction or have the same performed, within 24 hours after learning that the animal is dangerous or upon quarantine clearance, whichever is later. 
(e)  The liability insurance required under V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.042 is to be in an amount of at least $500,000.00, and shall be for bodily injury or property damage. 
(f)  Any animal that has been determined to be dangerous, and is not destroyed, shall have inserted into the animal a microchip by a licensed veterinarian within 240 hours from the date the animal is registered with the Animal Control Authority as a dangerous animal, at such owner's expense. The chip shall contain an alphanumeric combination code, which code shall be provided to the Animal Control Authority. 
(g)  Within 240 hours from the determination that an animal is dangerous, the owner of the animal must furnish proof of microchipping to the Animal Control Authority on a form furnished by the city and make the animal available, at the City's animal control facility, for scanning so the Animal Control Authority can verify the code. Failure to microchip, show proof of microchipping, or make the animal available for scanning shall constitute separate offenses. 
(h)  All owners of dangerous animals shall provide to the city two color photographs of the animal in two different poses showing the color and approximate size of the animal. 
(i)  The owner of a dangerous animal is required to have the animal wear, at all times, the dangerous animal registration tag provided by the Animal Control Authority. 
(j)  No dangerous animal may be kept on a porch, patio, or in any part of a house or structure, even if restrained, that would allow the animal to exit such building of its own volition. In addition, no dangerous animal may be kept in a house or structure when the windows are open or when screen windows or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing the animal from exiting the structure. 
(k)  No person shall permit a dangerous animal to go outside its secure enclosure unless such animal is securely leashed with an 18-inch traffic lead. No person shall permit a dangerous animal to be kept on a chain, rope, or other type of leash outside its secure enclosure unless a person is in immediate physical control of the leash. Such animal shall not be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts, or buildings. 
(l)  All owners of dangerous animals within the city shall display in a prominent place on their premises a sign easily readable by the public using the words "Beware—Dangerous Animal." The sign is to be no smaller than 12 inches by 12 inches and shall not exceed 18 inches by 24 inches in size. In addition, a similar sign shall be posted on the kennel or pen of such animal. 
(m)  All owners of registered dangerous animals shall, within ten calendar days of the occurrence, report the following in writing to the Animal Control Authority: 
(1)  Removal from the city or death of the animal. 
(2)  Written proof of a new address if such animal is sold and/or moves within the city. 
(n)  The new owner of a dangerous animal shall pay a registration fee established by City Council, and the Animal Control Authority shall issue a new dangerous animal registration tag. 
(o)  An owner of a dangerous animal shall notify the Animal Control Authority of any attack the animal makes on any person or animal. 
(p)  A dangerous animal may be destroyed during an attempt to seize or impound the animal if impoundment cannot be made with safety, wherever the impoundment is attempted, without liability to an owner of a dangerous dog. 
(q)  Sworn, written complaint. 
(1)  Should any person other than an Enforcement Officer desire to file a complaint concerning an animal which is believed to be a dangerous animal, such person must first file with the Enforcement Officer or city police department a sworn, written complaint containing: 
a.  The name, address and telephone number of the complainant and other witnesses; 
b.  The date, time, and location of any incident involving the animal; 
c.  A description of the animal; 
d.  The name, address, and telephone number of the animal's owner, if known; 
e.  A statement describing the facts of death or serious bodily or animal injury upon which such complaint is based; and 
f.  A statement describing any incidents where the animal has exhibited dangerous propensities in past conduct, if known. 
(2)  After a sworn complaint is filed, it shall be referred to the Enforcement Officer and/or Municipal Court for processing and a hearing, in accordance with the provisions of the state health and safety code sections referenced in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 16-001, § 4-11, 1-23-2006)  
Sec. 4-12. - Restraint. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or person to allow an animal to be at-large. All animals shall be kept under restraint. It shall be a defense to the six-foot length restriction under subsection (1) of the definition of at-large in section 4-1 if the animal is participating in an organized training or demonstration event, in which case the animal must be restrained by a leash or chain of sufficient strength and length to control the animal's actions, and it shall also be a defense to the six-foot limitation of the length of the leash when the animal and the person accompanying it are not in reasonable proximity to any other person or animal, or when such other person in the vicinity consents to the use of a longer leash, and it shall be a defense to the six-foot limitation of the length of the leash if an animal which is not confined or restrained is in a public area designated and posted for the free run or play of animals. 
(Ord. No. 16-001, § 4-12, 1-23-2006)  
Sec. 4-13. - Impoundment of animals. 
(a)  The Animal Control Authority or any Enforcement Officer may take up and impound any animal found at-large or otherwise in violation of this chapter. If the owner, keeper, or harborer of such animal is known or can be readily ascertained, the animal control officer shall notify him by telephone, personal service, certified mail, or door tag not later than 24 hours following the beginning of the next business day after such impoundment or after obtaining the owner's information. 
(b)  If impoundment of a dangerous animal is being attempted away from the premises of the owner and the impoundment cannot be made with safety, the animal may be destroyed without notice to the owner or harborer. If an attempt is made to seize or impound a dangerous animal from the premises of the owner or harborer and the impoundment cannot be made with safety, the owner or harborer will be given 24 hours' notice that if the animal is not surrendered to the animal control division for impoundment within such 24-hour period, the animal will be destroyed wherever it is found. Notice under this subsection shall be in writing. A written notice left at the entrance to the premises where the dangerous animal is harbored will be considered valid notice under this subsection. In lieu of surrendering the animal to animal control, an owner may permanently remove such animal from the city if written proof of destination is provided to the Animal Control Authority. 
(c)  The owner, keeper, or harborer of any animal impounded under this section may redeem the animal within 96 hours following notification of the person listed on the city's permit application or within 96 hours following impoundment if there is no city tag on the animal at the time of impoundment, by payment of applicable impounding fees and boarding fees as established by the City Council, and by providing proof, as may be required by the Animal Control Authority of the ownership or right to possession of the animal. 
(d)  Any person desiring to adopt an impounded cat or dog or other animal identified as adoptable by the Animal Control Officer may do so upon payment of the applicable fee as established by City Council. The decision as to whether or not an animal may be adopted by any particular person or entity is exclusively within the discretion of the Animal Control Authority. 
(e)  Any owner or person redeeming an animal from the Animal Control Authority must have the animal vaccinated and registered with the city within 120 hours of the release of the animal unless registration and vaccination are then effective and valid. 
(f)  Any owner or person adopting an animal from the Animal Control Authority must have the animal vaccinated and registered with the city within 120 hours of the release of the animal. 
(g)  The city shall comply with all sterilization laws as set forth in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 828. Any impounded animal adopted from the Animal Control Facility, if not sterilized and vaccinated, must be sterilized and vaccinated. The adoption fee includes the cost of sterilization. Adoptive owners will pick up adopted animals from a city-designated veterinarian's office following vaccination and sterilization. 
(h)  All impounded animals not redeemed within 96 hours as described in subsection (c) of this section may be destroyed in a humane manner by the Animal Control Authority. No animal may be adopted or sold for purposes of research. 
(i)  Any owner or person redeeming an unsterilized animal from the animal control authority for the fifth time within any consecutive 12-month period, or for the second time within any consecutive 12-month period for any animal which has been determined to be a dangerous animal, must have the animal sterilized. The cost of the sterilization shall be included in the fee required to redeem the animal from the animal control facility, and the owner will pick up animals from a city-designated veterinarian's office following sterilization. 
(j)  Impoundment, confinement and disposition of dogs or cats which have bitten or molested people. 
(1)  Ten days confinement required. Upon written complaint or reasonable proof to the pound master or any police officer by any person who has been bitten or otherwise molested by a dog or cat, it shall be the duty of such pound master or police officer to immediately impound such dog or cat in the city pound. The person shown to be the owner or keeper of such dog or cat by records on file in the city shall be immediately notified of the impounding of such dog or cat. If the owner or keeper of a dog or cat impounded for biting a person shall direct, said dog or cat may be removed to a reputable boarding kennel or animal hospital, provided the owner or keeper makes advance cash deposit with the kennel or hospital operator for the entire period of confinement and shall pay to the city a pound fee [as set out in the fee schedule] per day for each day the dog remains in the pound. Wherever confined, such dog or cat shall be kept for a period of ten days for observation for rabies. 
(2)  Redemption by owner after confinement period. If the dog or cat so confined shall not become rabid or exhibit symptoms of rabies, then upon termination of said ten day observation period, such dog or cat shall be immediately released to the owner or keeper of such dog or cat, provided a licensed veterinarian shall make and deliver to the pound master or person in charge of the boarding kennel or hospital, as the case may be, his/her certificate stating that in his/her opinion such dog or cat is not rabid and exhibits no symptoms of rabies, and provided the owner or keeper first pays the veterinary fees and other incidental expenses. When confinement has continued in the city pound, the incidental expenses shall include a pound fee [as set out in the fee schedule] per day, after the first twenty-four-hour period, for each day the dog or cat shall have been impounded, plus a flat fee. If, upon termination of the period of impoundment here provided for, such dog or cat shall not be redeemed by the owner or keeper, then such dog or cat shall be disposed of by the pound master as is hereafter provided for impounded dogs or cats which are not redeemed. 
(k)  Redemption of impounded dogs or cats not suspected of rabies. Any person whose dog or cat shall have been impounded for reasons other than biting a person shall have the right to redeem his/her dog or cat from the city pound on the date of its impoundment or within three calendar days thereafter, making proof to the animal control officer of his/her ownership or right to possession of the dog or cat and by payment to the animal control officer of a flat fee [as set out in the fee schedule], plus the sum [as set out in the fee schedule] per day, after the first twenty-four-hour period, for each day or part thereof that such dog or cat shall have been confined, for the food and care of such dog or cat. 
(Code 1992, app. A, § 4.100; Ord. No. 16-001, §§ 4-13, 4.100, 4.200, 1-23-2006) 
Cross reference— Fees for impoundment, App. A, § 4.100  
Sec. 4-14. - Animal control records. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer to keep the records of the animal control department, which records shall consist of records concerning impoundment and disposition of animals coming into custody, bite cases, adoption and vaccination and sterilization records, for all animals adopted or released from the city's animal shelter. 
(b)  It is expressly provided that the personal information about any individual that sterilizes or vaccinates an animal through or by agreement with the city or adopts an animal from the city shall remain confidential and shall not be subject to public disclosure. This personal information shall include the identity of the person sterilizing, vaccinating or adopting an animal, the name of the new owner of an animal adopted, those persons' addresses, telephone numbers, drivers' license numbers or other personal identifying information. Further, such other information may be declared confidential by state or federal law, including the provisions of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 826 as may be amended from time to time, and shall not be subject to public disclosure. 
(Ord. No. 16-001, § 4-14, 1-23-2006)  
Sec. 4-15. - Wild/prohibited animals. 
(a)  No owner shall keep or permit to be kept on his premises or premises under his control any wild/prohibited or dangerous animal for sale, display, or exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. This section shall not be construed to apply to any persons or entities as defined by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.102(a)(1) through (11). 
(b)  No person shall keep or permit to be kept any wild or prohibited animal as a pet. 
(c)  The Animal Control Authority may issue temporary approval for the keeping, care, and protection of an injured, newborn or immature animal native to this area which is deemed to be incapable of caring for itself. 
(d)  The Animal Control Officer shall have the power to release or order released any animal being kept temporarily under the provisions of subsection (c) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 16-001, § 4-15, 1-23-2006)  
Sec. 4-16. - Livestock. 
(a)  No person shall keep livestock within the corporate limits of the city except in conformance with and in districts, where permitted by the city zoning ordinance, as agriculture, open space or the like, or if the animals are kept as part of a sanctioned FFA or 4H project, are city approved horse and carriage operation or the like, or are horses, cows or cattle kept on tracts of land one acre in size or larger. Notwithstanding this prohibition, this subsection shall not apply to rabbits, goats, chickens, roosters, guineas, turkeys, ducks or sheep, provided that the owners or harbors of the same comply with the provisions of sections 4-17, 4-18 and 4-20. 
(b)  It is an affirmative defense to subsection (a) of this section that the animal is a potbellied pig, which meets with the requirements set forth in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Requirements for keeping potbellied pigs: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, or raise more than two adult potbellied pigs in any one location within the city. In order for a potbellied pig to be considered an adult potbellied pig, it must be at least six months of age. No adult potbellied pigs from more than one litter shall be kept at any one time. 
(2)  All such potbellied pigs shall be kept indoors at all times, other than times for evaluation of waste material or during exercise periods. 
(3)  All such potbellied pigs shall receive annual vaccinations for erysipelas. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or harborer of the pig to obtain an annual erysipelas vaccination certificate, from a licensed veterinarian, which shall include the following information: 
a.  Name and address of the owner; 
b.  Description of the animal; 
c.  Date of vaccination; 
d.  Tag number; and 
e.  Other appropriate information. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor any potbellied pig within the city, unless a current registration permit has been issued for such animal in accordance with this section. 
(5)  The owner or harborer of any potbellied pig within the city shall make application to the Animal Control Authority for a registration permit for the animal. Such application shall contain information on the potbellied pig's description, and the name, address and telephone number of the owner, keeper or harborer. The owner, keeper or harborer shall also present to the Animal Control Authority a current certificate of vaccination issued for such potbellied pig in compliance with subsection (c)(3) of this section. 
(6)  The application described in subsection (c)(5) of this section shall be accompanied by a fee as shall be established by the City Council. 
(7)  Upon the owner's or harborer's compliance with the provisions of subsections (c)(1) through (6) of this section, the Animal Control Authority shall register the potbellied pig and issue a metal registration tag. 
(8)  Registration shall be valid for one year from the date of registration, and shall be renewed annually. 
(9)  Should the potbellied pig die or be moved or acquire a new owner or harborer, it shall be the owner's or harborer's duty to inform the Animal Control Authority. In the event the potbellied pig is acquired by a new owner or harborer, such new owner or harborer shall be required to register the potbellied pig in accordance with the provisions of subsection (c)(4) of this section. 
(10)  All male potbellied pigs over the age of four weeks that are kept within the city shall be neutered, and proof of the same shall be required prior to issuance of the permit required in subsection (c)(5) of this section. 
(11)  For purposes of this section, the term "potbellied pig" shall mean a variety of swine no more than 18 inches in height at shoulder level when full grown and meeting the standards of the North American Potbellied Pig Association. Under no circumstances shall any swine be considered a potbellied pig if its weight exceeds 95 pounds. 
(Ord. No. 16-001, § 4-16, 1-23-2006)  
Sec. 4-17. - Protection of animals. 
(a)  Chickens or ducklings younger than eight weeks of age may not be sold in quantities of less than ten to a single purchaser except if the animals are sold as part of a sanctioned FFA or 4H project. 
(b)  No person shall knowingly expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the same may be eaten by any pet or domestic animal; provided, however, that the application of pesticides which are commercially available and which are properly applied to control pests shall not constitute a violation of this subsection. 
(c)  No owner or person shall: 
(1)  Deprive an animal of sufficient good and wholesome food or water, adequate shelter and protection from weather, veterinary care (when needed to prevent suffering), and humane care and treatment; 
(2)  Beat, cruelly or ill treat, torment, mentally abuse, overload, overwork or otherwise abuse an animal, or cause, instigate or permit any dog fight, cockfight, bull fight, or other combat between animals or between animals and humans; or 
(3)  Abandon any animal in his custody. 
(d)  No person shall transport or carry on any public roadway any animal in a motor vehicle unless the animal is safely enclosed within the vehicle, and if traveling in an unenclosed vehicle the animal shall be confined by a vented container or cage, or by chain, rope or other device cross-tied to prevent the animal from falling or jumping from the motor vehicle or from strangling on a single leash. 
(e)  No owner or person shall leave any animal in any standing or parked vehicle in such a way as to endanger the animal's health, safety or welfare. Any animal control officer or police officer is authorized to use reasonable force, including the breaking of a side window, to remove an animal from a vehicle whenever it appears the animal's health, safety or welfare is or soon will be endangered. If the life of the animal is in immediate danger, said animal may be impounded in the discretion of the animal control officer. 
(f)  The Animal Control Authority may liberally utilize the authority granted by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 821.022 to seize any animal, if the Animal Control Authority has reason to believe that an animal has been or is being cruelly treated. Seizure of the subject animal prior to receiving a warrant is hereby authorized if such a delay endangers the life or if it would unreasonably prolong the suffering of the animal requiring veterinary care. 
(g)  No owner or person shall sell, trade, barter, lease, rent, give away, or display for a commercial purpose, any live animal, on any roadside, public right-of-way, commercial parking lot, or any flea market. 
(Ord. No. 16-001, § 4-17, 1-23-2006)  
Sec. 4-18. - Public nuisances. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and constitute a public nuisance for any person to maintain any animal or fowl in such a manner or allow any pen, enclosure, yard or similar place used for the keeping of animals or fowl to become unsanitary, offensive by reason of odor, or create a condition that is a breeding place for fleas or other vector and which is offensive to persons of ordinary sensibilities residing in the vicinity thereof or is determined to be a public nuisance by any Enforcement Officer. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and constitute a public nuisance for any person to maintain any animal or fowl which repeatedly roams at large in violation of this chapter on public or private property, attacks another animal or damages public or private property. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful and constitute a public nuisance for the owner of any animal to allow any excreta deposited by his animal to remain on public or private property. The creation of any condition injurious to public health caused by the lack of or improper disposal of animal waste will also be considered a violation of this section. 
(d)  Subject to chapter 20, article VI, it shall be unlawful and constitute a public nuisance to keep any animal which, by causing frequent or long-continued barking, howling, crowing, meowing, or other noise, shall disturb any person of ordinary sensibilities residing in the vicinity of the premises where the animal is kept, housed or harbored. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or person to allow any animal to remain a public nuisance as defined in subsection (d) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 16-001, § 4-18, 1-23-2006)  
Sec. 4-19. - Traps. 
(a)  Only humane live-animal traps may be used for capturing animals roaming unrestrained in the city. The use of steel jaw traps to apprehend animals is prohibited. As an exception to this subsection, governmental agencies and entities shall be permitted to use such traps and equipment as necessary and permitted by state law or regulation. 
(b)  No person shall remove, alter, damage, or otherwise tamper with a trap or equipment set out by the Animal Control Authority. 
(Ord. No. 16-001, § 4-19, 1-23-2006)  
Sec. 4-20. - Humane care. 
Any person, owner, handler, or keeper of a cat or dog must provide humane conditions for such animals as follows: 
(1)  Enclosure. Any dogs confined within a fenced yard must have at least 100 square feet for two dogs maximum for the animals' use and exercise. Where dogs are kept or housed on property without a fenced yard, the owner of such dogs, or persons having custody of such dogs, shall provide an enclosure containing not less than 100 square feet for two dogs maximum for the animals' use and exercise. Such enclosure shall be constructed of chainlink fencing or similar type materials with all four sides enclosed. The enclosure shall be of sufficient height to prevent the dog from escaping from such enclosure. The top of the enclosure shall be covered with materials to provide the dog with shade and protection from the elements. 
(2)  Shelter. The owner or other person having custody of an animal must provide a shelter for the animal. The shelter must be constructed and maintained in such a manner to allow the animal to remain dry and protected from the elements, including sun. Such shelter shall be fully enclosed on three sides, roofed and have a solid floor with bedding appropriate to the season. The entrance to the shelter shall be flexible to allow the animal's entry and exit, and sturdy enough to block entry of wind and rain. The shelter shall be small enough to retain the animal's body heat and large enough to allow the animal to stand and turn comfortably. The enclosure shall be structurally sound and maintained in good repair. 
(3)  Food/water. The owner or other person having custody of an animal must provide wholesome and nutritious food appropriate for the age and size of the animal. Fresh clean water must be available at all times. The water container must be of adequate size and affixed in a manner such that it cannot easily be accidentally emptied. 
(4)  No person shall at any time fasten, chain or tie any cat or dog, or cause such cat or dog to be fastened, chained or tied, while such animal is on the property where it is normally kept or resides. (Exception: A cat or dog may be tethered to allow for the cleaning of its enclosure or while the owner is outside with the animal and is in visual contact with it at all times.) 
(5)  If the Enforcement Officer determines that any owner, harborer or keeper of an animal is in violation of subsections (a) through (d) of this section relating to the humane care of animals, he or she will notify the owner, harborer or keeper of the animal of the violation by door tag, personal service or certified mail, and to immediately remedy the violation, specifying a time for compliance, not to exceed three days following which, if the person has not complied with the requirements of the Enforcement Officer, the person may be found guilty of a violation of this section. After the second conviction within any six-month period, the Enforcement Officer may apply to the Municipal Judge for a warrant to seize such animal. The animal will be impounded at the city Animal Control Facility. The Municipal Judge will hold a hearing and determine the disposition of the impounded animal, which shall be in the judge's determination to the owner of the animal, a humane organization designated by the animal control officer, or the city animal control facility for humane destruction, which destruction shall occur following the expiration of any required appeal period. 
(Ord. No. 16-001, § 4-20, 1-23-2006)  
Chapter 5 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal regulation of housing and other structures, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 5-1—5-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODES 
 
Sec. 5-19. - Building and Residential Codes adopted. 
The following codes are hereby adopted by reference as though they were copied herein in full: 
(1)  International Building Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council including Appendices "A", "C", "D", and "F"; and 
(2)  International Residential Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council including Appendices "E", "G", and "J", but excluding Parts VI, VII and VIII. 
(Code 1992, § 3.101; Ord. No. 11-0146, § 3.101, 8-20-2001; Ord. No. 14-006, 5-17-2004; Ord. No. 17-012, § 5-19(1), (2), 6-18-2007; Ord. No. 23-013, 8-5-2013; Ord. No. 2019-27 , § 1, 10-7-2019)  
Sec. 5-20. - Conflicting provisions. 
With regard to any matters in said codes which are contrary to any other existing ordinances of the city as may be amended from time to time, the most restrictive standards, regulations and requirements shall control. 
(Code 1992, § 3.102; Ord. No. 11-0146, § 3.102, 8-20-2001)  
Sec. 5-21. - Officials designated. 
When reference is made to the duties of certain officials named within said codes, the designated official of Fredericksburg, Gillespie County, Texas, who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said code shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of said code is concerned. 
(Code 1992, § 3.103; Ord. No. 11-0146, § 3.103, 8-20-2001)  
Sec. 5-22. - Amendments to International Building Code. 
The International Building Code, adopted in section 5-19 of this Code, is amended as follows: 
(1)  112.3 Variances. The Board of Adjustments and Appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of this code to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice, and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this code or public interest, or when, in its opinion the interpretation of the building official should be modified or reversed. Variance requests shall only be heard if: 
a.  The variance concerns a modification within an existing building; 
b.  The variance concerns a new building or addition to existing building provided the applicant can demonstrate an equal alternative to compensate for not adhering to the specific code requirements. A waiver of the code provision without the provision of an equally sound alternative is not a valid ground for a variance; or 
c.  The variance concerns a claim that the building official has misinterpreted the code. 
(2)  112.1. Section 112.1 of Chapter 1 of the International Building Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
There is hereby established a board to be called the Board of Adjustment and Appeals, which shall consist of five members. The said board shall be appointed by the city council. 
(3)  1803.3-Trench Safety Requirements. Section 1803.3 is hereby added to Chapter XIII to read as follows: 
a.  In addition to any other requirements of this Code, in the City of Fredericksburg or in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Fredericksburg, as provided by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 43, to the extent required by state law or otherwise by municipal ordinance, on construction projects in which trench excavation will exceed a depth of five feet, the bid documents and the contract must include detailed plans and specifications for trench safety systems that meet Occupations Safety and Health Administration standards, and these plans and specifications shall include a pay item for these same safety systems. 
b.  This section does not apply to a contract entered into by a person subject to the safety standards adopted under article 6053-1 Texas Revised Civil Statutes and the administrative penalty provisions of article 6053.2 Texas Revised Civil Statutes, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(4)  3201, 3202. Section 3201, 3202 - General is hereby repealed. 
(5)  3203. Other projections is hereby added except as to section or article 3203.1, Sidewalk or Street Obstructions, which is hereby adopted to read as follows: 
Public property, including all rights-of-way shall be maintained clear of any and all structures including among others, buildings, posts, columns and signs. Structures for the purpose of this section and section 104.4.4 of the International Building Code as adopted by the City of Fredericksburg, shall mean and refer to anything placed in the right of way of a permanent nature or that which is not easily removable, including among other structures, basketball poles; provided however, that trees, shrubs and U.S. Postal Department approved mail receptacles are specifically excluded. This prohibition shall not apply to any structure for which a permit is obtained from the building official, after determination by the building official of the City that the structure will not be injurious or a danger to the health, safety and welfare of the public nor that it will interfere with the provision of public services or utilities. The issuance of a permit shall create no continuing rights with regard to the structure and in the event its removal is required by any public official or agent thereof such structure shall be promptly removed by the permittee upon notice or removed the city without notice. 
(6)  3107. Section 3107 is amended to read as follows: 
All signs erected must, in addition to the requirements of this building code, comply with the City of Fredericksburg Sign Ordinance and any other ordinances relating to signs whether with regard to size, placement, construction, look or materials or any other regulation, as the same may be amended from time to time. In the event of any conflict among the same, the most restrictive provision shall control. 
(Code 1992, § 3.104; Ord. No. 11-0146, § 3.104, 8-20-2001)  
Secs. 5-23—5-47. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PERMITS AND FEES FOR CONSTRUCTION 
 
Sec. 5-48. - Building permits. 
(a)  Permit required. No building shall be in any manner constructed, altered, repaired, remodeled, demolished or moved within the city limits unless a building permit is obtained. No building permit will be issued for any demolition of a historic structure which is subject to regulation under Chapter 23, Article III, Historic Preservation, of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fredericksburg unless a building permit for the construction of the replacement structure at the same site is issued at the same time. Fees shall be paid for building permits as set forth in the fee schedule found in appendix A to this Code. 
(b)  Waiver of fee for affordable housing—apartments—multi-family residential. Building permit fees are waived, or will be reimbursed, for any unit of rental housing within an apartment-multi-family residential development which qualifies as Affordable Housing under 42 U.S. Code Section 12745 (a), and for which Federal Tax Credits have been granted, under the following conditions: 
(1)  An application for such waiver shall be filed with the City Development Department on forms promulgated by the Director of Development. 
(2)  Proof that the housing units qualify for rental under 42 U.S. Code Section 12745 (a), and that the Federal Tax credits for the same have been granted for the specific number of qualifying units must be submitted along with the application. 
(3)  The units must continue to qualify for rental under said U.S. Code section for 30 years, and the City shall file a statement to such affect in the Deed Records of Gillespie County, Texas. In the event the units are not so maintained for the thirty-year period, the City will be paid for the fees waived, and the then owner of the property shall be responsible therefor, and the same shall constitute a lien against the property for which the waivers were granted. 
(4)  With regard to an apartment development containing both qualifying and non-qualifying units, the waiver of fees will be determined on a percentage basis which the fee for the number of qualifying units bears to the total fee which would be payable if there were no qualifying units. 
(c)  Waiver of fee for affordable housing—single-family residential. Building permit fees are waived, or will be reimbursed by the City, for any unit of owner-occupied housing, or rental housing which qualifies as Workforce Housing under the following conditions: 
(1)  An application for such waiver shall be filed with the City Development Department on forms promulgated by the Director of Development. 
(2)  Proof that the housing units qualify as Workforce Housing must be submitted along with the application. Workforce Housing for the purposes hereof are: 
a.  Houses, which include townhouses and condominiums, which are sold or rented to persons who will occupy the house as his, her or their primary residence the total sales price of which is no more than 90 percent of the mean home price for home sales within the City of Fredericksburg for the year previous to that of the year of the sale. The mean home price will be that established by the Gillespie County Board of Realtors, or if the same is unavailable, the Director of Development will use a comparable method to establish the mean home price. 
b.  Houses, which include townhouses and condominiums, which are financed to the borrower, if financed, must meet FHA financing guidelines with regard to interest rates, costs of the loan, closing costs and all other fees to the borrower. 
(3)  That the sale occurs on or before June 30, 2016. 
(Code 1992, § 3.201; Ord. No. 25-002, 2-2-2015; Ord. No. 25-009, 6-1-2015; Ord. No. 27-007, 7-5-2017)  
Sec. 5-49. - Plan checking fees. 
(a)  When the valuation of a proposed construction exceeds $250,000.00 and a construction plan is required to be submitted by this Code, the building official shall determine whether or not such plans will be reviewed by himself/herself or his/her department, or by an independent service for code compliance. The building official's determination shall be based upon the size of the project, or the complexity of the project or time in which the applicant wishes to complete the project. The building official's determination as to whether or not to have plans reviewed by an independent service, as well as what service will be used, shall be conclusive. 
(b)  Upon the building official's determination that the plans will be reviewed by an independent service, the fees charged by such service shall be passed through to the applicant, and shall be paid by the applicant to the city prior to the city incurring the same. The building official shall not issue a building permit until all fees are paid. 
(c)  The fees permitted by this section shall be paid by an applicant in addition to any other fee or assessment provided for by any other section of this Code. 
(Code 1992, § 3.202)  
Sec. 5-50. - General contractor license and bond. 
Every general contractor and builder, except an individual who works only on a dwelling where he/she resides, shall secure a license from, and provide a certificate of bond in an amount not less than $5,000.00, to the building official. The license shall expire on December 31 of the year in which it was issued. The annual license fee shall be as set forth in the fee schedule found in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1992, § 3.203)  
Sec. 5-51. - Refusal of utility connection. 
If, upon completion, the electrical, plumbing, or building inspector shall find that the building or installation therein fails to comply with existing ordinances, such findings shall be reported to the building official, in which event no utilities shall be connected with nor shall any utility company connect utilities to said building until same is so reconstructed or the installation reinstalled in order that a compliance with existing ordinances is had. 
(Code 1992, § 3.204)  
Secs. 5-52—5-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTRICAL CODE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— National electrical code applicable statewide for residential construction, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.214. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 5-76. - Adoption of current edition of the National Electrical Code. 
The 2014 edition of the National Electrical Code and the National Electrical Code Handbook are adopted and incorporated in this Code as fully as if set out herein in its entirety; and from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, its provisions shall be controlling in work described in NEC Article 90-2, within the corporate limits of Fredericksburg, Texas, subject to the laws of the state. 
(Code 1992, § 3.302; Ord. No. 10-003, § 3.302, 2-7-2000; Ord. No. 12-001, § 3.302, 2-18-2002; Ord. No. 17-012, § 5-76, 6-18-2007; Ord. No. 23-013, 8-5-2013; Ord. No. 2019-27 , § 2, 10-7-2019)  
Sec. 5-77. - Local amendments of National Electrical Code. 
(a)  Local amendments to the National Electrical Code shall be adopted by the city council and thereafter incorporated into this article and shall be made available in the office of the city secretary prior to their effective date(s). 
(b)  In the event of conflict between the provisions of the National Electrical Code and its local amendments, the local amendments shall prevail. All electrical work done or installed for any purpose shall be and remain at all times fully subject to the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1992, § 3.303)  
Sec. 5-78. - Rules with precedence over conflicting NEC provisions. 
The following rules shall take precedence over and supersede any portion of the NEC where conflicts occur: 
(1)  Table 300-50 is hereby amended to provide that all city primary shall have minimum cover of 48 inches. 
(2)  Table 300-5 is hereby amended to provide that secondary in city right-of-way or easement shall have a minimum cover of 24 inches. 
(3)  Article 338-10 is hereby amended to provide that U.S.E. cable may be used for service entrance conductors if installed completely in code approved raceway. 
(4)  The following minimum wire sizes shall be used for the type of circuit indicated: 
a.  No branch circuit shall have wire smaller than No. 12 AWG. This does not prohibit smaller wire sizes for circuits 90 volts and lower, nor for control circuits or switch legs. 
b.  Built-in ovens shall have a minimum wire size of No. 10 AWG copper. 
c.  Ranges shall have a minimum wire size of No. 8 AWG copper, or equivalent aluminum. 
d.  Window air conditioners shall have a minimum wire size of No. 10 AWG copper. 
e.  Water heaters shall have a minimum wire size of No.10 AWG copper. 
(5)  No aluminum wire shall be used in branch circuits. 
(6)  No copper-clad wire shall be used. 
(7)  Certain wiring methods permitted under the NEC shall not be allowed (except where existing prior to adoption of this Code), specifically, the wiring method set out in the following articles of the NEC, shall not be used: 
a.  Article 398 of the NEC - open wire on insulators. 
b.  Article 394 of the NEC - concealed knob-and-tube wiring. 
c.  Article 330 of the NEC - metal-clad cable (this prohibits interlocking tape and corrugated tube versions of MC cable, but permits the smooth tube version). 
(8)  Nonmetallic-sheathed cable (article 334 of the NEC) and shielded nonmetallic-sheathed cable (article 334 of the NEC) shall be used only in dwellings, as defined in article 100 of the NEC. Neither nonmetallic-sheathed cable or shielded nonmetallic-sheathed cable shall be used in hotels, motels, rooming houses, fraternity or sorority houses. 
(9)  In residential electrical construction cases, the following additional rules shall apply: 
a.  Separate dedicated branch circuits shall be provided for each refrigerator, dishwasher, and garbage disposal unit. These appliances shall be cord connected, and the garbage disposal shall be switched by a snap switch located above or direct to the kitchen sink. Where desired, the garbage disposal and dishwasher circuits may share a split-wired receptacle, provided all other code conditions for such use are followed. The dishwasher circuit shall have no other outlets on the circuit. 
b.  Where provisions are made for a microwave oven, a separate branch circuit is required, and no other outlets shall be on the circuit. 
c.  No more than ten outlets shall be installed per circuit. No more than eight of these outlets shall be receptacle outlets. (This rule does not apply to nonresidential occupancies or to lighting circuits containing no receptacles. Such circuits shall be calculated in accordance with articles 210-22, 210-23, and 220-2, NEC.) 
(10)  In the event article 680-41, NEC, relating to the indoor installation of spas, hot-tubs, or hydromassage bathtubs cannot be complied with due to architectural design constraints, the electrical board may consider alternate installation methods provided that maximum protection to the user is considered. Such alternate installation proposals shall be submitted to the electrical board at its regular meeting, and shall consist of sketched/drawings of the proposed installation methods. Any such approval obtained shall be restricted to that particular installation, and shall have no precedental value as to future similar cases. 
(11)  Portable or temporary job shacks or trailers may be wired for type NM, NMC, or SNM cable during the construction phase of a project. However, they must be removed when a certificate of occupancy is received for the building under construction. 
(12)  Premanufactured portable offices or trailers may be wired in type NM, NMC or SNM cable provided they are used as temporary buildings only. To be so considered they shall not be placed on permanent foundations, shall not have the transport undercarriage removed, nor shall the foundation be enclosed to give a permanent appearance. 
(13)  All services of 600 amps and smaller in rating shall have disconnecting means located on the exterior of the building served. By special permission, where this condition cannot be met, the electrical board will consider alternate locations. 
(14)  Electrical metallic tubing (article 358, NEC) shall not be installed in concrete. 
(15)  Overhead service entrance conductors must be in either rigid metal conduit, intermediate metal conduit, electrical metallic tubing, or schedule 80 rigid nonmetallic conduit, service-entrance cable (article 338, NEC) will not be used unless protected by approved conduit. If the service entrance conduit is a service mast, then only two inch or larger rigid metal conduit or intermediate metal conduit shall be used. 
(Code 1992, § 3.304; Ord. No. 12-001, § 3.304, 2-18-2002; Ord. No. 17-012, § 5-78(9)c, (14), 6-18-2007)  
Secs. 5-79—5-99. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ELECTRICAL BOARD[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal regulation of electricians, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1305.201; scope of municipal electrician license, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1305.202. 
 
Sec. 5-100. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-27 , § 9, adopted Oct. 7, 2019, repealed § 5-100, which pertained to electrical board established and derived from Code 1992, § 3.305.  
Sec. 5-101. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-27 , § 9, adopted Oct. 7, 2019, repealed § 5-101, which pertained to members of the electrical board and derived from Code 1992, § 3.306.  
Sec. 5-102. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-27 , § 9, adopted Oct. 7, 2019, repealed § 5-102, which pertained to powers and duties of the electrical board and derived from Code 1992, § 3.307.  
Sec. 5-103. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-27 , § 9, adopted Oct. 7, 2019, repealed § 5-103, which pertained to meetings and rules of the board and derived from Code 1992, § 3.308.  
Sec. 5-104. - Electrical inspector. 
(a)  The building official is designated as the electrical inspector responsible for enforcing and administering this article. He/she may designate any and all of his/her duties hereunder to member(s) of his/her department who shall serve then as electrical inspector(s) when enforcing the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Neither the building official nor any member of his/her department shall furnish labor, material or appliances for use in any manner in the electrical installation of a building or structure unless such person is otherwise eligible under the property and home owner exception as set forth in section 5-112. 
(Code 1992, § 3.309)  
Sec. 5-105. - Duties of the electrical inspector. 
The electrical inspector shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To enforce the provisions of this article and to bring before the electrical board or municipal court of the city or any other court of law, as appropriate, complaints against persons who violate any of its provisions. 
(2)  To enter any house or premises at any reasonable time with the knowledge of the owner or custodian to examine any electrical wiring or installation of electrical wiring, fixtures, or equipment. [4] 
(3)  To order the electric service disconnected when improper or defective wiring exists or where electrical construction or equipment has been installed without a permit after notice to the owner of the property on which the violation exists to correct the problem within 15 days from the date of the notice. 
(4)  To disconnect electrical service in cases of emergency when it is necessary for safety of persons or property or when electrical equipment may interfere with the work of the fire department. 
(5)  To attach to electrical equipment or electrical meters any official notice or seal to prevent the use of electricity. 
(6)  To order all persons to cease doing any work being done in violation of this article. 
(7)  To issue permits and notices as hereinafter set forth. 
(8)  To perform any other duties set forth in this article or which may be reasonably necessary to implement its provisions. 
(Code 1992, § 3.310) 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Should entry be denied, the electrical inspector may obtain entry by a search warrant issued as provided for by state law. 
 
Sec. 5-106. - Requirements for electricians' licenses. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to do electrical installations subject to this article unless he or she is licensed as a master electrician, or unless he or she is a journeyman electrician licensed under the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulations and doing electrical work under the supervision, direction and control of a licensed master electrician. 
(b)  When two or more master electricians are working on the same job, the supervision, direction, and control of the work shall be the responsibility of the person to whom the permit was issued. Any person holding a valid license need not procure a lesser license. 
(c)  The holder of a maintenance electrician license may, upon employment by one employer on a permanent basis, perform work of an electrical nature, restricted to maintenance, repair and replacement of electrical conductor or equipment pertaining to branch circuits or similar work within the confines of the building or premises of the employer without the supervision, direction, or control of a master electrician. The maintenance electrician is specifically limited to work on premises occupied by the employer. Maintenance electricians are prohibited from installing any additional wiring or equipment. 
(d)  A property owner may perform electrical work in a residence owned and occupied by him or her at his or her own residence, provided that all work performed shall be subject to permit, inspection, and approval in accordance with the terms of this article. The work may be performed only by the property owner. Any person who obtains a homeowner's permit and allows any other person to perform any electrical work under such permit shall be in violation of this article. 
(e)  Electrical work done by persons engaged by any electric utility company in the construction and maintenance of an electric utility system shall not be subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 3.311; Ord. No. 17-012, § 5-106(a), (d), 6-18-2007)  
Sec. 5-107. - Requirement for permits and inspections. 
(a)  Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to install or cause to be installed, or to permit any person to install any electrical wiring, fixtures or equipment within or on any building, structure or premises, publicly or privately owned, or to make any alterations, additions, changes or repairs within the scope of this article, without having procured a permit issued by the electrical inspection department. 
(b)  If a person is properly licensed or if no license is required, then no permit shall be required for the following work: 
(1)  Maintenance work or the making of minor repairs, such as the replacement of lamps, sockets, fuses, drop cords, snap switches or other similar items, or the replacement of any electrical device, circuit, or component with a part of similar nature, size, and application. 
(2)  The connection of portable electrical equipment to suitable permanently installed receptacles. 
(3)  Any work involved in the manufacture, testing, servicing, altering or repairing of electrical equipment or apparatus, except that this exemption shall not apply to any permanent wiring or permanent attachments. 
(Code 1992, § 3.317)  
Sec. 5-108. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Application for permits shall be made upon forms approved by the electrical board and provided by the electrical inspector, and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name of the applicant. 
(2)  The date the application is submitted. 
(3)  The license number of the applicant, if applicable. 
(4)  The exact address where the electrical work is to be done. 
(5)  The telephone number where the master electrician can be reached between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. 
(6)  An exact description of the work to be performed. 
(7)  Any other information deemed appropriate by the electrical board. 
(b)  Application for permits shall only be issued to the following persons: 
(1)  A master electrician licensed under the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulations. 
(2)  A person in the employment of the company he or she represents, designated by a master electrician to obtain electrical permits. 
(3)  A property owner who shall certify that the work for which application is being made will be performed by the applicant, with his or her own hands, in a residence being occupied, or to be occupied, by the applicant as his or her residence. 
(Code 1992, § 3.318; Ord. No. 17-012, § 5-112(b)(1), 6-18-2007)  
Sec. 5-109. - Subsequent permits for unfinished work. 
When the permitted electrician fails or refuses to complete electrical work, in whole or in part, on any electrical wiring or installation of fixtures or equipment, the electrical inspector may, in his/her sole discretion, waive the permit fee for a subsequent permit issued for the completion of the work described in the original permit. 
(Code 1992, § 3.319)  
Sec. 5-110. - Permit fees. 
(a)  Each application for a permit shall be remitted to the electrical inspector with the appropriate fee, except as provided in section 5-113, as determined from the fee schedule found in appendix A to this Code. 
(b)  The permit fee receipt and a copy of the permit application shall suffice as an electrical permit for the work being performed unless the building official has issued a stop work order or revoked such permit. 
(Code 1992, § 3.320)  
Sec. 5-111. - Issuance or denial of permit; terms and conditions of permit. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a permit, the permit holder may start the proposed job and make the installation described in his or her application, requesting inspections by the electrical inspector in the proper sequence as the work progresses. 
(b)  There shall only be one permit issued or outstanding at the same time on any one installation of electrical equipment, or other work covered by this article. 
(Code 1992, § 3.321)  
Sec. 5-112. - Inspections. 
(a)  The electrical inspector shall inspect and approve electrical work after rough-in and upon final completion of the work. If the electrical inspector deems that the complexity of the electrical work demands it, he/she may schedule additional inspections to be made at appropriate times during construction. When additional inspections are necessary, the electrical inspector shall notify the permit holder in writing of the required schedule and it shall be unlawful for the permit holder to fail to request inspections pursuant to the schedule. 
(b)  The permit holder shall notify the electrical inspector before 3:00 p.m. the day before an inspection is required. Interim inspection shall be made as soon as possible but not later than 24 hours after the call. In the event the electrical inspector fails to make the required inspection within the time allowed, the permit holder, upon written notice to the electrical board, shall proceed with his or her work as though the inspection had been made, and the work approved. However, nothing in this subsection shall relieve the permit holder from his/her responsibility to perform his or her work in accordance with all provisions of this article, and any work found by subsequent inspection to be not so performed shall be immediately removed or corrected. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsection (b) above, no electrical work for which a permit is required under this article shall be concealed in any manner from access or sight until it has been inspected and approved by the electrical inspector, and no electrical work shall be connected to a source of energy until such electrical work is completed and all outlets supplied with approved fixtures, devices or covers, and the electrical work has been finally approved for service. 
(d)  If the electrical installations, upon final inspection, meet all the requirements of this article, the electrical inspector shall issue a written certificate of approval to the permit holder to cover any work done by him/her and approved by the electrical inspector. 
(e)  In the event the electrical work fails to meet the requirements of this article, the permit holder shall be notified in writing by the electrical inspector of existing deficiencies either personally or by notice deposited in the U.S. Mail in Fredericksburg, Texas addressed to the address appearing on the permit application. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to correct the deficiencies and contact the inspector of reinspection within 45 days from the date of the notification. 
(f)  The electrical inspector shall make thorough inspection of all electrical work installed in the city and shall enforce all the provisions of this article by entering any building or premises, after presentation of proper credentials to the owner or person in control of the building or premises, at reasonable times. 
(g)  In the event the deficiencies discovered at the time of inspection or anytime thereafter, pose a threat to public safety, the safety of the occupants of the premises or potentially interfere with the work of the fire department in the opinion of the electrical inspector, the deficiencies shall be corrected or rendered harmless immediately following notification by the inspector. The electrical inspector may order that the power to the premises be disconnected until the deficiency is corrected. 
(Code 1992, § 3.322)  
Sec. 5-113. - Work standards. 
(a)  For all new residential construction, work standards shall be those set out in the National Electrical Code. 
(b)  For all new commercial construction, work standards shall be those set out in the National Electrical Code. Electrical conductors in structures used for commercial purposes other than apartments shall be installed in conduit, EMT, armored cable or ENT. 
(c)  Existing buildings. 
(1)  If an existing unsafe condition is discovered by the electrical inspector that, in the opinion of the inspector, requires immediate correction, he/she will proceed in accordance with section 5-105 or section 5-116, paragraph (g). 
(2)  If an existing building is condemned for any reason under the provisions of the building code of the city, the electrical wiring within that building and/or premises shall be required to be upgraded to new construction standards before electrical power is restored. 
(3)  Should the electric meter loop be judged inadequate at any time by the electrical inspector, that meter loop shall be required to be upgraded to the serving utility's connection policy standards. Electrical power once severed will only be reestablished when the meter loop installation meets the standards of the serving utility. 
(4)  Existing buildings electrically wired with less than three conductors (such as knob and tube, or two conductor romex) will be upgraded to National Electrical Code new construction standards when in the determination of the electrical inspector the cumulative value of electrical repair or alteration exceeds 50 percent of the estimated cost required to bring that electrical wiring to NEC standard or when a repair or alteration results in 50 percent or more of the substandard wiring being repaired or replaced. 
(5)  All buildings other than residential must be wired in conduit, EMT, armored cable or ENT. Existing buildings converted from residential to commercial use must be electrically conduit, EMT, armored cable or ENT. An inspection by the city electrical inspector and a certificate that the building's wiring is serviceable and in conduit, EMT, armored cable or ENT from a master electrician licensed in Fredericksburg is required before the building can be used for commercial purposes. If the occupancy of only a portion of the building is changed and that portion of the building is separated from the remainder of the building by fire wall which meets the requirements of the building code of the city, then only the portion of the building changed to commercial use need be made to conform. 
(Code 1992, § 3.323)  
Sec. 5-114. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person, corporation, partnership or other entity to request or permit electrical service connection to a specific site without having first obtained the certificate of approval as provided in section 5-116(d) herein for such site. Each day electric service is connected or continued without such permit shall be a separate violation hereof. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person, corporation, partnership or other entity to perform any work in violation of this article or to continue the performance of any work in violation of this article after notification from the electrical inspector that such work is in violation of this article. Notification may be as permitted in section 5-116(e) herein or by a notice, placed by the electrical inspector, or his/her department, at the worksite ordering the cessation of work. Each day such work is performed or continued after notification shall be a separate violation hereof. 
(c)  Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity, or agent for same, owning or controlling premises covered by this article, who permits electrical work covered by this article to be performed by any person not properly licensed shall be guilty of violation of this article, and in addition to other penalties imposed under the general provisions of the Fredericksburg City Code, such person or entity shall immediately, upon notification by the electrical inspector, cause all work performed by such person to be removed. 
(d)  Any person who performs electrical work covered by this article without a proper license shall be guilty of violation of this article, and in addition to other penalties imposed under the general provisions of the Code, shall be prohibited for a period of 90 days from the last date of the offense from applying for or being issued a license for the performance of electrical work within the city, or from applying for or being issued an electrical work permit. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to break, change, destroy, tear, mutilate, cover or otherwise deface or injure any official notice or seal posted by the electrical inspector or his/her department. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the following acts: 
(1)  To display or cause or permit to be displayed or to have in one's possession any license or permit for the doing of any electrical work, knowing it to be fictitious or to have been canceled, suspended, or altered. 
(2)  To lend or knowingly permit the use of any license or permit for the doing of any electrical work to any person not entitled to it under the provisions of this article. 
(3)  To display or to represent as one's own any license or permit for electrical work when the license has not been lawfully issued to the person displaying it. 
(4)  To fail or refuse to surrender to the electrical enforcement official on demand any license or permit for electrical work which has been suspended or canceled. 
(5)  To apply for or have in one's possession more than one current license or permit of the same type, from the city, as provided for in this article. 
(6)  To use a false or fictitious name or address in any application for any license provided for in this article, or any renewal or duplicate, or knowingly make a false statement or knowingly conceal a material fact or otherwise commit fraud in making any application. 
(7)  To perform any electrical work for which a license is required without the license required by this article, or while the license is suspended or cancelled. 
(8)  To perform electrical work in any manner in violation of any restrictions imposed on a restricted license. 
(9)  To falsely represent himself or herself as a licensed electrician of any class set out in this article or to use the words "electrical contractor," "master electrician," journeyman electrician," "maintenance electrician," or words of similar import or meaning on signs, cards, stationary, advertising or in any other manner whatever, unless such person is properly registered within the meaning of the words used as provided in this article. 
(g)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be punished upon conviction in municipal court, as provided in the general provisions in chapter 1 of this Code. Such punishment shall be in addition to any other penalty provided elsewhere in this article or other laws. 
(Code 1992, § 3.324)  
Secs. 5-115—5-148. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PLUMBING CODE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority concerning plumbing and house draining, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.012. 
 
Sec. 5-149. - International Plumbing Code adopted. 
The International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council, including Appendix "C", is adopted by reference as though it were copied herein in full. 
(Code 1992, § 3.501; Ord. No. 11-0146, § 3.501, 8-20-2001; Ord. No. 14-2006, 5-17-2004; Ord. No. 17-012, § 5-149, 6-18-2007; Ord. No. 23-013, 8-5-2013; Ord. No. 2019-27 , § 3, 10-7-2019)  
Sec. 5-150. - Amendments to the International Plumbing Code. 
The International Plumbing Code adopted in section 5-149 is hereby amended as follows: 
(1)  Section 605.3 of chapter 6 is hereby amended by adding subsection 605.3.2 as follows: 
605.3.2 — Polybutylene pipe is not permitted in any water system. Outside water service lines shall be Schedule 40 PVC, copper (Type K or L) or galvanized steel. Lines in and under building foundations shall be copper (Type K or L), galvanized steel, PE-AL-PE, or PEX-AL-PEX. 
(2)  Section 416.3 of chapter 4 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
416.3 — Waste outlets: Lavatories shall have waste outlets not less than 1¼-inch in diameter; provided, however, the connecting drain and trap shall be not less than two inches in diameter. Waste outlets may have open strainers or may be provided with stoppers. 
(3)  Chapter 8 sections amended and adopted. 
a.  Section 802.5 of chapter 8 is added to read as follows: 
802.5 — Air conditioning units: The condensate or waste from an air conditioning unit shall not be connected to the waste system piping. 
b.  Section 804.3 of chapter 8 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
804.3 — Air conditioning units: The condensate or waste from an air conditioning unit shall not be connected to the waste system piping. 
(4)  Section 607.3.1 of chapter 6 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
607.3.1 — Size of fixture supply: The minimum size of fixture supply pipe shall be as follows: 
Type of Fixture or Device 	Pipe Size (inches) 
Bath tubs 	½ 
Combination sink & tray 	½ 
Drinking fountain 	3/8
Dishwasher (domestic) 	½ 
Kitchen sink, residential 	½ 
Kitchen sink, commercial 	¾ 
Lavatory 	½ 
Laundry tray, 1, 2, or 3 compartments 	½ 
Shower (single head) 	½ 
Sinks (ser slop) 	½ 
Sinks flushing rim 	¾ 
Urinal (flush tank) 	½ 
Urinal (direct flush valve) 	¾ 
Water closet (tank type) 	½ 
Water closet (flush valve type) 	1 
Hose bibbs 	¾ 
Wall hydrants 	¾ 
Water Heaters 	¾ 
 
(5)  Sections 106.6.1 and 106.6.2 are hereby repealed. Section 106.1 is amended to read as follows: 
Permit fees shall be as established from time to time by ordinance. 
(6)  Section 708.3.1 of chapter 7 is hereby amended to read as follows: 
In addition to the upstream cleanout and the cleanout of the junction of the building drain and building sewer, cleanouts shall be located along the horizontal piping so that: 
a.  In pipe three inches nominal diameter or less, cleanouts shall be located at not more than 50-foot (15.2 meter) intervals. 
b.  In pipe four inches nominal diameter through six inches nominal diameter, cleanouts shall be located at not more than 80-foot (24.4 meter) intervals. 
(7)  As to new construction commenced on or after December 1, 1995, and as to all sewer lines which are replaced on or after December 1, 1995, a two-way cleanout will be located at the property line adjacent to where the building sewer attaches to the city tap. 
(Code 1992, § 3.502; Ord. No. 11-0146, § 3.500, 8-20-2001; Ord. No. 17-012, § 5-150(1), (3), (4), (7), (8), 6-18-2007)  
Secs. 5-151—5-168. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - GAS CODE 
 
Sec. 5-169. - International Fuel Gas Code adopted. 
The International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council, including Appendices "A", "B", "C", and "D", is adopted by reference as though it were copied herein in full. 
(Code 1992, § 3.601; Ord. No. 11-0146, § 3.601, 8-20-2001; Ord. No. 14-006, 5-17-2004; Ord. No. 17-012, § 5-169, 6-18-2007; Ord. No. 23-013, 8-5-2013; Ord. No. 2019-27 , § 4, 10-7-2019)  
Sec. 5-170. - Amendments to the International Fuel Gas Code. 
Section 109.2 of the International Fuel Gas Code is amended to read as follows: 
109.2 — Makeup of the board: There is hereby established a board, to be called the board of adjustment and appeals, which shall consist of five members. The same board shall be appointed by the city council. 
(Code 1992, § 3.602; Ord. No. 11-0146, § 3.602, 8-20-2001; Ord. No. 17-012, § 5-170, 6-18-2007)  
Secs. 5-171—5-193. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Home rule municipality may require buildings to comply with energy conservation standards, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.901. 
 
Sec. 5-194. - International Energy Conservation Code adopted by reference. 
Certain documents, three copies of which are on file in the office of the director of development services for the city being marked and designated as the International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council, are hereby adopted as the code of the City for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, Installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of the building envelope, mechanical, lighting and power systems in the City, and for providing the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, on file in the office of the City are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 12-011, § 3.2001, 8-19-2002; Ord. No. 23-013, 8-5-2013; Ord. No. 2019-27 , § 5, 10-7-2019)  
Sec. 5-195. - Inspections for compliance. 
The building inspectors of the city or other persons appointed by the building official shall be the persons to inspect for compliance with the terms of this article, and for such purpose are given all rights and powers set forth in said code for such purposes. 
(Ord. No. 12-011, § 3.2002, 8-19-2002)  
Sec. 5-196. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article shall be enforced in accordance with the provisions of section 1-6 of this Code of Ordinances. The application of such fines and penalties are non-exclusive and the provisions hereof may be enforced by the city through injunctive or any other judicial relief. Additionally, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the city for any property or to any person or entity until compliance is had with the requirements of the International Energy Conservation Code. 
(Ord. No. 12-011, § 3.2003, 8-19-2002; Ord. No. 14-006, 5-17-2004)  
Secs. 5-197—5-215. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - MECHANICAL CODE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— State license requirements for air conditioning and refrigeration contracting, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 1302.251 et seq.; municipal licensing and regulation of air conditioning and refrigeration contracting, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code §§ 1302.301—1302.303. 
 
Sec. 5-216. - International Mechanical Code adopted. 
The 2015 edition of the International Mechanical Code, with the exception of Appendix "B", is hereby adopted by reference as though it were copied herein in full. 
(Ord. No. 13-013, § 3.3001, 10-20-2003; Ord. No. 17-012, § 5-216, 6-18-2007; Ord. No. 23-013, 8-5-2013; Ord. No. 2019-27 , § 6, 10-7-2019)  
Sec. 5-217. - Mechanical contractors must be licensed. 
All mechanical contractors and any person performing HVAC, boiler and refrigeration work within the city limits shall comply with the terms of the International Mechanical Code and all licensing and insurance requirements of chapter 75 of the Texas Administrative Code as the same may be amended from time to time and as administered by the appropriate agency of the state. 
(Ord. No. 13-013, § 3.3002, 10-20-2003)  
Sec. 5-218. - Mechanical permits required. 
All mechanical contractors and any person performing HVAC, boiler, and refrigeration work within the city limits shall obtain a mechanical permit for such work prior to its commencement. 
(Ord. No. 13-013, § 3.3003, 10-20-2003)  
Sec. 5-219. - License and insurance requirements. 
Prior to issuance of a mechanical permit hereunder, the applicant therefor shall exhibit to the building official of the city, his or her state of Texas mechanical license and proof of insurance, as appropriate to the work to be performed. For convenience, contractors frequently performing work within the city may keep copies of current information on file with the building official. 
(Ord. No. 13-013, § 3.3004, 10-20-2003)  
Sec. 5-220. - Building official responsibility. 
The building official of the city shall be responsible for implementation, enforcement and oversight of the International Mechanical Code hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 13-013, § 3.3005, 10-20-2003; Ord. No. 14-006, 5-17-2004)  
Secs. 5-221—5-248. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - MISCELLANEOUS TECHNICAL CODES 
 
Sec. 5-249. - International Property Maintenance Code. 
The International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition, published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted by reference as though it were copied herein in full. 
(Ord. No. 14-006, art. 3.4000, 5-17-2004; Ord. No. 17-012, § 5-249, 6-18-2007; Ord. No. 23-013, 8-5-2013; Ord. No. 2019-27 , § 7, 10-7-2019)  
Sec. 5-250. - Board of appeals. 
The board of appeals as described in section 111, Means of Appeal, of the International Property Maintenance Code shall be the Board of Adjustment of the City of Fredericksburg. Such Board shall follow any special notices as set forth in the said International Property Maintenance Code, however its membership, meeting procedures shall be as currently composed. 
(Ord. No. 23-009, 6-17-2013)  
Sec. 5-251. - Alternate enforcement under Texas Local Government Code. 
As an additional or alternate remedy, the exercise of one of which shall not preclude the other, the City, in its discretion, may enforce this International Property Maintenance Code using the judicial abatement authority as set forth in Chapter 54 of the Texas Local Government Code to bring an action in a County Court at Law with jurisdiction if applicable or in a District Court. 
(Ord. No. 23-009, 6-17-2013)  
Sec. 5-252. - Performance Code. 
The Performance Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council, is adopted by reference as though it were copied herein In full. 
(Ord. No. 23-013, 8-5-2013; Ord. No. 2019-27 , § 8, 10-7-2019)  
Secs. 5-253—5-278. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - IMPACT FEES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Administration of impact fee, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 395.011 et seq. 
 
Sec. 5-279. - Title. 
This article shall be known, and may be cited, as the Impact Fee Ordinance of the City of Fredericksburg, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 8-058, § 11.801, 11-18-1997)  
Sec. 5-280. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms and words are defined as indicated below: 
Assessment means a determination of the amount of the impact fee in effect on the date or occurrence provided herein and is the maximum amount that can be charged per service unit of such development. No specific act by the political subdivision is required to impose an assessment. Additionally, an assessment shall be at the maximum allowable assessment but the actual impact fee shall be the amount to be collected as hereinafter set forth at the time of collection. Once a fee is paid for a service unit, no further fee may be collected as to that service unit, except as provided under section 5-287. 
Capital improvement means any of the following facilities that have a life expectancy of three or more years and are owned and operated by or on behalf of a political subdivision: water supply, treatment, and distribution facilities; wastewater collection and treatment facilities; whether or not they are located within the service area. 
Capital improvements plan means a plan for water and wastewater services, or including either. 
Ch. 395 means Texas Local Government Code ch. 395, and any amendment, codification, or recategorization of the statute. 
Credit means the amount of the reduction of an impact fee for fees, payment, or charges for, or construction of, the same type of facility, as is delineated on the relevant capital improvement plan. 
Developer means a property owner or owners, or their duly appointed representative or other person or entity, who proposes to develop a tract of land within the corporate limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city so as to increase the number of service units required for said tract of land. 
Director of building and planning means the department head of the city planning and building department or his designee; referred to as director in this article. 
Facility expansion means the expansion of the capacity of an existing facility that serves the same function as an otherwise necessary new capital improvement, in order that the existing facility may serve new development. The term does not include the repair, maintenance, modernization, or expansion of an existing facility to better serve existing development. 
Impact fee advisory committee means the committee heretofore established by the city and its successors appointed to advise and assist the city in the adoption, implementation, monitoring, and continuing evaluation of land use assumptions, capital improvements plan and impact fees as set forth in chapter 395, Texas Local Government Code. 
Platted or platting means platted in accordance with Texas Local Government Code ch. 212, or the subdivision or platting procedures of the city (final plat recorded) and includes all replats. 
Service area means the area within the city limits and within the extra territorial jurisdiction of the city which is served by capital improvement plan projects. Service areas for water and wastewater are shown on the maps attached hereto as exhibits "A" and "B", respectively. 
Standards means the service units for water meters as they are set forth in section 5-287 below. Wastewater service units shall be defined and calculated in the same manner. 
Wastewater facility means an improvement for the provision of wastewater collection and treatment, including, but not limited to, land or easements, treatment facilities, lift stations, or interceptor mains. 
Water facility means an improvement for the provision of water supply, treatment and distribution service, including, but not limited to, land or easements, water treatment facilities, water supply facilities or water distribution lines. 
(Ord. No. 8-058, § 11.802, 11-18-1997)  
Sec. 5-281. - Compliance with state law. 
Ch. 395 supplements this article to the extent that its provisions may be applicable hereto and, to such extent, its provisions are incorporated for all purposes herein. 
(Ord. No. 8-058, § 11.803, 11-18-1997)  
Sec. 5-282. - Capital improvements plan. 
The capital improvement plans identifying capital improvements or facility expansion for which impact fees may be assessed with regard to water and wastewater, which were considered at the December 3, 2007, public hearing, are attached as exhibits to the Impact Fee and Capital Improvement/Water and Wastewater Study prepared by Freese and Nichols, Inc. dated October 2007 (available in the office of the Director of Development Services) and are hereby approved and adopted. 
(Ord. No. 8-058, § 11.804, 11-18-1997; Ord. No. 17-029, § 5-282, 12-3-2007)  
Sec. 5-283. - Land use assumptions. 
The land use assumptions forming the basis of the determination of the impact fees, which were considered at the December 3, 2007, public hearing, are set forth in section 2.0 of the Impact Fee and Capital Improvement/Water and Wastewater Study prepared by Freese and Nichols, Inc. dated October 2007 (available in the office of the Director of Development Services) and are hereby approved and adopted. 
(Ord. No. 8-058, § 11.805, 11-18-1997; Ord. No. 17-029, § 5-283, 12-3-2007)  
Sec. 5-284. - Periodic updates. 
The land use assumptions and the capital improvements plan upon which the impact fees are based shall be updated at least every three years. Alternatively, the city council may, pursuant to state law, make a determination that no such updated is required. 
(Ord. No. 8-058, § 11.806, 11-18-1997)  
Sec. 5-285. - Establishment. 
Pursuant to Ch. 395, an impact fee is hereby established to be assessed and collected as set forth in this article against each service unit of new development within each service area to generate revenues for funding or recouping the costs of capital improvements or facility expansions for water and wastewater facilities necessitated by and attributable to such new development. 
(Ord. No. 8-058, § 11.807, 11-18-1997)  
Sec. 5-286. - Payment/enforcement. 
(a)  Payment of the impact fees assessed and collected pursuant to this article is made to the city to be held and managed in accordance with the further provisions hereof. 
(b)  Written agreements providing for the time and method of payment of the impact fee between the city and a developer of property for which there is a recorded plat shall prevail over any contrary provisions of this article. The city manager is hereby designated as the person authorized to act for the city in the matter of written agreements providing for the time or method of payment other than as provided for herein. 
(c)  If the impact fee, which is to be collected at the time of issuance of a building permit, has not been paid, the director of building and planning may order any work under the building permit stopped by notice in writing service on any persons engaged in doing or causing the work to be done, and any such persons shall immediately cease the work until authorized by the director to proceed with the work after payment of the impact fee. The city may also obtain an injunction to enforce payment if necessary. 
(d)  Without waiving any other remedies, the city may impose fines and penalties as set forth in this Code for violation of city ordinances. Each day a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(e)  Neither a building permit nor certificate of occupancy shall be issued or approved prior to payment of the impact fee, nor shall water or sewer service be commenced prior to payment of the impact fee, except as may be agreed by written agreement as provided in subsection (b) above. 
(Ord. No. 8-058, § 11.811, 11-18-1997)  
Sec. 5-287. - Calculation. 
(a)  In this section the term "calculated amount" means the number of service units multiplied by the amount of the impact fee to be collected per service unit; a separate calculation based upon the following criteria shall be made for water and for wastewater. 
(b)  The number of service units is determined at the time of assessment, where possible, or at the time of collection, if no plat, building permit, etc. is required. 
(c)  The number of service units shall be in accordance with the meter size required, pursuant to the table in subsection (d). 
(d)  Impact fees. See Appendix A of the Code of Ordinances. 
(e)  An impact fee is assessed and collected only for the utility service(s) utilized, be it water or wastewater. 
(Ord. No. 8-058, § 11.812, 11-18-1997; Ord. No. 17-029, § 5-287(d)(1)—(3), 12-3-2007; Ord. No. 23-015, 9-16-2013)  
Sec. 5-288. - Accounting/use. 
The impact fee is to be deposited in an interest bearing account that clearly identifies the type of capital facility within the service area for which the fee is imposed. Interest earned is credited to the account and is subject to the same restrictions or expenditures as the funds generating such interest. The impact fee and the interest earned thereon may be spent only for the purposes for which such fee was imposed as shown in the capital improvements plan and as permitted by state law as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 8-058, § 11.814, 11-18-1997)  
Sec. 5-289. - Credit and reimbursements. 
(a)  Where, in order to serve new development, there is required the construction of, contribution to, or dedication of, a capital improvement facility expansion identified in the capital improvements plans (exhibits "C" and "D" to the ordinance establishing this article) by the developer, the developer may enter into an agreement with the city whereby the developer is: 
(1)  Credited for such capital improvement or facility expansion against the impact fee otherwise due from the new development; or 
(2)  Reimbursed for all or a portion of the costs of such capital improvement or facility expansion from impact fees as received from other new developments that use such capital improvement or facility expansion within ten years of a developers original expenditure. 
(b)  A developer is entitled to a credit against any category of impact fee as may be provided in a written agreement between the city and the developer. 
(Ord. No. 8-058, § 11.815, 11-18-1997)  
Sec. 5-290. - Payment of fees for affordable housing—Apartments—Multifamily residential. 
Impact fees will be paid by the City, for any unit of rental housing within an apartment development—multi-family residential which qualifies as Affordable Housing under 42 U.S. Code Section 12745 (a), and for which Federal Tax Credits have been granted, under the following conditions: 
(1)  An application for such payment shall be filed with the City Development Department on forms promulgated by the Director of Development. 
(2)  Proof that the housing units qualify for rental under 42 U.S. Code Section 12745 (a), and that the Federal Tax credits for the same have been granted for the specific number of qualifying units must be submitted along with the application. 
(3)  The units must continue to qualify for rental under said U.S. Code section for 30 years, and the City shall file a statement to such affect in the Deed Records of Gillespie County, Texas. In the event the units are not so maintained for the thirty-year period, the City will be paid for the fees paid, and the then owner of the property shall be responsible therefor, and the same shall constitute a lien against the property for which the waivers were granted. 
(4)  With regard to an apartment development containing both qualifying and non-qualifying units, the payment of fees will be determined on a percentage basis which the fee for the number of qualifying units bears to the total fee which would be payable if there were no qualifying units. 
(Ord. No. 25-002, 2-2-2015; Ord. No. 25-009, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 5-291. - Waiver of impact fees for affordable housing. 
(a)  The City may waive an impact fee for any service unit that would qualify as affordable housing under 42 U.S.C. Section 12745, as amended, once the service unit is constructed. If a waiver is granted under this Section, and affordable housing as defined by 42 U.S.C. Section 12745, as amended, is not constructed, the City may assess an impact fee against the service unit at any time during the development approval or building process or after the building process, if an impact fee was not already assessed. 
(b)  An application for a waiver under this Section must be submitted to the City on a form promulgated by the Director of Development Services. All applications submitted under this Section shall be include copies of documentary evidence to establish that the service unit will qualify as affordable housing under 42 U.S.C. Section 12745, as amended, once the service unit is constructed. 
(Ord. No. 28-023, § 1, 10-18-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 28-023, § 1, adopted Oct. 18, 2018, amended § 5-291 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former §5-291, pertained to payment of fees for affordable housing—single family residential, and derived from Ord. No. 25-009, 6-1-2015.  
Secs. 5-292—5-311. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Local governments must adopt ordinances necessary for jurisdiction to qualify for National Flood Insurance Program, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.3145; political subdivision to comply with federal requirements, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.315. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 5-312. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
Development means any man-made change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building (i) built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zones V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters. In the case of Zones V1-30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building," even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls met the standards of section 60.3(e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study is the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map. 
Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
Flood proofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
Floodway (regulatory floodway) means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminary determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminary determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of interior; 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior; or 
b.  Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs. 
(5)  Designated as a rated structure under the history preservation ordinance of the city. 
Levee means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary conditions or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Variance is a grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this article when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. (For full requirements see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Code 1992, § 3.702; Ord. No. 11-014, § 3.702, 8-6-2001)  
Sec. 5-313. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the City of Fredericksburg. 
(Code 1992, § 3.703(A))  
Sec. 5-314. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
(a)  The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for the City of Fredericksburg," dated on or about October 19, 2001, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Boundary-Floodway Maps (FIRM and FBFM) and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. Additionally, the city council may by resolution declare specific areas to be areas of specific flood hazards and floodways, subject to the provisions of article XI, following an engineering report recommending such inclusion. 
(b)  Areas within the city that are subject to flooding within the 100 year frequency which has been established as the benchmark for inclusion of an area within the floodplain areas of the city, but which areas are not necessarily along the waterways of the city, and which are not included in the official floodplain maps of the city, which are on file with the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), are subject to the same building and use restrictions which apply to areas lying within the floodplain maps which are on file with FEMA. 
(Code 1992, § 3.703(B); Ord. No. 8-069, 7-20-1998)  
Sec. 5-315. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 3.703(C))  
Sec. 5-316. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Code 1992, § 3.703(D))  
Sec. 5-317. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Code 1992, § 3.703(E))  
Sec. 5-318. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Code 1992, § 3.703(F))  
Sec. 5-319. - Warning and disclaimer or liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision made thereunder. 
(Code 1992, § 3.703(G); Ord. No. 11-014, § 3.703, 8-6-2001)  
Secs. 5-320—5-341. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 5-342. - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
The building official or his or her designee is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Code 1992, § 3.704(A))  
Sec. 5-343. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Review permit application to determine whether proposed building site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this article. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)  Ensure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with this article, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this article. 
(9)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
(10)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA (Conditional Letter of Map Revision). 
(Code 1992, § 3.704(B))  
Sec. 5-344. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(3)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 5-365; 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
(5)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 5-343. 
(6)  Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors: 
a.  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
b.  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
c.  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
d.  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
e.  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
f.  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
g.  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
h.  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
i.  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; and 
j.  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance for that area. 
(Code 1992, § 3.704(C))  
Sec. 5-345. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The appeal board, which shall be the board of adjustment of the city as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this division. 
(f)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 5-344 of this article have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(g)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this division, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article. 
(h)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(j)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
(1)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(2)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.  Showing a good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(3)  Any application to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(k)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that: 
(1)  The criteria outlined in this section are met; and 
(2)  The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(l)  The appeal board (board of adjustment) shall utilize the same administrative procedures regarding application deadlines, organization of the board, quorums, conduct of meetings and the like as it uses when sitting as a board of adjustment in zoning matter; provided, however, that a majority of the members present and voting shall be required for actions of the board. 
(Code 1992, § 3.704(D); Ord. No. 11-014, § 3.704, 8-6-2001)  
Secs. 5-346—5-363. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
 
Sec. 5-364. - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Code 1992, § 3.705(A))  
Sec. 5-365. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 5-314, subsection 5-343(8); or subsection 5-366(c), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in section 5-344, is satisfied. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.  Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subparagraph 4b. of this section be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation, or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(5)  Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either: 
a.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
b.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
c.  Meet the permit requirements of section 5-344, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in subparagraph 5b. of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(Code 1992, § 3.705(B))  
Sec. 5-366. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with this chapter. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet development permit requirements of sections 5-315, 5-344, and the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which are greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 5-314 or subsection 5-343(8) of this chapter. 
(d)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(Code 1992, § 3.705(C))  
Sec. 5-367. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 5-314, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures: 
a.  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 5-344, are satisfied. 
(4)  Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Code 1992, § 3.705(D))  
Sec. 5-368. - Floodways. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 5-314, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If the above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this division. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM and floodway revision through FEMA. 
(Code 1992, § 3.705(E); Ord. No. 11-014, § 3.705, 8-6-2001)  
Secs. 5-369—5-394. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 5-395. - Penalties for noncompliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this article by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not more than $500.00 for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. Each day any person or entity fails to comply with the article or any of its requirements shall constitute a separate offense hereunder. 
(Code 1992, § 3.706; Ord. No. 11-014, § 3.706, 8-6-2001)  
Sec. 5-396. - Regulations. 
The regulations set forth in this article shall be effective on or about October 19, 2001, upon the issuance by the Federal Emergency Management Agency of the final flood insurance study for the city. 
(Code 1992, § 3.707; Ord. No. 11-014, § 3.707, 8-6-2001)  
Secs. 5-397—5-420. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - LANDSCAPING 
 
Sec. 5-421. - Purpose. 
The purpose of landscaping and screening requirements is to improve certain setback and yard areas, including off-street vehicular parking and open-lot sales and service areas, for all uses other than one family, duplex, triplex or fourplex residential uses in Fredericksburg and to aid in stabilizing the environment's ecological balance by contributing to the process of air purification, oxygen regeneration, groundwater recharge and stormwater runoff retardation, while at the same time aiding in noise, glare and heat abatement, and to protect and preserve the appearance, character and value of surrounding neighborhoods. 
(Code 1992, § 3.901)  
Sec. 5-422. - Definitions. 
The following specific definitions shall apply to the landscaping and screening regulations contained in this article: 
Landscaping. Landscaping shall consist of any of the following or combination thereof: materials such as, but not limited to, grass, ground covers, flowers, vines, hedges, trees, native plant materials, planters, brick, stone or natural forms, water forms, aggregate or other landscape features, but not including the use of smooth concrete or asphalt. The use of brick, stone, aggregate or other inorganic materials shall not predominate over the use of organic plan materials. 
Shrubs. Self-supporting, woody, evergreen species as normally grown in Gillespie County. 
Dripline. The periphery of the area beneath a tree that would be encompassed by perpendicular lines dropped from the farthest edges of the crown of the tree. 
(Code 1992, § 3.902)  
Sec. 5-423. - Landscaping requirements for certain yard areas and off-street parking. 
(a)  Areas to which this section applies. All areas used for the display or parking of any and all types of vehicles, boats or heavy construction equipment, whether such vehicles, boats or equipment are self-propelled or not (here referred to as "off-street parking areas"), and all areas upon which vehicles traverse the property as a function of the primary use (hereinafter referred to as "other vehicular use areas"), including, but not limited to, activities of a drive-in nature such as filling stations, grocery and dairy stores, banks and restaurants shall conform to the minimum landscaping requirements herein provided. Exceptions include: areas used for parking or other vehicular uses under, on or within buildings; parking areas and other vehicular use areas serving one family, duplex, triplex or fourplex uses, as normally such residential areas are voluntarily landscaped; and expansions and changes in use of existing improved properties. 
(b)  Installation. All landscaping shall be installed in a good workmanship-like manner and according to accepted good planting procedures with the quality of plant materials as herein described. All elements of landscaping, except plant materials other than hedges, shall be installed so as to conform to all other applicable ordinances and city codes. Landscaped areas shall require protection from vehicular encroachment as herein provided. 
(c)  Maintenance. The owners, tenants and their agents, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping provided for under this article. All landscaping shall be maintained in good condition so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance and shall be kept free from refuse and debris. All landscaped areas shall be provided with either a readily available water supply with at least one outlet located within 100 feet of all plant materials to be maintained, or an underground sprinkler system. Landscaped areas adjacent to pavement areas shall be protected with curbs or equivalent barricades. 
(d)  Plant materials. 
(1)  Crowns. Trees shall be species having an average mature spread of crown of at least 15 feet and having a trunk(s) which can be maintained in a clear condition over five feet of clear wood. Trees having an average mature spread crown less than 15 feet may be substituted by grouping the same so as to create the equivalent of a 15 foot crown spread. 
(2)  Species. Tree species shall be a minimum of seven feet overall height immediately after planting. 
(3)  Shrubs and hedges. Shrubs shall be a minimum of 15 inches in height when measured immediately after planting. Except as provided for herein, hedges shall be planted and maintained so as to form a continuous, unbroken, solid, visual screen within a reasonable time after planting. 
(4)  Vines. Vines shall be a minimum of 24 inches in height immediately after planting and may be used in conjunction with fences, screens or walls to meet physical barrier requirements as herein specified. 
(5)  Ground covers. Ground covers used in lieu of grass, in whole or in part, shall be planted in such a manner as to present the appearance of reasonably complete coverage within three months after planting. 
(6)  Lawn grass. Grass areas shall be planted in species normally grown as permanent lawns in Fredericksburg. Grass areas may be sodded, plugged, sprigged or seeded, except that solid sod shall be used in swales or other areas subject to erosion. In areas where other than solid sod or grass seed is used, rye grass seed shall be sown for immediate effect and protection until coverage is otherwise achieved. 
(e)  Required landscaping adjacent to public rights-of-way. On the site of a building or open lot use providing an off-street parking area or other vehicular use area, where such area will not be entirely screened visually by an intervening building or structure from any abutting right-of-way, excluding dedicated alleys, there shall be provided landscaping between such area and such right-of-way, as follows: 
(1)  A strip of land at least five feet in depth, located between the abutting right-of-way and the off-street parking area or other vehicular use area which is exposed to an abutting right-of-way, shall be landscaped. Such landscaping shall include one tree for each 50 lineal feet or fraction thereof of right-of-way (street) frontage. Such trees shall be located between the abutting right-of-way and off-street parking area or other vehicular use area and shall be planted in a plating area of at least 25 square feet, with each dimension at least five feet in length. In addition, a hedge, wall or other durable landscape barrier of at least two feet in height shall be placed along the perimeter of such landscaped strip. If such durable barrier is of nonliving material, for each ten feet thereof, one shrub or vine shall be planted abutting such barrier but need not be spaced ten feet apart. Such shrubs or vines shall be planted along the street side of such barrier, unless they are of sufficient height at the time of planting to be readily visible over the top of such barrier. The remainder of the required landscape areas shall be landscaped with grass, ground cover or other landscape treatment, excluding paving. 
(2)  All property other than the required landscaped strip lying between the right-of-way and off-street parking area or other vehicular use area shall be landscaped with grass or other ground cover. 
(3)  Necessary accessways from the public right-of-way through all such landscaping shall be permitted to service the parking or other vehicular use areas. 
(f)  Perimeter landscaping related to abutting properties. On the site of a building or structure or open lot use providing off-street parking areas or other vehicular use area, where such areas will not be entirely screened visually by an intervening building or structure from abutting property, that portion of such area not so screened shall be provided with a wall or fence or hedge or other durable landscape barrier, not greater than eight feet in height nor less than 3½ feet in height, to form a continuous screen between the off-street parking area or other vehicular use area and such abutting property. Such landscape barrier shall be located between the common lot line and the off-street parking area or other vehicular use area exposed to the abutting property, provided the purpose of screening the off-street parking areas and other vehicular use areas is accomplished. If such barrier consists all or in part of plant materials, such plant materials shall be planted in a planting strip of not less than 2½ feet in width. In addition, one tree shall be provided for each 75 lineal feet of such landscape barrier or fractional part thereof. Such trees shall be located between the common lot line and the off-street parking area or other vehicular use area. Each such tree shall be planted in at least 25 square feet of planting area, with each dimension at least five feet in length. Each such planting area shall be landscaped with grass, ground cover or other landscape material, excluding paving, in addition to the required tree. The provisions of this subsection shall not be applicable in the following situations: 
(1)  Where a property line abuts a dedicated alley, or to those portions of the property that are opposite a building or other structure located on the abutting property. 
(2)  Where a proposed parking area or other vehicular use abuts an existing hedge, wall or other durable landscape barrier on an abutting property, said existing barrier may be used to satisfy the landscape barrier requirements of this subsection, provided that such existing barrier meets all applicable standards of this article and protection of hedges against vehicular encroachment is provided. 
(3)  Where the abutting property is zoned for business uses, only the tree provision with its planting area as prescribed in this section shall be required; however, the number of trees may be reduced to one tree for each 125 lineal feet or fractional part thereof. 
(g)  Parking area interior landscaping. 
(1)  Off-street parking areas shall have at least ten square feet of interior landscaping for each parking space, excluding those spaces abutting a perimeter for which landscaping is required by other sections hereof and excluding all parking spaces which are directly served by an aisle abutting and running parallel to such a perimeter. In addition, other vehicular use areas shall have one square foot of landscaped area for each 100 square feet or fraction thereof of paved area for the first 50,000 square feet, excluding the first 5,000 square feet of paved area, plus one square foot of landscaped area for each 200 square feet or fraction thereof of paved area for all paved area over 50,000 square feet; provided, however, in areas zoned for industrial use, these requirements shall be reduced by 50 percent. Where the property contains both parking areas and other vehicular use areas, the two types of areas may be separated for the purposes of determining the other vehicular use by first multiplying the total number of parking spaces by 400 and subtracting the resulting figure from the total square footage of the paved area. Each separate landscaped area shall contain a minimum of 50 square feet, with each dimension at least five feet in length, and shall include at least one tree having a clear trunk at least five feet in height, with the remaining area adequately landscaped with shrubs, ground cover or other authorized landscaping material not to exceed three feet in height. 
(2)  The total number of trees shall be not less than one for each 100 square feet or fraction (over one-half) thereof of required interior landscaped area. Such landscaped areas shall be located in such a manner as to divide and break up the expanse of paving. 
(3)  In other vehicular use areas, where the strict application of this section will seriously limit the function of such area, the required landscaping may be located near the perimeter of the paved area including such perimeters which may be adjacent to a building on the site. Such interior landscaping that is relocated as herein provided shall be in addition to the perimeter landscaping requirements of subsection (e) of this section. 
(4)  The front of a vehicle may encroach upon any interior landscaped area where such area is at least 3½ feet in depth adjacent to the abutting parking space and protected by wheel stops or curbing. Two feet of such landscaped area may be part of the required depth of each abutting parking space. 
(5)  Parking lot storm drainage shall be designed so as to direct water from the paved areas to the landscaped areas to allow absorption into the permeable ground prior to discharge into a public street or storm drainage system. This should be accomplished in a manner not likely to result in erosion. 
(h)  Traffic sign distance for landscaping adjacent to public rights-of-way and points of access. When an accessway intersects a public right-of-way, all landscaping within the triangular areas described below shall provide unobstructed cross visibility at a level between three feet and six feet in height; provided, however, trees having limbs and foliage trimmed in such a manner that no limbs or foliage extend into the cross-visibility area may be allowed if they are located so as not to create a traffic hazard. Landscaping, other than grass or ground cover, shall not be located within three feet from the edge of any accessway pavement. The triangular areas above referred to are: 
(1)  The areas of property on each side of an accessway formed by the intersection of the accessway and the public right-of-way line, with two sides of each triangle being ten feet in length from the point of intersection along the accessway and public right-of-way lines respectively, and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the two other sides. 
(2)  The area of property located at a corner formed by the intersection of two or more public rights-of-way, with two sides of the triangular area being 25 feet in length along the public right-of-way lines, measured from their point of intersection, and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the other two lines. 
(i)  Landscape preservation. The existing natural landscape character (especially native oaks, elms and pecan trees) shall be preserved to the extent reasonable and feasible. In an area containing a stand of trees, the owner and developer shall use best good faith efforts to preserve such trees. In determining whether there is compliance with this section, the building official shall consider topographical constraints on design, drainage, access and egress, utilities, and other factors reasonably related to the health, safety and welfare of the public which necessitated disturbance of the land's natural character, the nature and quality of the landscaping installed to replace the existing natural landscaping, and such other factors as may be relevant and proper. Indiscriminate clearing or stripping of the natural vegetation on a lot is prohibited. 
(Code 1992, § 3.903)  
Sec. 5-424. - Credits toward landscaping requirements. 
In instances where healthy plant material exists on a site prior to its development, in whole or in part, for purposes of off-street parking or other vehicular use areas, the building official may adjust the application of the herein-described standards to allow credit for such plant material if, in his/her opinion, such an adjustment is in keeping with and will preserve the intent of this article. Any credit shall be in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Each square foot of landscaped area which is permeable and within the area encompassed by the dripline of a tree of at least four inches in trunk diameter, measured four feet above the ground level, shall count 1½ square feet of landscaped area for the purpose of satisfying the minimum requirements of subsection 5-423(f) of this article. 
(2)  Each square foot of landscaped area which is permeable and within the area encompassed by the dripline of a tree of at least eight inches in trunk diameter, measured four feet above the ground level, shall count as two square feet of landscaped area for the purpose of satisfying the minimum requirements of subsection 5-423(f) of this article. 
(3)  The foregoing credits shall be subject to the following limitations and conditions: 
a.  Tree dripline area shall not qualify for credit under this section if: 
1.  Less than one-half of the dripline is permeable cover. 
2.  There have been any damaging changes in the original grade of the dripline under the tree. 
b.  The total calculated landscaped credit around the tree shall be limited to the total square footage of area within the dripline. 
c.  Neither overlapping dripline areas nor areas contiguous to the dripline areas which overlap shall be counted twice. 
d.  Permeable paving shall be considered a permeable cover. 
(Code 1992, § 3.904)  
Sec. 5-425. - Screening requirements and standards. 
(a)  Other areas not covered by subsection 5-423(e) of this article shall be subject to requirements of this section. Minimum landscaped screening requirements shall be provided in the following situations: 
(1)  Multiple-family (greater than four units) and mobile home uses along property lines abutting a single-family district. 
(2)  Commercial use along property lines abutting any residential district. 
(3)  Civic use along property lines abutting a more restrictive district in which the use is not permitted. 
(4)  Surrounding multiple-family (greater than four units), commercial, industrial or civic trash storage areas or support services systems. 
(b)  Screening shall be provided by installation and maintenance thereafter of a visual screen or buffer of one of the following types: 
(1)  A solid wood and/or masonry fence or wall at least six feet but not greater than eight feet in height. 
(2)  A hedge-like screen of evergreen plant materials capable of attaining a minimum height of eight feet at maturity, planted initially at a minimum of four foot centers and with a minimum height of 3½ feet. 
(Code 1992, § 3.905)  
Sec. 5-426. - Other applicable regulations. 
The provisions of this article shall be subject to other applicable regulations, where such regulations are more restrictive and not otherwise inconsistent with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 3.906)  
Sec. 5-427. - Plan approval. 
(a)  Prior to issuance of a building permit, a site plan of the tract involved shall be submitted to the building official. The site plan shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The date, scale, north point, title and name of owner of the tract. 
(2)  The location of existing boundary lines and dimensions of the tract. 
(3)  The approximate centerline of existing water courses; the approximate location of significant drainage features; and the location and size of existing and proposed streets and alleys, existing and proposed utility easements on or adjacent to the lot, and existing and proposed sidewalks adjacent to the street. 
(4)  The location, size and type (tree, shrub, ground cover or grass) of proposed landscaping in each proposed landscaped area; and the location and size of proposed landscaped areas. 
(5)  The location and species of existing trees in the street yard and parking lots having trunks four inches or larger in diameter and the approximate size of their crowns. 
(6)  Information necessary for verifying whether the required minimum landscaped area has been met under this section and whether a particular area qualified for credit under this article. 
(7)  Statement as to the ratio of the total calculated impervious area to total lot area. 
(8)  An indication of how the applicant plans to protect the existing trees, which are proposed to be retained, from damage during construction. 
(9)  The location of sprinklers and water outlets. 
(10)  The certification of a professional engineer, surveyor, landscape architect, or full-time professional building designer that the plans satisfy the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The building official shall not issue a building permit or certificate of occupancy unless the requirements of this article are satisfied. 
(Code 1992, § 3.907)  
Sec. 5-428. - Graphic application of landscaping requirements. 
The graphic diagram, shown on Exhibit "A" of the ordinance creating this section,* depicts the requirements of this article. This diagram is designed as a guide only and shall not replace the other provisions of this article. Where there is a discrepancy or conflict between the diagram and the other provisions of this article, the other provisions of this article shall prevail. 
(Code 1992, § 3.908) 
Note— The graphic diagram Exhibit "A" has not been reproduced herein but is on file and available for inspection in the appropriate city offices.  
Secs. 5-429—5-454. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIII. - STORMWATER CONTROL 
 
Sec. 5-455. - Purpose and applicability. 
(a)  The growth in and around the City of Fredericksburg and the associated development and construction of buildings, paved surfaces, roads and other improvements has altered in the past and continues to alter the natural flow of surface waters on the land, which together with the construction of gutters, culverts, drains and channels for the carrying off of surface waters has both increased the quantity of stormwater and amplified the peak flow rates of runoff, thus leading to present and potential flooding of property and homes, dangerous flows within and over public roadways and streets, and soil and channel erosion. 
(b)  It is the intention of the city council to protect the health and safety of the citizens and visitors of the community and to prevent damage to private property and public facilities through the proper design and construction of both on-site and regional stormwater detention facilities that prevent or adequately reduce increases in peak flow rates of runoff that may otherwise increase the risk of flooding and the associated risk of public endangerment, property damage and erosion. 
(c)  It is also the intention of the city council to protect the health and safety of the citizens and visitors of the community and to prevent damage to private property and public facilities through the installation and use of temporary and permanent erosion control practices that prevent or adequately reduce increases in erosion and siltation that may otherwise increase the risk of flooding and the associated risk of public endangerment and property damage by clogging and/or partial filing of constructed or natural drainageways as well as drainage structures and detention ponds. 
(d)  It is the intention of the city council, through this article, to establish a method of maintaining natural flowage of water and stormwater detention both through the establishment of requirements for individual property owners who develop their property and through the design and construction of regional stormwater detention facilities so that, where practical, the most effective protection from flooding may be accomplished. 
(e)  It is the intention of the city council to establish a regional stormwater detention pond program for the design and construction of regional stormwater detention facilities so that, where practical, the most cost-effective protection from flooding may be accomplished. 
(f)  This article shall apply to all property within the corporate city limits and the extra-territorial jurisdiction (ETJ) of the city unless otherwise stated. 
(g)  Subsections 5-456(b) and (c) and section 5-458 of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Single family or duplex residential lots, of whatever size, which exist as such and are zoned as such (inside the city limits) or are restricted as such (outside the city limits) prior to the adoption of this article. This exemption shall not apply in cases where there is a prior agreement between owners or developers and the city which addresses drainage issues; in which case, the terms of the agreement shall control. 
(2)  Residential lots (restricted as such) in the extra territorial jurisdiction of the city that contain no more impervious ground cover than 20 percent of the gross lot surface area exclusive of any area within the 100 year flood plain. 
(3)  Single lots, multi-family or non-residential lots of one-half acre or less which exist as such and are zoned as such (inside the city) or are restricted as such (outside the city), prior to the adoption of this article. 
(4)  Entire subdivisions or resubdivisions containing one-half total acre or less or resubdivisions resulting in less total number of lots than the original subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 9-001, § 3.1100, 2-1-1999)  
Sec. 5-456. - Standards and requirements for stormwater detention. 
(a)  The placing of fill material or the construction of impervious cover or construction or placement of any other structure on any property subject to this division, or the performance of any excavation or grading in a manner which alters the surface flow of water across said property in a manner which damages any adjacent property is prohibited except as provided in subsection (c) below. 
(b)  No final subdivision plat, subdivision construction plan, site plan or building permit shall be approved by the city unless it can be demonstrated by the owner or developer of such property that the proposed development or improvement will not result in the additional identifiable adverse flooding of other property or public facilities, including roadways. This is to be demonstrated by a certified professional engineer's submittal of sufficient data and calculations acceptable to the city. 
(c)  The alteration of the flow of surface water shall be permitted upon accomplishment by the owner or developer of property subject to this article of one of the following: 
(1)  Design and construction of an on-site stormwater detention facility, or facilities, by the land owner or developer which limits the peak flood flows from the proposed development to the existing peak flood flows from the subject tract. 
(2)  Construction of, or participation in the construction of, off-site drainage improvements, such as storm inlets, storm sewers, culverts, channel modifications, land filling, and/or other drainage facilities such that the peak flood flows for fully-developed watershed conditions from the watershed area in which the proposed development is located will be sufficiently and safely passed without flooding of adjacent and downstream property and roadways. 
(3)  Design and construction of the development utilizing limited impervious cover, infiltration of runoff from impervious cover via flow through pervious areas, and/or grass-lined swales or channels such that these measures result in a minimal increase in peak flood flows from the development. 
(d)  Acceptance of requests from land owners or developers to meet the stormwater detention requirements through measures listed in subsections 5-456(c)(2) and 5-456(c)(3) above in lieu of the requirement of subsection 5-456(c)(1) above is solely at the discretion of the city. The construction or acceptance of the same by the city shall not relieve the owner of responsibility under civil law to adjacent and down stream properties. 
(e)  Acceptance by the city of on-site stormwater detention plans will be based on the suitability and adequacy of the engineering and technical design of the proposed stormwater detention facilities, as described in section 5-459 below. 
(Ord. No. 9-001, § 3.1101, 2-1-1999)  
Sec. 5-457. - Regional detention pond program. 
A regional stormwater detention pond program will be established by the city at its sole discretion in areas where it determines that regional solutions are preferable to site-by-site solutions. The city will design and direct construction of, or otherwise facilitate construction of, regional stormwater detention ponds in order to prevent increases in and, if practical, to reduce peak flows of stormwater run off. 
(Ord. No. 9-001, § 3.1102, 2-1-1999)  
Sec. 5-458. - Standards and requirements for erosion/sediment controls. 
(a)  No final subdivision plat, subdivision construction plan, site plan or building permit for any property containing a total of five acres or more shall be approved by the city unless the plans for the proposed development include temporary and permanent erosion and sedimentation control measures such that siltation of downstream drainageways are minimized. 
(b)  The above requirements shall be accomplished through a combination of the following practices: 
(1)  Installation of silt fences and rock berms before and during construction in order to reduce on-site soil erosion and provide temporary capture of sediment. 
(2)  Temporary and/or permanent revegetation of bare ground in order to stabilize distributed soil at the earliest practical date. 
(3)  Construction of on-site stormwater detention facilities by the land owner or developer in a manner such that detention ponds function as temporary sedimentation basins until permanent revegetation of the subject tract is accomplished. 
(4)  Other measures which may be necessary to control erosion and sedimentation on a site-by-site basis. 
(Ord. No. 9-001, § 3.1103, 2-1-1999)  
Sec. 5-459. - Additional standards for approval. 
(a)  A registered professional engineer, licensed in the state and qualified and experienced in the design and operation of stormwater detention ponds and related stormwater management facilities, shall perform the hydraulic and structural design of stormwater detention ponds and related stormwater management facilities, including the development of engineering and technical information required for evaluation by the city. 
(b)  All design and technical information necessary to thoroughly evaluate the suitability and adequacy of the engineering and technical design of proposed on-site stormwater detention facilities and, if proposed, off-site facilities shall be provided to the city for review. All detention and runoff calculations, including computer model simulations, if used, shall be provided. The city's review shall be based upon the most current flood protection planning study. 
(c)  All on-site stormwater detention facilities shall be designed to adequately and safely pass all stormwater inflows, including flood flows and runoff from upstream and adjacent properties that have natural and/or existing overland flows toward and onto the subject tract. The on-site stormwater detention facilities should not impound stormwater onto or cause backwater to inundate any upstream or adjacent properties in excess of existing conditions. 
(d)  On-site stormwater detention facilities shall not be placed such that they encroach into the regulatory 100-year floodplain as established by the city, Gillespie County, and/or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, unless it can be satisfactorily demonstrated to the city through the use of hydraulic modeling that such encroachment will not cause any rise in the 100-year flood level on other off-site properties or that increase in the 100-year flood level caused by such encroachment will occur entirely onsite on the owner's or developer's property. 
(e)  Additional engineering and technical rules and guidance with respect to the application and review of the stormwater detentions requirements of this article will be provided by the city within a drainage criteria manual. 
(f)  All design and technical information necessary to thoroughly evaluate the suitability and adequacy of proposed erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be provided to the city for review. 
(g)  Additional rules, guidance and requirements with respect to the review and acceptance of temporary and permanent erosion and sedimentation control plans may be provided by the city within a drainage criteria manual. 
(Ord. No. 9-001, § 3.1104, 2-1-1999)  
Sec. 5-460. - Director of public works. 
All references in this article to the city shall mean the director of public works for the city or his delegate, whose determination of the adequacy of data and plans shall be final. The city may, at its discretion and cost, have all plans and data submitted under this article reviewed by its own consultant(s), and may utilize the recommendation of such consultant(s) in its determinations. 
(Ord. No. 9-001, § 3.1105, 2-1-1999)  
Sec. 5-461. - Enforcement. 
This article shall be enforced by any legal means available to the city, including fines as provided in this Code, the obtaining of injunctions against the placement of improvements in violation of the terms of this article. Enforcement by any one method shall not preclude enforcement by any other method. 
(Ord. No. 9-001, § 3.1106, 2-1-1999)  
Secs. 5-462—5-469. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XIV. - DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 5-470. - Definitions. 
(a)  Construction Design Elements. Architectural style, Architectural Materials, Architectural colors, Architectural features, Massing and Scale, Signage, Building height, Setbacks and Frontage, Landscaping, Lighting, Service Areas, parking and access, Drainage and stormwater, and Streetscape. 
(b)  Design Guidelines for the City of Fredericksburg. Written strategies, features or techniques adopted by the City of Fredericksburg, outlining methods which are encouraged to be used for development or redevelopment of all properties within the Entry Corridors of the City of Fredericksburg as the same relate to each of the categories of the Construction Design Elements as set out above. See the guidelines attached to this ordinance in the Appendix. Design Guidelines use such terms as "may," "encouraged," "should" and "to be considered". In cases where the Design Guidelines may be difficult to achieve, or an innovative solution may provide a better answer, the topic intent may be used in a determination. 
(c)  Design Standards for the City of Fredericksburg. Written standards adopted by the City of Fredericksburg, outlining required methods for development or redevelopment of all properties within the Entry Corridors of the City of Fredericksburg as the same relate to each of the categories of Construction Design Elements as set out above. See the standards attached to this ordinance in the Appendix. In addition to the standards set forth in Appendix A. Design Standards will include the requirements of all other ordinances, specifications or requirements of the City of Fredericksburg and any other applicable governmental entity. Design Standards use the terms "shall" and "must" to indicate that compliance is required. 
(d)  Director. Any reference herein to the Director means the Director of Development Services for the City of Fredericksburg or his or her designee. 
(e)  Entry corridors. All properties having any frontage on the following streets of the City: U.S. Highway 290 East and West, U.S. Highway 16 North and South, U.S. Highway 87 North and South and FM 965 North of U.S. 290 (Main Street) lying within the City limits of the City of Fredericksburg except properties within the Historic Overlay District. 
(f)  Ordinary Repairs or Maintenance. Work done to prevent deterioration of any Construction Design Element or any part thereof to keep such Element nearly as practical to its condition prior to such deterioration, decay, or damage and by using, where possible, original material. 
(g)  Insignificant Alteration. Ordinary Repairs or Maintenance will be considered to be an Insignificant Alteration. 
(Ord. No. 25-106, 9-8-2015)  
Sec. 5-471. - Applicability. 
(a)  No person or entity shall develop, install, construct, reconstruct, alter, change, restore, remove, or demolish any Construction Design Element of any property along an Entry Corridor unless and until such person or entity has completed review of his/her/its proposed changes to the particular Construction Design Element at issue by the Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Fredericksburg which shall act as the design review board in accordance with the further provisions hereof. No building permit, sign permit, street or sidewalk permit, site plan approval, plat, temporary placement in public right of way permit or temporary use permit will be issued until completion of review regarding Design Guidelines or compliance with Design Standards, as applicable, is had in accordance with the Design Standards and Guidelines Applicability Matrix attached hereto and made a part hereof. 
(b)  Properties within the Historic Overlay District, as described in the City's Zoning Ordinance, are exempt from the provisions of this Article XIV. 
(c)  The Design Standards and/or Design Guidelines shall apply only to the extent of the development, installation, construction, reconstruction, alteration, change, restoration, removal or demolishment under the purview of the permit, site plan, or other development activity required. 
(d)  Neither the Design Guidelines nor the Design Standards shall require the construction of additional sidewalks, except those internal to a project, which are not shown in the City's then current Sidewalk Plan. 
(Ord. No. 25-016, 9-8-2015)  
Sec. 5-472. - Process for Review and Approval. 
(a)  Application. The applicant shall submit an application in writing to the Director for review and/or approval as applicable. The application will be as promulgated by the Director on the City's Website, and also available in the offices of the Director, which includes data and information as required by the Director, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Name of applicant and property owner. 
(2)  Email address and phone number of applicant and permanent mailing address of property owner. 
(3)  Location of the Construction Design Element to be installed, constructed, reconstructed, altered, changed, restored, removed, or demolished. 
(4)  A detailed description of the nature of the proposed installation, construction, reconstruction, alteration, change, restoration or removal to be completed. 
(5)  A description of how the proposed change will comply with the Design Guidelines and the Design Standards. 
(6)  Any circumstances or conditions concerning the property which may affect compliance with the Design Guidelines or Design Standards. 
(7)  The intended and desired starting date and completion date of the alterations to be made. 
(8)  Any drawings or photographs which would explain the proposed change. 
(9)  A site plan, if applicable. 
(10)  Color chips of the colors, and samples of other materials relevant to the Design Guidelines or Design Standards which will be used. 
(b)  Completeness. The applicant shall submit all required data and information to the Director within the time periods prescribed. The application shall not be accepted and processed until it is deemed complete by the Director, including sufficient description to adequately and completely convey the full effect of the work to be done, and until applicable fees are paid. 
(c)  Prescribed time periods. All applications shall be processed with and will follow the same time periods and procedures as an adjunct application to any other development application that is submitted with the application under this Article. For example, if the applicant is also applying for Site Plan approval, the application hereunder will be processed in accordance with the requirements for a Site Plan. In the case where no other procedure is applicable, the application will be submitted not less than 14 days prior to the next scheduled public meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(d)  Fee. An administration fee will be assessed to the applicant reflecting the cost to the City of Fredericksburg for processing the application. (See Appendix A, Code of Ordinances.) 
(e)  DRC. All applications shall be reviewed by the Development Review Committee ("DRC") at the regular meeting thereof following the submission of a competed application. 
(f)  Ordinary Repair or Maintenance or Insignificant Alteration. If the Director determines that the application involves Ordinary Repair or Maintenance, or if the application is for Insignificant Alteration(s) in the Construction Design Elements, and if the application is not submitted as an adjunct application to another development application, he/she may, within seven days following the DRC meeting, approve the application and forward a copy of the approved application to the chairman of the Planning and Zoning Commission, or to the vice chairman if the chairman is not available. The chairman or vice chairman of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall, within three business days, either approve the Director's decision or inform the Director to place the matter on the agenda of the next regular meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission for which there is adequate notice time to meet the posting requirements of the Texas Open Meetings Act. If the agenda for the next regular meeting has been posted, the matter will be placed on a subsequent agenda. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider and advise with regard to the Design Guidelines and approve or disapprove the application under the Design Standards if applicable. If the chairman or vice chairman of the board does not take any action within three business days, it shall be deemed that such person has approved the Director's decision to approve the changes detailed on the application. 
(g)  Significant Alteration. If the Director determines that the application involves a significant alteration (that is, not an Insignificant Alteration) of the Construction Design Elements, or for any other reason does not desire to act under subsection (f) above, and if the application is not submitted as an adjunct application to another development application he/she shall place the application on the agenda of the next regular meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission for which there is adequate notice time to meet the posting requirements of the Texas Open Meetings Act. If the agenda for the next regular meeting has been posted, the matter will be placed on a subsequent agenda. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the Design Guidelines and approve or disapprove the application under the Design Standards if applicable. 
(h)  Time for Approval. All times for approval shall be within the same periods as the applicable development application to which an application hereunder is adjunct. Subject to the exception herein, applications which are not adjunct to another development application shall be approved or disapproved within 60 days after the meeting of the DRC at which the completed application is considered. The applicant shall be given written notice of the time and place of any Planning and Zoning Commission meeting by email, or if the applicant does not have email, then by regular mail to the address on the application. The Planning and Zoning Commission may hold any additional meetings within such 60-day period as may be necessary to carry out its responsibilities under this article. If action is not taken within said 60-day period, it shall be deemed that the application is approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
The exceptions to the time for approval are: 
(1)  The applicant or his/her agent, or representative, shall attend the meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission during which his/her application is considered, otherwise the Planning and Zoning Commission shall not take action, and the application will be deemed to be incomplete. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall place the item on its next regular agenda, or sooner at the discretion of the Chairman of the Planning and Zoning Commission and make its determination and forward it to the Director within 60 days after the meeting attended by the applicant or his or her agent or other representative unless (2) below applies. 
(2)  If the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or the Director and the applicant have mutually agreed to extend the period of review. 
(Ord. No. 25-016, 9-8-2015)  
Sec. 5-473. - Criteria for Approval of an Application. 
The Director and Planning and Zoning Commission shall review and approve or disapprove the proposed application, as applicable, using the criteria set forth in the addenda hereto pages 65 through 104 which describe in detail the Design Guidelines and Design Standards. The Director and Planning and Zoning Commission will encourage adherence to the Design Guidelines and may make suggestions for adherence to said guidelines. The Director and Planning and Zoning Commission shall apply the Design Standards to the application, and require changes as necessary for compliance with said standards. 
(Ord. No. 25-016, 9-8-2015)  
Secs. 5-474—5-499. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XV. - OUTDOOR LIGHTING[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 25-016, adopted Sept. 8, 2015, enacted new provisions to be designated as Article XIV, §§ 5-470—5-473. In order to include those provisions as sent, this Article was renumbered as Article XV. 
 
Sec. 5-500. - Purpose. 
The purpose of these rules and regulations are to provide outdoor lighting standards and regulations to assure public safety, promote efficient and more cost effective lighting, enhance the ability to view the night sky and promote a positive City image reflecting order, harmony and pride. 
(Ord. No. 24-014, 8-18-2014)  
Sec. 5-501. - Jurisdiction and scope. 
This Chapter applies to Outdoor lighting on all properties within the City limits and to all signs within the extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) of the City and to all street lighting regardless of where located within the City. The City may apply this Chapter to properties through agreements with property owners, or as a term affixed to a developmental/regulatory approval (such as a variance or site plan), and in such event the provisions of this Chapter will be enforced against such properties and owners thereof as set forth herein. All properties and property owners not required to adhere to these requirements are strongly encouraged to do so. 
(Ord. No. 24-014, 8-18-2014)  
Sec. 5-502. - Definitions. 
Words and phrases used in this Chapter shall have the meanings set forth in this section. Terms that are not defined below, but are defined elsewhere in the Code of Ordinances, shall be given the meanings set forth therein. Words and phrases not defined in the Code of Ordinances shall be given their common, ordinary meaning unless the context clearly requires otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words in the plural number shall include the singular number (and vice versa); and words in the masculine gender shall include the feminine gender (and vice versa). The word "shall" is mandatory. Headings and captions are for reference purposes only. 
Applicant means a person or entity who submits to the City an application for an approval for building or development, including those for signs, required by the Code of Ordinances. Any person or entity must have sufficiently documented legal authority or proprietary interests in the land to commence and maintain proceedings under the Code of Ordinances. Tenants and property owners are both liable for violations of this Chapter. 
City means the City of Fredericksburg. 
City limits means the incorporated municipal boundary of the City, as may be expanded from time to time by annexation. 
ETJ means the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City. For the purpose of application of this ordinance to signs within the ETJ, or to properties for which a development or non-annexation agreement is made with the City, properties will be determined as Residential or Non-residential (as defined below) according to the use of the property. 
Fixture means the complete assembly that holds or contains a lamp, including any elements designed to provide light output control such as a reflector or refractor, the ballast and housing. 
Fully shielded fixtures means fixtures, as installed, that are designed or shielded in such a manner that all light rays emitted by the fixture, either directly from the luminaires or indirectly from the fixture, are not permitted to project above a horizontal plane running through the lowest point on the fixture where light is emitted. See Figures A and C for examples of acceptable lighting fixtures, and Figure B for examples of unacceptable fixtures. 
Holiday lighting means temporary lighting used for a specific celebration which consists only of traditional festoon-type low-output lamps. 
Lighting means any source of light that does not include natural light emitted from celestial objects or fire. The term includes, without limitation, any type of lighting, fixed or movable, designed or used for illumination of buildings or homes, including lighting for billboards, streetlights, canopies, gasoline station islands, searchlights used for advertising purposes, externally or internally lit advertising signs, area-type lighting and luminous elements or fixtures attached to structures, poles, the earth or any other location. 
Light trespass means lighting emitted from fixtures designed or installed that causes light to fall on a property other than the one where the fixture is installed, drivers' eyes of passing motor vehicles, or upwards toward the sky. 
Luminaire, or Luminous elements (of a light fixture) means individually or collectively: the lamp (light bulb), any diffusing elements and surfaces intended to reflect or refract light emitted from the lamp. 
Net acre means the unit of land area which comprises an acre, less that portion of land area covered by any building. 
Non-residential property means property which is located in any area of the City which is not located in any residential zone (R-1 through R-5.) The term non-residential property also includes enhancements or amenities to property such as to subdivisions. Non-residential property also includes multi-family properties wherever located in the City having nine or more dwelling units located thereon within one tract or lot regardless of the zoning area in which they are located. 
Outdoor lighting means lighting that is installed or located outside or on the exterior of any building or part thereof, structure, sign or other improvement or stand or lighting which is installed to project outdoors for the purpose of lighting outdoors. Lighting located under canopies, under building overhangs or under roof eaves are included in the definition of Outdoor lighting. 
Person means an individual, corporation, agency, unincorporated association, partnership, sole sale proprietorship, or any other entity. 
Residential property means all properties other than non-residential property as defined above. 
Temporary lighting means lighting intended for uses which by their nature are of limited duration provided the lights are positioned so they do not shine in the eyes of passing drivers. Examples of Temporary lighting are lighting for: emergencies, holiday decorations, festivals, civic events, construction areas, theatrical, television, or performance areas. 
Up lighting means lighting that causes light rays to project above a horizontal plane running through the lowest point on the fixture where light is emitted. 
(Ord. No. 24-014, 8-18-2014; Ord. No. 2019-16, §§ 1, 2, 5-6-2019)  
Sec. 5-503. - Lighting—Offense. 
(a)  All Outdoor lighting shall be installed to comply with the standards, rules and regulations established by this Chapter. 
(b)  It is an offense for any Person to install, permit the installation or to continue the existence of Outdoor lighting that does not comply with the standards, rules and regulations established by this Chapter. 
(c)  A violation of this Chapter is hereby declared to be a prohibited public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 24-014, 8-18-2014)  
Sec. 5-504. - Nonconforming existing lighting. 
All existing Outdoor lighting that was legally installed before the effective date of this Article, and that does not comply with the standards, rules and regulations established by this Article shall be deemed nonconforming. Nonconforming existing Outdoor lighting shall be brought into compliance with this Article upon the earlier of: 
(a)  All nonconforming existing Outdoor lighting located on a property for which an application for a conditional use permit, subdivision approval, building permit for construction of a new building or site plan permit, is made shall be brought into compliance with this Article before final inspection, issuance of a certificate of occupancy, final plat recordation, or occupancy of the improvement, whichever is applicable. 
(b)  All maintenance of nonconforming existing Outdoor lighting, such as repairs that do not include replacement of the fixture part of the light, changing bulbs and the like is exempt from the provisions of this ordinance. Any other repairs or replacements are required to comply with the provisions of this Article. 
(c)  All existing nonconforming Outdoor Lighting, including City streetlights, shall be brought into compliance with the requirements of this Article on or before May 1, 2029. The City Manager shall have discretion to grant exemptions for existing nonconforming Outdoor Lighting of church steeples after May 1, 2029, based upon preservation of the City's historic steeple architecture and cityscape. 
(Ord. No. 24-014, 8-18-2014; Ord. No. 2019-16, § 3, 5-6-2019)  
Sec. 5-505. - General Outdoor Lighting Standards. 
(a)  Streetlights installed, repaired, or replaced on and after the effective date shall be Fully shielded fixtures in order to limit light trespass (See Figure A) and shall have a correlated color temperature of 3000K or less. City streetlights installed before the effective date of this Ordinance shall be brought into compliance with the requirements of this Article on or before May 1, 2029, including but not limited to the installation of Fully shielded fixtures in order to limit light trespass (See Figure A) and having a correlated color temperature of 3000K or less. 
(b)  All Outdoor lighting, except streetlights and as otherwise specifically permitted by this Article, shall be (1) Fully shielded fixtures, (2) the Luminous elements of the fixture shall not be visible from any other property and the fixture shall have a correlated color temperature of 3000K or less. (See Figure C for examples of acceptable light fixtures. See Figure B for examples of unacceptable light fixtures. See Figure A for shielding illustration.) 
(c)  Outdoor lighting fixtures with a maximum output of 300 lumens per fixture, regardless of the number of bulbs, may be left unshielded, provided that the fixture has an opaque top to prevent light from shining directly up and the source of the light is not visible from any other property. Outdoor lighting fixtures with a maximum output of 600 lumens per fixture, regardless of the number of bulbs, may be shielded with a colored lens, provided such lens reduces the lumen output in half, the fixture has an opaque top to prevent light from shining directly up, and the source of the light is not visible from any other property. The aggregate lumen output from all fixtures set forth in this Section 5-505(c) shall not exceed 20 percent of the allowable aggregate total Outdoor lighting set forth in Section 5-505(d). 
(d)  The aggregate total Outdoor lighting on any residential property shall not exceed 17,500 lumens per net acre. The aggregate total Outdoor lighting on any non-residential property shall not exceed 75,000 lumens per net acre, unless approved in writing by the City Manager. 
(e)  Outdoor lighting at public and private outdoor recreational facilities, including but not limited to playing fields, arenas, tracks, and swimming pools: 
(1)  Shall be Fully shielded fixtures; 
(2)  The Luminous elements of the fixture shall not be visible from any adjacent property; and 
(3)  Shall comply with the levels of illumination consistent with the IESNA "Recommended Practice for Sports and Recreational Area Lighting" (IESNA RP-6-10) or successor recommendations for the class of play appropriate for the kinds of facilities in the City. 
(Ord. No. 24-014, 8-18-2014; Ord. No. 2019-16, § 4, 5-6-2019)  
Sec. 5-506. - Lighting for outdoor signs and panels. 
(a)  Outdoor internally-illuminated signs shall conform to the Sign Ordinance of the City of Fredericksburg. 
(b)  Outdoor externally-illuminated signs shall conform to all provisions of this Chapter and the Sign Ordinance of the City of Fredericksburg. 
(Ord. No. 24-014, 8-18-2014)  
Sec. 5-507. - Flag poles. 
The City encourages the custom of displaying the United States Flag only from sunrise to sunset on buildings and on stationary flagstaffs in the open. However, lighting of up to two governmental flags per property is permitted with the following restrictions: Flag poles heights shall conform to the requirements of the zone and shall be illuminated with no more than a single spot type fixture utilizing diffusers or hex louvers to reduce glare. The fixture is to be mounted so that the lens is perpendicular to the flag pole. 
(Ord. No. 24-014, 8-18-2014)  
Sec. 5-508. - Lighting curfews. 
(a)  Lighting for outdoor recreational facilities is allowed between one hour prior to sunset and 11:00 p.m. It is a defense to prosecution that such lighting is needed to complete a specific organized activity or event already in progress at 11:00 p.m. 
(b)  All Outdoor lighting is encouraged to be turned off when no one is present to use the light. 
(c)  The City Manager shall have discretion to determine when and under what circumstances new public outdoor lighting is warranted and will be permitted, based upon public safety hazards or concerns that can only be mitigated by additional public outdoor lighting. The City Manager shall have discretion to determine the adaptive controls or curfews to be employed in all future installations of public outdoor lighting, considering the circumstances indicating the need for said public outdoor lighting based on the presence or absence of citizens on public property or rights-of-way. For the purposes of this subsection, "public outdoor lighting" shall be defined as all City public street lighting and outdoor lighting on other City property and City owned rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 24-014, 8-18-2014; Ord. No. 2019-16, § 5, 5-6-2019)  
Sec. 5-509. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  The installation of any mercury vapor fixture or lamp for use as Outdoor lighting is prohibited. 
(b)  The installation of any wall pack style fixture for use as Outdoor lighting is prohibited unless the fixture is rated by the manufacturer as Fully shielded. Examples of acceptable wall packs, when mounted with light directed downward only are shown in Figure C. 
(c)  The installation of any barn-light style fixture for use as Outdoor lighting is prohibited unless the fixture includes a full opaque reflector instead of the standard translucent lens and otherwise complies with the shielding requirements of this Article. An example of barn-light style with and without the required opaque reflector is shown in Figure C. 
(d)  The operation of searchlights except by governmental authorities is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 24-014, 8-18-2014; Ord. No. 2019-16, §§ 6, 7, 5-6-2019)  
Sec. 5-510. - Submission of plans and evidence of compliance. 
(a)  All conditional use permit, site plan, subdivision, building permit or other development applications must include an outdoor lighting plan which includes the following information: 
(1)  The location of all existing and proposed light fixtures; and 
(2)  Specification sheets for all existing and proposed light fixtures. 
(b)  Verification that a project covered hereby has complied with the provisions of this Chapter shall occur during the final step in the applicable application process, for example, during the final inspection for a certificate of occupancy by the City building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 24-014, 8-18-2014)  
Sec. 5-511. - Exemptions. 
The following lighting is exempt from this Chapter: 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Outdoor lighting for which light is produced directly by the combustion of fossil fuels. 
(d)  Holiday lighting. 
(e)  Lighting required by law to be installed on motor vehicles. 
(f)  Lighting needed during activities of law enforcement, fire and other emergency services. 
(g)  Lighting employed during repairs of roads and utilities and such lighting may be unshielded provided the lights are positioned so they do not shine in the eyes of passing drivers. 
(h)  Lighting required for the safe operation of aircraft. 
(i)  Temporary lighting, provided that the exemption applies only during the hours of the event or work. 
(j)  Temporary lighting required to save life, limb or property from imminent peril, provided that the exemption applies only during the hours of the peril. 
(Ord. No. 24-014, 8-18-2014; Ord. No. 2019-16, §§ 8, 9, 5-6-2019)  
Sec. 5-512. - Materials and methods of installation. 
This Chapter is not intended to prohibit the use of any design, material or method of prescribed installation not specifically prescribed by this Chapter, provided such alternative produces the result which would be produced by use of the fixtures and requirements described herein. 
(Ord. No. 24-014, 8-18-2014)  
Sec. 5-513. - Compliance with building code. 
All lighting installations commenced in accordance with this Chapter must otherwise be in compliance the City's Building Codes. 
(Ord. No. 24-014, 8-18-2014)  
Sec. 5-514. - Administrative guidance. 
The City's Director of Development Services is authorized to promulgate one or more interpretive documents to aid in the administration of, and compliance with, this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 24-014, 8-18-2014)  
Sec. 5-515. - Enforcement. 
(a)  General Penalties provided in Section 1-6 of the City of Fredericksburg Code of Ordinances shall apply to violations hereof. 
(b)  The City shall also have the right to bring a civil action to enforce the provisions of this Chapter and to seek remedies as allowed by law, including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Injunctive relief, 
(2)  Monetary damages, and 
(3)  Other relief as directed by a court with jurisdiction over the matter. 
(Ord. No. 24-014, 8-18-2014)  
Sec. 5-516. - Alternative relief. 
(a)  In lieu of criminal prosecution, a civil penalty up to $500.00 a day, when it is shown that the defendant was actually notified of the provisions of this Chapter and committed acts in violation of this Chapter or failed to take action necessary for compliance with this Chapter; and other available relief. 
(b)  In the event work is not being performed in accordance with this Chapter, the City may issue a slop work order and all work shall immediately cease on the entire project for which a permit is issued. No further work shall be undertaken on the project as long as a stop work order is in effect. 
FIGURES AND ILLUSTRATIONS 
 
 
(Ord. No. 24-014, 8-18-2014; Ord. No. 2019-16, § 10, 5-6-2019)  
Chapter 8 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Home rule municipality may license any lawful business subject to police power, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.075. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 8-1—8-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 25-008, adopted June 1, 2015, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 8-19—8-29, and enacted a new article as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to itinerant merchants and vendors and derived from Code 1992, §§ 4.101—4.111. 
 
Sec. 8-19. - Definitions. 
As used in this ordinance the following words have the meaning indicated: 
Canvasser is a person who attempts to make personal contact with a resident at his/her residence without prior specific invitation or appointment from the resident, for the primary purpose of: (1) attempting to enlist support for or against a particular religion, philosophy, ideology, political party, issue or candidate, even if incidental to such purpose the canvasser accepts the donation of money for or against such cause, or (2) distributing a handbill or flyer advertising a non-commercial event or service. 
Peddler is a person who attempts to make personal contact with a resident at his/her residence without prior specific invitation or appointment from the resident, for the primary purpose of attempting to sell any good or service for immediate delivery. 
Solicitor is a person who solicits or attempts to solicit, a resident at his/her residence without prior specific invitation or appointment from the resident, funds, or orders for services, commercial goods, wares, merchandise, subscriptions or publications to be delivered at a future date or time or who distributes or attempts to distribute a handbill or flyer advertising a commercial event or service. A person who distributes handbills or flyers for a commercial purpose, or advertising an event, activity, good or service that is offered to the resident for purchase at a location away from the residence or at a time different from the time of visit is a solicitor. 
(Ord. No. 25-008, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 8-20. - Permit required. 
It is unlawful for any Peddler or Solicitor to engage in business within the City without first obtaining a permit from the City of Fredericksburg Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 25-008, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 8-21. - Permit exemptions. 
(a)  The following are excluded from permitting provisions: 
(1)  Newspaper carriers, 
(2)  Farmers who sell agricultural products that were raised or grown by them, 
(3)  Those who proselytize religion or distribute religious literature even if incidental to such purpose there is the sale of some good or service, 
(4)  Those who are engaging in political speech; or 
(5)  Canvassers. 
(6)  Federal, state or local government employees or public utility employees in the performance of his/her duty for his/her employer. 
(b)  Persons who are exempt from the permitting requirements pursuant to Subsection (a), above, or who are otherwise exempt from the provisions of this Article, shall be subject to the provisions of Sections 8-31 and 8-32 below, and are encouraged to notify the Fredericksburg Police Department as to the approximate dates of the door-to-door activities, and the areas in which they will be working. 
(Ord. No. 25-008, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 8-22. - Written application required for permit. 
Any Peddler or Solicitor desiring to engage in activities as a peddler or solicitor within the City must, and any Canvasser or other person exempt from the Permit requirement may, file a written application for permit with the Fredericksburg Police Department, which application shall contain the following information: 
(a)  For each individual who will be Peddling, Soliciting or Canvassing: 
(1)  Name of applicant and employer if applicable. 
(2)  The name and physical description of each applicant who will be engaged in the activity. In lieu of this information, a driver's license, state identification card, passport, or other government-issued identification card (issued by a government within the United States) containing this information may be provided, and a photocopy taken. A photograph will be taken of each person for which a permit is requested at the application site. 
(3)  The permanent and (if any) local address of the applicant. 
(4)  The permanent and (if any) local address of each applicant. 
(5)  A brief description of the proposed activity related to this peddler Permit. (Copies of literature to be distributed may be substituted for this description at the option of the applicant). 
(6)  Date and place of birth for each person who will be engaged in the activity. In lieu of this information, a driver's license, state identification card, passport, or other government-issued identification card (issued by a government within the United States) containing this information may be provided, and photocopy taken. 
(7)  A list of any infraction, offense, misdemeanor or felony conviction of each person who will be engaged in the activity covered by this Article for the seven years immediately prior to the application date. 
(8)  The motor vehicle make, model, year, color, and state license plate number of any vehicle which will be used by each person who will be engaged in the activity. 
(9)  If a license is requested for a Peddler: 
a.  The name and permanent address of the business offering the event, activity, good or service (i.e., the Peddler's principal). 
b.  A copy of the principal's sales tax license as issued by the state of Texas, provided that no copy of a license shall be required of any business which appears on the city's annual report of Sales Tax payees as provided by the Texas Comptroller's office. 
c.  The location where books and records are kept of sales which occur within the city and which are available for city inspection to determine that all city sales taxes have been paid. 
(10)  If a license is requested for a Solicitor: 
a.  The name and permanent address of the organization, person, or group for whom donations (or proceeds) are accepted. 
b.  The web address for this organization, person, or group (or other address) where residents having subsequent questions can go for more information. 
(11)  Any other information the applicant wishes to provide, perhaps including copies of literature to be distributed, references to other municipalities where similar activities have occurred, etc. 
(Ord. No. 25-008, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 8-23. - Permit fees. 
All peddlers and solicitors not exempted by Section 8-21 shall pay a permit fee to the Fredericksburg Police Department which is set forth in Appendix A of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 25-008, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 8-24. - Exemption from payment of permit fees. 
The following are exempt from the permit fee: Solicitors (including a commercial Solicitor advertising an event, activity, good or service for purchase at a location away from the residence), and Canvasser requesting a Permit. 
(Ord. No. 25-008, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 8-25. - Denial of permit. 
(a)  The Fredericksburg Police Department will secure a background check through the Texas Department of Public Safety website. 
(b)  The Fredericksburg Police Department will issue permits for each individual conducting activities covered by this Article II. An application for permit under this chapter may be denied where: 
(1)  Required application information is incomplete or incorrect; 
(2)  Any applicant is currently wanted on warrant for arrest. 
(3)  Any applicant has been convicted (which shall include pleas of no contest) of any offense involving theft, embezzlement, aggravated assault, burglary, forcible rape, larceny-theft, motor vehicle theft, murder, non-negligent manslaughter, robbery or any other offense which is deemed to be a sex offense, within the seven years preceding the date of application. 
(c)  If the Fredericksburg Police Department denies a permit, any applicant may appeal this decision in writing to the City Manager of the City of Fredericksburg, who may affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the Police Department. 
(d)  Permits will include a picture of the permittee, the date the permit was approved and contain the statement contain the warning: "The issuance of this permit is not an endorsement by the City of Fredericksburg or any of its officers or employees. 
(Ord. No. 25-008, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 8-26. - Issuance and duration of permit. 
(a)  If the Fredericksburg Police Department finds that the application is completed in conformance with the provisions of this Article, and applicable fees paid, a permit shall be issued within three calendar days. Each permit will be valid for one year from date of issue. 
(b)  The permit holder is required to notify the Fredericksburg Police Department before any peddling or soliciting under the issued permit is conducted in any new calendar month after the issuance of the permit. At this time, the permit holder will update any information required under Section 8-22 that has changed. 
(c)  The Fredericksburg Police Department will retain one copy of the approved permit for official records. The permit may not be represented as an endorsement or approval by the City of the purposes of a solicitation or a product offered by the permittee. 
(d)  Only those Peddlers or Solicitors possessing a valid permit may conduct business under the issued permit. No Canvasser may conduct business under the permit issued for anyone else. 
(Ord. No. 25-008, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 8-27. - Display of permit. 
Each Peddler or Solicitor will display the required permit on his or her person, in plain view, while engaged in the activity covered by this Article. 
(Ord. No. 25-008, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 8-28. - No transfer of permit. 
Permits issued under the provisions of this Article are not transferable and will be clearly marked "Not transferable." 
(Ord. No. 25-008, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 8-29. - Initial suspension of permit and revocation if no request for review. 
(a)  The Fredericksburg Police Department may, upon documented complaint of a violation of law, suspend (and subsequently revoke) a permit issued under this Article. The Fredericksburg Police Department may suspend(and revoke) any permit issued under this chapter for the following reasons: 
(1)  False material statement or omission in the application or if any or permittee otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a license under the terms of this article. 
(2)  Conduct of permitted business contrary to the terms of this Article, 
(3)  Violation of any other applicable law, or 
(4)  Endangerment of public welfare, health or safety. 
(b)  Peddlers and Solicitors whose permits are suspended immediately shall cease all activity covered by this Article, and they shall have five calendar days after notice of suspension, which will be in writing and delivered to the permittee or mailed by regular mail to the address on the application, during which to request an administrative review of the suspension from the Fredericksburg Police Department. If request for administrative review is not made within five calendar days, the permit is revoked and will be confiscated by the Fredericksburg Police Department. If the notice of suspension is mailed the notice of suspension date will be three calendar days following the date of mailing. 
(Ord. No. 25-008, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 8-30. - Revocation of permit following review. 
(a)  Upon permittee's request within five calendar days from the date of suspension, the Fredericksburg Police Department shall provide the permittee with written notice containing particulars of any and all complaints against him or her, and the time, date and place for an administrative review of the suspension. 
(b)  The City Manager of the City of Fredericksburg or his or her designee shall conduct an administrative review within five calendar days after the request for an administrative review is received to determine whether the permit shall be restored or revoked. 
(c)  Upon revocation, a permit shall be confiscated and thereafter the permit holder is barred from eligibility for a new permit for a period of one year. 
(Ord. No. 25-008, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 8-31. - Hours of solicitations. 
No Peddler, Solicitor or Canvasser may conduct activities defined in Section 8-19 except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 25-008, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 8-32. - No solicitation signs. 
No Peddler, Solicitor or Canvasser may conduct or attempt to conduct business at a place where a sign clearly indicates that solicitors or peddlers are unwelcome. The phrases "no soliciting" or "no solicitors" shall be sufficient to prohibit all Peddlers, Solicitors and Canvassers. 
(Ord. No. 25-008, 6-1-2015)  
Secs. 8-33—8-46. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 25-008, adopted June 1, 2015, repealed Art. III, §§ 8-47—8-55, which pertained to charitable solicitations and derived from Code 1992, §§ 4.201—4.209. 
 
Secs. 8-47—8-83. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SALES OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Local regulation of alcoholic beverages, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.31 et seq.; local fee authorized, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 11.38; local license fee authorized, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 61.36; local regulation of billboards and electric signs, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 108.55; local option elections, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 251.01 et seq. 
 
Sec. 8-84. - Definitions. 
As hereinafter used, and for the purposes of this article, the following words shall have the meanings herein assigned unless it is obvious from the content of the article that some other meaning is applicable: 
Alcoholic beverage. Alcohol, or any beverage containing more than one-half percent of alcohol by volume, which is capable of use for beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted. 
Beer. A malt beverage containing one-half percent or more of a alcohol by volume and not more than four percent of alcohol by weight. 
Mixed beverage. One or more servings of a beverage composed in whole or in part of an alcoholic beverage, in a sealed or unsealed container of any legal size for consumption. 
Person. A natural person or association of natural persons, trustee, receiver, partnership, corporation, organization, or the manager, agent, servant, or employee of any of them. 
Wine. The product obtained from the alcoholic fermentation of juice of sound ripe grapes, fruits, or berries. 
(Code 1992, § 4.301)  
Sec. 8-85. - License fee schedule. 
Before any person shall be permitted to manufacture, sell or distribute beer, wine or mixed beverages, as hereinbefore defined, within the corporate limits of the city, he/she shall present to the tax collector of the city his/her license or permit to manufacture, sell or distribute beer, wine or mixed beverages, as the case may be, within the state or in the County of Gillespie, and pay said tax collector an annual license fee in an amount equal to the maximum allowed under V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 11.38(a). 
(Code 1992, § 4.302) 
State Law reference— Local license fees, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 11.38.  
Sec. 8-86. - Separate license required for each place of business. 
Such license fee shall be paid for each separate place of business maintained within the corporate limits of the city by such manufacturer, distributor or retail dealer. 
(Code 1992, § 4.303)  
Sec. 8-87. - Tax collector to pay fees into city general fund. 
All license fees collected under section 8-85 shall be paid by the tax collector into the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1992, § 4.304)  
Sec. 8-88. - When license to be issued; when license expires. 
Upon presentation of a license granted by the state or county and payment of the fee listed in section 8-87, the city tax collector shall issue to each applicant the license applied for by him/her. Each license shall expire one year after the date it is issued. 
(Code 1992, § 4.305)  
Sec. 8-89. - Late hours possession; consumption of alcoholic beverages in a public place. 
In all duly licensed establishments selling alcoholic beverages, the prohibited hours for possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages in a public place are reduced to the following: 2:15 a.m. to 12:00 noon on Sundays, and 2:15 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. on all other days. 
(Code 1992, § 4.306) 
State Law reference— Hours of sale and consumption, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, ch. 105.  
Sec. 8-90. - Sale of beer in public places; private clubs and service within private clubs. 
In all duly licensed establishments selling beer within the corporate limits of the city and in all duly licensed private clubs operating within the corporate limits of the city, the prohibited hours for the sale of beer and the service of alcoholic beverages shall be 2:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon on Sunday and 2:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. on all other days. 
(Code 1992, § 4.307)  
Secs. 8-91—8-108. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FOOD ESTABLISHMENT REGULATIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal regulatory authority concerning food service employees not preempted by state regulation, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 438.037; municipality which is member of public health district not prohibited from regulating or administering permit system concerning food service establishments, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 437.004(d). 
 
Sec. 8-109. - Adoption of Texas food establishment rules. 
(a)  The city adopts by reference the provisions of the current rules or regulations as may be amended from time to time by the State Board of Health found in 25 Tex. Admin. Code §§ 228.1 through 228.278 regarding the regulation of food establishments in this jurisdiction (TAC). 
(b)  Unless amended by this article, all definitions will be the same as the TAC, or state rules, as the same may be amended from time to time. If a provisions in this Article is more strict than the comparable provision of the TAC, the provision of this Article will be applicable. 
Authorized agent or employee means the employees of the regulatory authority. 
Certified Food Protection Manager and Food Handler shall have the same meaning as found in Tex. Admin. Code, title 25, Rule § 228.33. A person holding a certificate issued to him or her who successfully completes an examination approved by the State Department of Health shall be accepted as meeting the training and testing requirements under the Health and Safety Code of the State of Texas and the Texas Administrative Code. 
Food establishment. See Tex. Admin. Code, title 25, § 228.2(57). 
Institutional food service establishments are food establishments for all purposes of this ordinance except with regard to the cost of a permit, for such purposes include child care centers licensed by the regulatory authority to receive 13 or more children for care which prepares food for on-site consumption, hospitals, which serve food to the general public, correctional facilities (jails), which contract with professional food management corporations for food preparation or are privately owned correctional facilities, and schools where food is prepared and intended for service primarily to students in institutions of learning, including, but not limited to, public and private kindergartens, preschool and elementary schools, junior high schools, high schools, colleges and universities (excluding those located on federally owned property, which are exempt from the terms of this article). 
Mobile Food Establishment means a vehicle mounted, self or otherwise propelled, self-contained food service operation designed to be readily movable (including, but not limited to, catering trucks, trailers, push carts and roadside vendors) and used to store, prepare, display, serve or sell food. The mobility of a Mobile Food Establishment units must completely maintained at all times. No drive-through service shall be permitted from a Mobile Food Establishment. A roadside vendor is classified as a Mobile Food Establishment. (A Mobile Food Establishment unit does not mean a stand, a booth, push carts and portable cooler type operations capable of being transported by one person which are not included and are not permitted under this ordinance. Such operations are permitted only with the zoning that would permit them, and they are subject to all other applicable health and safety regulations.) 
Owners, operators, person in charge shall apply to any person or entity who or which owns, manages (including the certified food manager and food handlers, when applicable), directs or supervises the activities at a food establishment. Without limiting the responsibility for any of the foregoing for complying with this article, any person who executes the application for a permit shall be a person responsible for compliance, and shall also be subject to penalties for non-compliance. 
Regulatory authority means the Gillespie County Health Division. 
Reinspection means any inspection performed by the regulatory authority other than the annual inspection and/or any routine unannounced inspection initiated by the regulatory authority. All reinspections requested by food establishments shall be performed within a reasonable time following the request subject to the scheduling of the regulatory authority. 
State rules means the state rules found at Tex. Admin. Code, title 25, Part 1, Chapter 228. These rules are also known as the Texas food establishment rules. 
Temporary food service means a food establishment that operates for a period of no more than 14 consecutive days in conjunction with a single event or celebration. 
Temporary shall mean no longer than 14 days. 
(Ord. No. 10-016, § 6.601, 10-30-2000; Ord. No. 11-001, § 6.601.B.2, 1-8-2001; Ord. No. 13-006, § 6.603.A, B.10, B.11, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 20-000a, § 8-109(b), 3-1-2010; Ord. No. 25-004, 5-4-2015; Ord. No. 25-028, 11-16-2015)  
Sec. 8-110. - Permits and exemptions. 
(a)  A person or entity may not operate a food establishment without a permit issued by the regulatory authority. Permits are not transferable from one person or entity to another or from one location to another location, except as otherwise permitted by this article. A valid permit must be posted in or on every food establishment location regulated by this article. 
(b)  One-time events in homes or those events attended by private guests, invitees, church socials and the like shall not be subject to the terms of this article, it being the intent of this article to regulate public vendors of food and large-scale gatherings to which the public is invited, and not to exempt those of whatever size or patronage who regularly provide food service. Without limitation, individual vendors at public fairs and festivals are specifically subject to the terms of this article. The determination of whether or not an establishment is exempt shall be made by the director in accordance with the definitions set out in the state rules, which determination is subject to appeal, as provided below. 
(c)  Regarding food establishments operated in connection with festivals, events and the like, the sponsoring organization shall be responsible for requiring that all individual vendors at its festival or event are properly licensed. Such sponsoring organization shall be permitted to apply for permits on behalf of its individual vendors and/or pay permit fees and may allocate them among vendors in any manner deemed suitable to the sponsoring organization. 
(d)  A food establishment, which is permitted and regulated directly by the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) or the state is exempt from the provisions of this article except in the event of an imminent hazard to public health the regulatory authority may require immediate cessation of operations with the required notice. Operations may be resumed at any time by any representative of the USDA or the state. 
(e)  Owners or operators of limited bed and breakfast establishments are not subject to the terms of this article if the owner, operator or manager has successfully completed a food manager's certification course recognized by the health division, within the immediate past five years. A limited bed and breakfast means an establishment with seven or fewer rooms for rent that serves only breakfast to overnight guests and does not engage in the retail sale of food. Any other bed and breakfast shall be subject to the terms of this article for retail food establishments and shall be considered an extended bed and breakfast. 
(Ord. No. 10-016, § 6.602, 10-30-2000)  
Sec. 8-111. - Application for permit and fees. 
(a)  Any person desiring to operate a food establishment must make a written application for a permit on forms provided by the regulatory authority. The application must contain the name and address of each applicant, the location and type of the proposed food establishment, name, address and phone number of the owner of the establishment, the name and a copy of the state certificate or registration card for the certified food manager for such establishment and the signature of each applicant and the applicable fee. An incomplete application will not be accepted. Failure to provide all required information, or falsifying information required may result in denial or revocation of the permit. The same information is required for a renewal permit as for an initial permit. Renewals of permits shall be required during the month of January of each calendar year beginning January 2005. All applications and renewals for the year 2003 shall be due and paid for on the anniversary date of the establishment's existing permit, and all applications and renewals for the year 2004 shall be prorated at the rate of $27.08 per month for each remaining month in the year 2004 for retail food establishments, and food service establishments, and at the rate of $8.34 per month for institutional food service establishments and portable/mobile/roadside food units. Temporary food service establishments per booth shall not be prorated. 
(b)  Prior to the approval of an initial permit, the regulatory authority shall inspect the proposed food establishment to determine compliance with state laws and rules. The regulatory authority shall inspect all renewing food establishments at least once annually. A food establishment that does not comply with state laws and rules will be denied a permit or the renewal of a permit provided however, that with regard to individual vendors at a festival or other event an initial inspection shall not be required; the regulatory authority may inspect such vendors at any time before or during the event at its discretion. Each food establishment must submit renewals of food manager certifications within 90 days after their expiration or within 90 days following cessation of employment by the certified food manager listed in its permit application. If the same is not submitted within the time period, the food establishment shall have its permit revoked under the method provided in section 8-114 below. 
(c)  The fees for permits under this article are found in Appendix A to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fredericksburg. 
(d)  The fee for all reinspections under this article are found in Appendix A to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fredericksburg. The fee shall not apply to the first reinspection by the health officer which is required as a follow-up due to failure of an inspection or which is otherwise required by state law which will be performed at no charge. All reinspections requested by food establishment shall be paid for in advance. All other reinspections shall be paid for within 30 days following the reinspection. If not paid timely, a late fee of $25.00 per calendar month, or portion thereof, shall be imposed and the food establishment shall have its permit revoked under the method provided in section 8-114 below. 
(e)  The fee for copies of permits issued under this article are found in Appendix A to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fredericksburg. 
(Ord. No. 10-016, § 6.603, 10-30-2000; Ord. No. 11-001, § 6.603.C, 1-8-2001; Ord. No. 11-025, § 6.603.C, 12-17-2001; Ord. No. 13-006, § 6.603, 6-16-2003; Ord. No. 15-014, § 8-111(c), (e), 11-21-2005; Ord. No. 20-000a, § 8-111(c), 3-1-2010; Ord. No. 22-020, 8-6-2012; Ord. No. 23-017, 9-16-2013)  
Sec. 8-112. - Review of plans. 
(a)  Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled, and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to the regulatory authority for review for food health and safety issues only before work is begun. Extensive remodeling means that 20 percent or greater of the area of the food establishment is to be remodeled. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, equipment arrangement, mechanical plans and construction of materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The plans and specifications will be approved by the regulatory authority if they meet the requirements of the health and safety rules adopted by this article. The approved plans and specifications must be followed in construction remodeling or conversion. 
(b)  Failure to follow the approved plans and specifications will result in a permit denial, suspension or revocation or the exercise of any other remedies hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 10-016, § 6.604, 10-30-2000)  
Sec. 8-113. - Immediate revocation or suspension of permit—imminent hazard. 
(a)  The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice or hearing revoke or suspend any permit to operate a food establishment if the operation of the food establishment constitutes an imminent hazard to public health. Revocation or suspension is effective upon service of the notice required by this article. When a permit is revoked or suspended, food operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit is revoked or suspended, the holder of the permit shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing within ten days of the receipt of a request for a hearing. 
(b)  Whenever a permit is revoked or suspended, the holder of the permit or the person in charge shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately revoked or suspended and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within ten days. If no written request for hearing is filed within ten days, the revocation or suspension is sustained. The regulatory authority may end the suspension at any time if reasons for suspension no longer exist. 
(Ord. No. 10-016, § 6.605, 10-30-2000; Ord. No. 20-000a, § 8-113(a), 3-1-2010)  
Sec. 8-114. - Revocation or suspension of permit—no imminent hazard. 
(a)  The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke or suspend a permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of these rules or for interference with the regulatory authority in the performance of its duties or if the food establishment has ceased operations for a period of time longer than 30 days. Prior to revocation or suspension, the regulatory authority shall notify the holder of the permit or the person in charge, in writing, of the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation or suspension and that the permit shall be revoked or suspended at the end of the ten days following service of such notice unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the permit within such ten day period. 
(b)  If no request for hearing is filed within the ten day period, the revocation or suspension of the permit becomes final. 
(Ord. No. 10-016, § 6.606, 10-30-2000)  
Sec. 8-115. - Administrative process. 
(a)  A notice as required in these rules properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit, as noted on the permit or as changed from time to time by the holder of the permit by written notice, delivered as herein set out to the regulatory authority at his/her address. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authority. 
(b)  The hearings provided for in these rules shall be conducted by the city council, in the case of an establishment within or violation occurring within the city limits or the commissioners court of Gillespie County; in the case of an establishment in or violation occurring within the limits of Gillespie County but outside of the city limits of the city, at a time and place designated by it. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the council or commission shall make final findings, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit by the regulatory authority. 
(c)  The hearing shall be held within ten days following the receipt of the request for hearing by the regulatory authority. The respective council or board of commissioners shall establish rules for such hearings. 
(Ord. No. 10-016, § 6.607, 10-30-2000)  
Sec. 8-116. - Food handler's certificate. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful of any person to accept any person for employment in any food establishment or to accept such employment, as such term is defined in this section, unless such person should have obtained a valid food handler's certificate as provided for in this section. For the purposes of this section, the term "food establishment" shall be defined as any place where food or beverage is prepared or served and intended for human consumption. Volunteer handlers will not be required to have a health certificate but shall be subject to the provisions of subsection (f) of this section. 
(b)  The term "food handler" shall be defined as any person who prepares, cooks, or serves food or drinks for consumption by the public. Such food handlers shall include those personnel in a supervisory capacity and those who provide accessory services such as dishwashers, busboys, cashiers and so forth, whether fulltime, parttime or temporary employees. The term "food handlers" shall include those who are employed as butchers, meat cutters and wrappers, produce handlers or bakers. A certified food manager shall not additionally be required to comply with this section. 
(c)  There shall be two classifications of food handlers: 
(1)  The professional food handler, being any food handler who receives payment for services rendered; and 
(2)  The volunteer food handler, who is any food handler who volunteers his services to a benevolent or nonprofit organization on an intermittent basis. 
(d)  All food handlers shall be thoroughly indoctrinated in personal hygiene and food service sanitation as well as in the methods of importance of preventing food-borne illness. The course required under subsection (e) of this section shall be one that the regulatory authority or his or her designated representative prepares and conducts which shall be a minimum required two-hour workshop designed to impart the information necessary to the sanitary preparation and handling of food and food service equipment, or any other course which is accredited by the Texas Department of State Health Services or its successor organization. 
(e)  Requirements for food handlers to obtain food handlers' certificates. Those persons defined as food handlers in this section shall be required to obtain food handlers' certificates before working in any capacity that shall required the preparation or service of food for consumption by the public. Food handlers will qualify for a certificate initially by attending and demonstrating knowledge of the contents of a course designed to impart information necessary to the sanitary preparation and handling of food and equipment. A food handler's certificate shall be issued for a period of two years, which will be renewed for additional periods of two years after attendance at a course designed to review and update information on good practices of food preparation, service and sanitation. 
(f)  Volunteer food handlers will not be required to obtain a food handler's certificate. However, each chairperson heading an event will be given an information package containing sanitation requirements at the time of permitting. Each volunteer food handler shall be responsible for knowing the information presented in the package. A list of rules and information will be provided by the regulatory authority, and each volunteer will be expected to abide by those rules. 
(g)  The regulatory authority shall enforce this section. 
(h)  As an administrative charge for the issuance of a food handler's certificate, a nonrefundable fee of $10.00 shall be paid to the regulatory authority before the issuance of a food handler's certificate. 
(i)  The regulatory authority shall prepare or arrange for the food handler's course and shall issue and publish cleanliness and sanitary food handling practice rules and regulations for all food handlers, and shall amend them as needed. 
(j)  In addition to any other remedies which may apply to violations of this article, the regulatory authority may additionally deduct three points, which will be classified as noncritical points, from the results of any inspection or reinspection performed for any food establishment found to be employing or using any person who is required to have a food handler's certificate, and who does not have one. 
(k)  The requirements of this section shall become effective on September, 1, 2010. 
(Ord. No. 20-000a, § 8-116, 3-1-2010)  
Sec. 8-117. - Mobile food establishments. 
(a)  Permit application. A person who, or entity (hereinafter referred to as applicant, person or operator) which seeks to operate a mobile food establishment must submit to the Regulatory Authority a written application for a permit on a form provided by the Regulatory Authority. The application must include: 
(1)  name and address of the applicant and the applicant's identification number as shown on a current and valid government-issued identification document that includes a photograph of the applicant, 
(2)  type of vehicle to be used for the proposed Mobile Food Establishment, 
(3)  proof of sales tax and use permit, 
(4)  an itinerary of locations where sales occur, 
(5)  other information reasonably required by the Regulatory Authority, 
(6)  the authorized signature of each applicant, 
(7)  a notarized statement from the owner of a Central Preparation Facility, when the same is required by the TAC, stating the Mobile Food Establishment uses the facility as its base of operation. For the purposes hereof a Central Preparation Facility is a facility that is an approved and permitted retail food establishment at which food is prepared, stored, and wrapped; and the Mobile Food Establishment is supplied with fresh water and ice; and emptied of waste water into a proper waste disposal system, and cleaned, including washing, rinsing, and sanitizing of those food-contact surfaces or items not capable of being immersed in the Mobile Food Establishment utensil-washing sink. Use of a private residence as a Central Preparation Facility is prohibited), however, when a Central Preparation Facility is not required, water may be supplied from a public water system as defined by the TAC rules. 
(8)  a notarized statement from the owner of the property to be used for the Mobile Food Establishment permitting such use, 
(9)  if at one location for more than two hours, a written agreement from a business within 150 feet for employees of the Mobile Food Establishment to have use of flushable (not port-a potty) restrooms (or other facilities as approved by the health authority) during hours of operation, 
(10)  proof of fire inspection where applicable, 
(11)  proof of compliance with parking regulations, 
(12)  location of trash receptacles separate from the main business on the same property if any, 
(13)  a notarized statement from the owner of a waste disposal facility stating the Mobile Food Establishment uses the facility in its disposal operation, and 
(14)  the required fee for a Mobile Food Establishment which shall be the same as for other food establishments, may be temporary or annual, and which must accompany an application. 
(b)  Regulatory authority permit. For a Mobile Food Establishment permit, the Regulatory Authority shall: 
(1)  issue a permit (and this may be the same as an approved application) provided all of the requirements of all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations including fire safety procedures established by the Fire Marshal pursuant to the Fire Safety Code of the City of Fredericksburg are met, 
(2)  describe on the permit any operating restrictions, and 
(3)  provide the permit holder a permit listing such restrictions, if any, and that indicates the permit expiration date. 
(c)  Must display permit. A person operating a Mobile Food Establishment shall promptly display the permit on the unit where it is readily visible (as designated by the Regulatory Authority). 
(d)  Suspension or revocation of permit. The Regulatory Authority may inspect a Mobile Food Establishment at any time, and may suspend or revoke a Mobile Food Establishment permit if the Regulatory Authority determines that: 
(1)  the operator fails to continue to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations, 
(2)  an applicant obtained the Mobile Food Establishment permit by knowingly providing false information on the application, 
(3)  a person is infected with or is a carrier of any foodborne communicable disease, 
(4)  the continuation of the person's Mobile Food Establishment permit presents a significant public health or fire threat, or 
(5)  the Mobile Food Establishment violates the terms and conditions of any restriction or written agreement with the Regulatory Authority. If a written agreement with the Regulatory Authority terminates without fault by the Mobile Food Establishment, the operator has ten days to replace the required written agreement without constituting a violation. 
(e)  Items to be sold. 
(1)  A person operating a Mobile Food Establishment may only sell a food item described in the permit. 
(2)  A person operating a Mobile Food Establishment may not sell a non-food item except for items which are related to the food served (for example souvenir cups containing the beverage sold). 
(f)  Sanitary requirements. 
(1)  A person operating a Mobile Food Establishment shall equip the interior of the Mobile Food Establishment with an attached trash receptacle approved by the Regulatory Authority for the use of persons working in the Mobile Food Establishment. The operator must hold, store, and dispose of solid and liquid waste in a receptacle approved by the Regulatory Authority and must comply with any other applicable City Code requirements. 
(2)  A person who operates a Mobile Food Establishment must meet all of the following additional requirements: 
a.  A Mobile Food Establishment shall provide only single service articles for use by the consumer. 
b.  A Mobile Food Establishment shall comply with any regulations the Regulatory Authority adopts regarding time, temperature, plumbing, access to water, operation and maintenance requirements for Mobile Food Establishments. 
c.  A Mobile Food Establishment shall comply with any regulations the Regulatory Authority adopts regarding a Mobile Food Establishment's provisions, mandatory central preparation facility, serving area and operations. 
d.  A Mobile Food Establishment shall demonstrate that the vehicle is readily moveable if requested by the Regulatory Authority. 
e.  A Mobile Food Establishment shall comply with all requirements of the Regulatory Authority prohibiting alteration, removal, attachments, placement or change in, under, or upon the Mobile Food Establishment that would prevent or otherwise reduce ready mobility of the Mobile Food Establishment unit. 
f.  If at one location for more than two hours, a written agreement from a business within 150 feet of the Mobile Food Establishment, allowing employees of the mobile food establishment to have use of flushable (no-porta-potty) restrooms (or other facilities as approved by the health authority) during hours of operation must be provided. 
g.  The Regulatory Authority shall require each Mobile Food Establishment to come, on an annual basis, to a location designated by the Regulatory Authority for an inspection. 
h.  All food and food supplies must be stored within the mobile unit. 
i.  Except as provided in Subsection (g) of this section, a person who operates a Mobile Food Establishment may not place waste, food, equipment, or supplies outside of the permitted unit and must conduct its operational activities within the Mobile Food Establishment. 
j.  Mobile Food Establishments must comply with all regulations of the zoning district in which it is located with regard to parking, setbacks and any others that are applicable. 
k.  No signage shall be placed anywhere other than on the Mobile Food Establishment unit. 
(3)  The Regulatory Authority may require that Mobile Food Establishments found by it to violate mobile food establishment regulations to come for a re-inspection at a location designated by the Regulatory Authority. 
(g)  Recycling. Subsection (2)i. of this section does not apply to trash, recycling, or composting receptacles that a person uses while operating a Mobile Food Establishment. An operator of a Mobile Food Establishment may place trash, recycling, or composting receptacles outside of, and detached from, the Mobile Food Establishment when the establishment is open for business. 
(h)  Use of public property. A person who operates a Mobile Food Establishment may not go into a City park or other City owned property to sell, offer for sale, or display a food item, unless the person's activity is authorized by: 
(1)  a park property rental agreement; or 
(2)  written permission of the director of the Parks and Recreation Department. 
(Ord. No. 25-004, 5-4-2015; Ord. No. 25-028, 11-16-2015)  
Sec. 8-118. - Posting Requirements for Permits, Inspection Reports and Certified Food Protection Manager certificates. 
(a)  Each person or entity having a permit under this Article shall post his, her or its current permit, the most recent inspection report, and all current food manager's certificates in a conspicuous place, which is visible to the public, within the premises where such food establishment is authorized to operate. 
(b)  No person shall, and it is unlawful to, move, remove, deface, camouflage, alter or conceal from public view any current permit, most recent inspection report or current food manager's certificate. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to operate a food establishment unless the posting requirements of this Section are met and continue to be met. 
(Ord. No. 25-022, 9-21-2015; Ord. No. 25-028, 11-16-2015)  
Secs. 8-119—8-143. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - GARBAGE HAULING SERVICE 
 
Sec. 8-144. - Permits required. 
No person, firm or corporation except a duly authorized agent or employee of the city shall empty garbage and trash containers or receptacles, or convey or transport the contents thereof on the streets, alleys or public thoroughfares of the city for hire, without having first obtained a written permit from the city council or its authorized representatives. The city may deny any application for service which is duplicative of or which interferes with comparable services conducted by the city. 
(Code 1992, § 4.601)  
Sec. 8-145. - Application for permits; investigation; fees; rules and regulations. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation desiring a permit for the collection, removal and disposal of garbage and trash shall make application for such permit to the city council, who shall make or cause to be made such investigations as may be considered necessary in order to determine whether or not the public convenience and necessity requires the granting of such permit and whether the applicant is a fit and proper person to conduct such business. The application shall consist of the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  The trade name under which the applicant does or proposes to do business. 
(3)  The number of vehicles the applicant desires to operate. 
(4)  The class, size and design of each vehicle. 
(5)  The financial statement showing financial responsibility of the applicant. 
(6)  The ability of the applicant to respond in the event of damages to persons or property by reason of the negligent operation of a vehicle or vehicles in the amounts set forth in subsection (d). 
(7)  The nature and character of the service the applicant proposes to render. 
(8)  The applicant's experience in rendering such service. 
(9)  The patrons for whom the applicant proposes to render the service. 
(10)  Such other information as may be required by the city council. 
(b)  Permits may be issued to qualified applicants for a period of one year. 
(c)  In all cases where a permit has been issued, such permit shall be attached to the vehicle or vehicles used for such purpose or shall be in possession of the person rendering such service. 
(d)  No permit shall be issued to any applicant unless and until such applicant has paid the city an application fee, as set forth in the fee schedule found in appendix A to this Code, and obtained a policy of public liability insurance and has filed with the city secretary a certificate evidencing such policy. Such policy shall include the city as an additional insured, provide at least 30 days written notice to the city as a condition precedent to cancellation, insure the public against any loss or damage that may result to any person or any property arising out of the applicant's operations under the permit, and provide a minimum amount of recovery in such policy as to each and every vehicle of not less than the following amounts: 
(1)  For injury to or death to one person in any one accident, $100,000.00. 
(2)  For injury to or death to two or more persons in any one accident, $300,000.00. 
(3)  For damages to or destruction of property in any one accident, $100,000.00. 
The termination or cancellation of the policy of insurance required herein, shall automatically revoke the permit granted under the provisions of this Code. 
(e)  On the last day of the month following each quarterly period, each private garbage hauler shall submit to the city secretary a report listing the names and addresses and dates of service for customers served by such private garbage hauler. For the purposes of this article, quarterly period shall mean the regular calendar quarters of the year. In the event any private garbage hauler fails or refuses to submit such report, the city council may revoke the permit granted to such private garbage hauler under the provisions of this Code. 
(f)  Each permit shall be non-transferable and may be revoked by the city council after hearing upon a finding by the city council that the holder thereof is operating under this permit in such a manner as to be detrimental to the public safety, health or the general welfare of the city. The permit holder shall be given notice of the hearing not less than ten days prior to the hearing. 
(Code 1992, § 4.602)  
Sec. 8-146. - Use of city landfill. 
It shall be unlawful for any Garbage Hauling Service to transport and or dispose of any solid waste collected within the City limits of the City of Fredericksburg to any disposal facility other than that operated by the City of Fredericksburg. Any permit granted hereunder shall be revoked upon a finding by the City Council that another facility was so used. It is a defense to prosecution hereunder that the solid waste is required, by law or applicable governmental regulation, to be otherwise disposed. This Section shall not apply to any person or entity having a contract with the City which specifies the disposition of the solid waste (for example, recycled products). 
(Ord. No. 24-018, 9-2-2014)  
Secs. 8-147—8-173. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS 
 
Sec. 8-174. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms and phrases shall have the meaning given in this article: 
Advertising, as used in this section, shall include any communication of information concerning goods, products or merchandise, or the commercial enterprises and personnel involved in its manufacture, processing, or sale. 
Charitable solicitation is not considered a commercial transaction or sale for purposes of this article, even though some minor item of small value is given or exchanged at the time of a donation or solicitation for funds. Any written materials involved in charitable solicitation shall be considered a non-commercial handbill for purposes of this article. 
Commercial handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other written material the principal effect of which is to propose a commercial transaction. It includes only: 
(1)  Written material which exclusively: 
a.  Advertises for sale or advertises the availability of any merchandise, product, commodity, or thing; 
b.  Directs attention to, gives directions to, or promotes any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, commercial district or area, or other commercial activity; or 
c.  Combines both (a) and (b). 
(2)  Written material which is primarily and essentially an advertisement, although containing reading matter other than advertising or commercial information. Written material is primarily and essentially an advertisement if advertising compromises more than one-fourth of the page space on the front or back pages, or more than one-half of the page space overall. 
Noncommercial handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed matter not included in the definition of a commercial handbill as set out in this section. 
Restricted place means any and all public streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds, and buildings within the historical overlay district as defined in the city's zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1992, § 4.801)  
Sec. 8-175. - Conduct prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall throw, discard or deposit any commercial or non-commercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city. 
(b)  No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any vehicle, without the effective consent of the owner thereof, whether by attaching it thereto or otherwise. 
(c)  No person shall stand in any marked traffic lane or curbside parking area in any street and hand out or distribute any commercial or non-commercial handbill to the occupant of any vehicle while such vehicle is traveling upon or located upon the traveled portion of any street or parked in such curbside parking area. 
(d)  No person shall obstruct, block or occupy more than one fourth of the available passageway area on any sidewalk while engaged offering or displaying any goods, wares, or merchandise for sale. This article shall not confer any right of possession or use for such purposes, which rights shall continue to be governed by the law of property. 
(e)  No person shall hand out, distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any restricted place, in violation of the following requirements: 
(1)  Any distribution or sale must occur within 15 feet of available trash receptacles. 
(2)  Any distribution or sale must be accompanied by written notice to the recipient to properly dispose of the matter after reading or using the information contained therein. Any such notice in writing shall be in a different color, or in a type size as large as the largest type size on the front or back facing page. 
(3)  No commercial handbill shall exceed three inches by nine inches in size, in its distributed form, which may be folded or in multiple pages. No commercial handbill shall be more than one-eighth of one inch in thickness, including all pages and covers. 
(4)  No distribution or sale shall occur within 44 inches on either side of, or within 96 inches directly in front of the entrance or exit of any business fronting upon a public sidewalk. 
(f)  No person or entity shall cause another person to violate subsections (2) or (3) above by means or hiring, requesting or otherwise causing such other person to throw, deposit or distribute handbills or commercial handbills in violation of this article. 
(g)  It is not unlawful on any sidewalk, street, or other public place within the city for any person to hand out or distribute any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it. 
(h)  Conduct made unlawful by this article must be intentional, knowing, or reckless, as defined in the Texas penal code. 
(Code 1992, § 4.802)  
Sec. 8-176. - Enforcement. 
This article shall be enforced by fines as provided for in this Code of Ordinances and by all other means and through all other remedies as provided by law. 
(Code 1992, § 4.803)  
Secs. 8-177—8-205. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - CABLE TELEVISION RATE REGULATIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Federal law reference— Basic cable television service rates may be regulated by a local government according to federal regulations, 47 USC 543. 
 
Sec. 8-206. - General provisions. 
The following regulations are hereby adopted and shall be the cable TV regulations for the city. 
(Code 1992, § 4.901)  
Sec. 8-207. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise apparent, the following definitions shall apply in this article: 
Affiliated programmer. An affiliated programmer is a programmer with an ownership interest of five percent or more including general partnership interest, direct ownership interest, and stock interest in a corporation where such stockholders are officers or directors or who directly or indirectly own five percent or more of the outstanding stock, whether voting or nonvoting. Such interest include limited partnership interest of five percent or greater. 
Basic service tier. The basic service tier shall, at a minimum, include all signals of domestic television broadcast stations provided to any subscriber (except a signal secondarily transmitted by satellite carrier beyond the local service area of such station, regardless of how such signal is ultimately received by the cable system), any public, educational, and governmental programming required by the franchise to be carried on the basic tier, and any additional video programming signals or service added to the basic tier by the cable operator. 
Cable operator. Cable operator means any person or group of persons who provides cable service over a cable system within the city under a franchise issued by the city, and who directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system, or who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system. 
Cable programming service. Cable programming service includes any video programming provided over a cable system, regardless of service tier, including installation or rental of equipment used for the receipt of such video programming, other than: 
(1)  Video programming carried on the basic service tier as defined in this section; 
(2)  Video programming offered on a pay-per-channel or pay per-program basis; or 
(3)  A combination of multiple channels of pay-per-channel or pay-per-program video programming offered on a multiplexed or time-shifted basis so long as the combined service: 
a.  Consists of commonly-identified video programming; and 
b.  Is not bundled with any regulated tier of service. 
City. The City of Fredericksburg, Texas. 
Commission. The Federal Communications Commission. 
Small system. A small system is a cable television system that serves fewer than 1,000 subscribers. The service area of a small system is determined by the number of subscribers that are served by a system's principal headend, including any other headends or microwave receive sites that are technically integrated to the system's principal headend. 
(Code 1992, § 4.902)  
Sec. 8-208. - Information to be provided by cable operator on monthly subscriber bills. 
A cable operator must provide the following information to subscribers on monthly bills: 
(1)  A statement substantially the same as the following: "the basic service tier rates and related equipment and installation charges are regulated by the city. If you have any questions or comments regarding these rates, you may call or write the city at [address and telephone number]"; and 
(2)  The FCC community unit identifier for the cable system. 
(Code 1992, § 4.903)  
Sec. 8-209. - Negative option billing. 
A cable operator shall not charge a subscriber for any service or equipment that the subscriber has not affirmatively requested by name. This provision, however, shall not preclude the addition or deletion of a specific program from a service offering, the addition or deletion of specific channels from an existing tier of service, or the restructuring or division of existing tiers of service that do not result in a fundamental change in the nature of an existing service or tier of service, provided that such change is otherwise consistent with applicable regulations. Subscriber's failure to refuse a cable operator's proposal to provide such service or equipment is not an affirmative request for service or equipment. A subscriber's affirmative request for service or equipment may be made orally or in writing. 
(Code 1992, § 4.904)  
Sec. 8-210. - Subscriber bill itemization. 
(a)  Cable operators may identify as a separate line item of each regular subscriber bill the following: 
(1)  The amount of the total bill assessed as a franchise fee. 
(2)  The amount of the total bill assessed to satisfy any requirements imposed on the cable operator by the franchise agreement to support public, educational, or governmental channels or the use of such channels. 
(3)  The amount of any other fee, tax, assessment, or charge of any kind imposed by any governmental authority on the transaction between the operator and the subscriber. In order for a governmental fee or assessment to be separately identified under this section, it must be directly imposed by a governmental body on a transaction between a subscriber and an operator. 
(b)  The charge identified on the subscriber bill as the total charge for cable service should include all fees and costs itemized pursuant to this section. 
(Code 1992, § 4.905)  
Sec. 8-211. - Rates for the basic service tier. 
(a)  Basic service tier rates. Basic service tier rates are subject to regulation by the city in order to ensure that they are in compliance with the requirements of 47 USC 543. Rates that are demonstrated, in accordance with this article, not to exceed the "Initial Permitted Per Channel Charge" or the "Subsequent Permitted Per Channel Charge" as described below, or the equipment charges as specified in section 8-212, will be accepted as in compliance. The maximum monthly charge per subscriber for the basic service tier offered by a cable operator shall consist of a permitted per channel charge multiplied by the number of channels on the tier, plus a charge for franchise fees. The maximum monthly charges for the basic service their shall not include any charges for equipment or installations. Charges for equipment and installations are to be calculated separately pursuant to section 8-212 of this article. 
(b)  Initial permitted per channel charge. 
(1)  For purposes of this section, the initial date of regulation for the basic service tier shall be the date on which the city gives written notice to the cable operator that the city has been certified by the commission to regulate rates for the basic service tier and this article has been adopted by the city. 
(2)  For purposes of this section, rates "in effect on the initial date of regulation" or "in effect on September 30, 1992," shall be the rates charged to subscribers for service received on that respective date. 
(3)  The permitted per channel charge on the initial date of regulation shall be, at the election of the cable operator, either: 
a.  A charge determined pursuant to a cost-of-service proceeding; or 
b.  The charge specified in subparagraphs (a), (b), or (c) of this section, as applicable: 
1.  If the operator's per channel charge for the basic service tier and equipment in effect on the date of initial regulation is equal to or below the benchmark per channel charge, as adjusted forward for inflation from September 30, 1992, to the date of initial regulation, then the permitted per channel charge shall be the per channel charge in effect on the date of initial regulation, adjusted for equipment. 
2.  If: 
(i)  The operator's per channel charge for the basic service tier and equipment in effect on the date of initial regulation is above the benchmark per channel charge, as adjusted forward for inflation from September 30, 1992, until the initial date of regulation, and; 
(ii)  The operator's per channel charge for the basic service tier and equipment in effect on September 30, 1992, was above the benchmark per channel charge, then the permitted per channel charge is nine-tenths of the per channel charge in effect on September 30, 1992, but no lower than the benchmark per channel charge, additionally adjusted for inflation from September 30, 1992, to the initial date of regulation, for equipment, and for any changes in the number of channels offered on the basic service tiers. 
3.  If: 
(i)  The operator's per channel charge for the basic service tier and equipment in effect on the date of initial regulation is above the benchmark per channel charge, as adjusted forward for inflation from September 30, 1992, until the initial date of regulation, and; 
(ii)  The operator's per channel charge for the basic service tier and equipment in effect on September 30, 1992, was above the benchmark per channel charge, then the permitted per channel charge is the benchmark rate per channel adjusted for inflation from September 30, 1992, to the initial date of regulation, for equipment, and for any changes in the number of channels offered on the basic service tiers. 
(c)  Subsequent permitted per channel charge. After the initial date of regulation, the permitted channel charge for the basic service tier shall be, at the election of the cable operator, either: 
(1)  A per channel rate determined pursuant to a cost of service showing, or; 
(2)  The prior permitted per channel charge previously approved by the city, adjusted for inflation and external costs in accordance with the price cap requirements set forth in paragraph (d) of this section. 
(d)  Price cap requirements. 
(1)  Inflation adjustments. Permitted per channel charges for the basic service tier may be adjusted periodically on account of inflation. Adjustments to permitted per channel charges on account of inflation shall be based on changes in the Gross National Product Price Index ("GNPPI") published by the Bureau of Economic Analysis of the United States Department of Commerce. 
(2)  External costs. Permitted per channel charges for the basic service tier may also be adjusted for changes in external costs measured on a per channel per subscriber basis. To the extent external cost increases are greater or less than the GNPPI for the relevant period, the per channel charge will be adjusted accordingly. Per channel charges may not be increased if external costs other than franchise fees increase at a rate less than inflation. Permitted per channel charges also shall be decreased on account of external costs to the extent such costs decrease from previous levels. 
a.  Categories. External costs shall consist of costs in the following categories: 
1.  State and local taxes applicable to provision of cable television service; 
2.  Franchise fees; 
3.  Costs of channels; 
4.  Costs of complying with franchise requirements, including providing public, educational, and governmental access as required by the city; 
5.  Retransmission consent fees; and 
6.  Programming costs. 
b.  The permitted per channel charge for the basic service tier shall be adjusted on account of programming costs and retransmission consent fees only for programming or broadcast signals offered on that tier. 
c.  The permitted per channel charge shall not be adjusted for costs of retransmission consent fees or charges in those fees incurred prior to October 6, 1994. 
d.  The starting date for adjustments on account of external costs for the basic service tier shall be the initial date of regulation or 180 days from September 1, 1993, if the initial date of regulation occurs on or after 180 days from September 1, 1993. 
e.  Changes in franchise fees shall not result in an adjustment to permitted per channel charges, but rather shall be calculated separately as part of the maximum monthly charge per subscriber for the basic service tier. 
f.  Adjustments to permitted per channel charges on account of increases in costs of programming obtained from affiliated programmer shall be the lesser of actual increases or the previous permitted rate level increased by the amount of inflation. 
g.  Adjustments to permitted per channel charges on account of increases in costs of programming shall be further adjusted to reflect any revenues received by the operator from the programmer. 
(Code 1992, § 4.906)  
Sec. 8-212. - Rates for equipment and installation used to receive the basic service tier. 
(a)  Scope. The equipment regulated under this section consists of all equipment in a subscriber's location that is used to receive the basic service tier, regardless of whether such equipment is additionally used to receive other tiers of regulated programming service and/or unregulated service. Such equipment shall include, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Converter boxes; 
(2)  Remote control units; 
(3)  Connections for additional television receivers; and 
(4)  Other cable home wiring. 
Subscriber charges for such equipment shall not exceed charges based on actual costs in accordance with the requirements set forth below. 
(b)  Unbundling. A cable operator shall establish rates for remote control units, converter boxes, other customer equipment, installation, and additional connections separate from rates for basic service tier. In addition, the rates for such equipment and installations shall be unbundled one from the other. 
(c)  Equipment basket. A cable operator shall establish an equipment basket, which will include all costs associated with providing customer equipment and installation under this section. Equipment basket costs shall be limited to the direct and indirect material and labor costs of providing, leasing, installing, repairing, and servicing customer equipment, as determined in accordance with the cost accounting and cost allocation requirements of section 8-213. The equipment basket shall not include general administrative overhead including general marketing expenses. The equipment basket may include a reasonable profit. 
(d)  Hourly service charge. A cable operator shall establish charges for equipment and installation using the Hourly Service Charge ("HSC") methodology. The HSC shall equal the operator's annual equipment basket costs, excluding the purchase cost of customer equipment, divided by the total person hours involved in installing, repairing, and servicing customer equipment during the same period. The purchase cost of customer equipment shall include the cable operator's invoice price plus all other costs incurred with respect to the equipment until the time it is provided to the customer. The HSC is calculated according to the following formula: 
HSC = EB - CE/H 
Where, 
EB = annual equipment basket cost; 
CE = annual purchase cost of all customer equipment; and 
H = person hours involved in installing and repairing equipment per year. 
(e)  Installation charges. Installation charges shall be either: 
(1)  The HSC multiplied by the actual time spent on each individual installation; or 
(2)  The HSC multiplied by the average time spent on a specific type of installation. 
(f)  Remote charges. Monthly charges for rental of a remote control unit shall consist of the average annual unit purchase cost of the type of remote leased, including acquisition price and incidental costs such as sales tax, financing and storage up to the time it is provided to the customer, added to the product of the HSC times the average number of hours annually repairing or servicing a remote, divided by 12 to determine the monthly lease rate for a remote according to the following formula: 
Monthly Charge = UCE + (HSC × HR) 12 
Where, 
HR = average hours repair per year; and 
UCE = average annual unit cost of remote. 
Separate charges shall be established for each significantly different type of remote control unit. 
(g)  Other equipment charges. The monthly charges for rental of converter boxes and other customer equipment shall be calculated in the same manner as for remote control units. Separate charges shall be established for each significantly different type of converter box and each significantly different type of other customer equipment. 
(h)  Additional connection charges. The costs of installation and monthly use of additional connections shall be recovered as charges associated with the installation and equipment cost categories, and at rate levels determined by the actual cost methodology presented in the foregoing paragraphs (e), (f), and (g) of this section. An operator may recover additional programming costs and the costs of signal boosters on the customers premises, if any, associated with the additional connection as a separate monthly unbundled charge for additional connections. 
(i)  Charges for equipment sold. A cable operator may sell customer premises equipment to a subscriber. The equipment price shall recover the operator's cost of the equipment, including costs associated with storing and preparing the equipment for sale up to the time it is sold to the customer, plus a reasonable profit. An operator may sell service contracts for the maintenance and repair of equipment sold to subscribers. The charge for a service contract shall be the HSC times the estimated average number of hours for maintenance and repair over the life of the equipment. 
(j)  Promotions. A cable operator may offer equipment or installation at charges below those determined under paragraphs (e) through (g) of this section, as long as those offerings are reasonable in scope in relation to the operator's overall offerings in the equipment basket and not unreasonably discriminatory. Operators may not recover the cost of a promotional offering by increasing charges for other equipment basket elements, or by increasing programming service rates above the maximum monthly charge per subscriber prescribed by this article. As part of a general cost-of-service showing, an operator may include the cost of promotions in its general system overhead costs. 
(k)  Franchise fees. Equipment charges may include a properly allocated portion of franchise fees paid to the city. 
(Code 1992, § 4.907)  
Sec. 8-213. - Cost accounting and cost allocation requirements. 
(a)  Applicability. The requirements of this section are applicable for purposes of rate adjustments on account of external costs and for cost-of-service showings. 
(b)  Generally accepted accounting principles. Cable operators shall maintain their accounts in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, except as otherwise directed by the city. 
(c)  Accounts required. Cable operators shall maintain accounts in a manner that will enable identification of appropriate costs and application of the city's cost assignment and allocation procedures, to cost categories necessary for rate adjustments due to changes in external costs and for cost-of-service showings. Such categories shall be sufficiently detailed and supported to permit verification and audit against the company's accounting records. 
(d)  Accounting level. Except to the extent indicated below, cable operators shall aggregate expenses and revenues at either the franchise, system, regional, or company level in a manner consistent with practices of the operator as of April 3, 1992. However, in all events, cable operators shall identify at the franchise level their costs of franchise requirements, franchise fee, local taxes, and local programming. 
(e)  Cost allocation requirements. 
(1)  For purposes of establishing expenses at the franchise level, operators shall allocate expenses and revenues aggregated at higher levels to the franchise level based on the ration of the total number of subscribers served at the franchise level to the total number of subscribers served at the higher level. 
(2)  Except to the extent indicated below, all categories of costs allocated to, or identified at, the franchise level shall be allocated to the basic service tier based on the ration of channels in the basic tier to the total number of channels offered in the franchise area, including nonregulated and leased commercial access channels. These costs shall be allocated to each tier of cable programming services based on the ration of channels in that tier to the total number of channels offered in the franchise area. 
(3)  Costs of programming and retransmission consent fees, however, shall be allocated only to the tier on which the programming or broadcast signal at issue is offered. 
(4)  Costs of franchise fees shall be allocated among equipment and installations, program service tiers and subscribers in a manner that is most consistent with the methodology of assessment of franchise fees by the city. 
(5)  Costs of public, educational, and governmental access channels carried on the basic tier shall be directly assigned to the basic tier where possible. 
(f)  Common costs. Expenses which cannot be assigned to any single expense or service category shall be described as common costs. Common costs shall be allocated to expense categories as follows: 
(1)  Wherever possible, common costs are to be allocated to service cost categories based on direct analysis of the origin of the costs themselves. 
(2)  When direct analysis is not possible, common costs shall, if possible, be allocated to service cost categories based on an indirect, cost-causative linkage to other costs directly assigned or allocated to the service cost category. 
(3)  When neither direct nor indirect measures of cost allocation can be found, common costs shall be allocated to each service cost category based on the ration of all costs directly assigned and attributed to a service cost category over total costs directly assignable and attributable. 
(g)  Unrelated expenses and revenues. Cable operators shall exclude from cost categories used to develop rates for the provision of basic service tier and equipment, any direct OL indirect expenses and revenues not related to the provision of such services. Common costs of providing equipment, and unrelated activities shall be allocated between them in accordance with paragraph (f) of this section. 
(h)  Part-time channels. In situations where a single channel is divided on a part-time basis and is used to deliver service associated with different tiers or with pay per channel or pay per view service, a reasonable and documented allocation of that channel between services shall be required along with the associated revenues and costs. 
(Code 1992, § 4.908)  
Sec. 8-214. - Costs of franchise requirements. 
(a)  The costs of satisfying franchise requirements to support public, educational, and governmental channels shall consist of the sum of: 
(1)  All per channel costs for the number of channels used to meet franchise requirements for public, educational, and governmental channels; 
(2)  Any direct costs of meeting such franchise requirements; and 
(3)  A reasonable allocation of general and administrative overhead. 
(b)  The costs of satisfying any other requirement under the franchise shall consist of the direct and indirect costs, including a reasonable allocation of general and administrative overhead. 
(Code 1992, § 4.909)  
Sec. 8-215. - Charges for customer changes. 
(a)  This section shall govern charges for any changes in service tiers or equipment provided to the subscriber that are initiated at the request of a subscriber after initial service installation. 
(b)  The charge for customer changes in service tiers effected solely by coded entry on a computer terminal or by other similarly simple methods shall be a nominal amount, not exceeding actual costs, as defined in paragraph (c) of this section. 
(c)  The charge for customer changes in service tiers or equipment that involve more than code entry on a computer or other similarly simple method shall be based of an actual cost. The actual cost charge shall be either the HSC, as defined in section 8-211 of this article, multiplied by the number of person hours needed to implement the change, or the HSC multiplied by the average number of person hours involved in implementing customer changes. 
(d)  A cable operator may establish a higher charge for changes effected solely by coded entry on a computer terminal or by other similarly simple methods, subject to approval by the city, for a subscriber changing service tiers more than two times in a 12 month period, except for such changes ordered in response to a change in price or channel line-up. If a cable system adopts such an increased charge, the cable system must notify all subscribers in writing that they may be subject to such a charge for changing service tiers more than the specified number of times in any 12 month period. 
(e)  Downgrade charges that are the same as, or lower than, upgrade charges are evidence of the reasonableness of such downgrade charges. 
(f)  For 30 days after notice of retiering or rate increases, a customer may obtain changes in service tiers at no additional charge. 
(Code 1992, § 4.910)  
Sec. 8-216. - Notification of proposed rate increase. 
(a)  A cable operator shall provide written notice to a subscriber of any increase in the price to be charged for the basic service tier or associated equipment at least 30 days before any proposed increase is effective. The notice shall include a provision stating that protest to such prices may be filed with the city at 126 W. Main Street, Fredericksburg, Texas, 78624, or at City Hall, Attn. City Manager. The notice shall also include a statement that such protests must be filed with the city no later than 30 days after the notice is received by the subscriber. 
(b)  In addition to the notice required in paragraph (a) of this section, the cable operator shall give the city a minimum of 30 days advance written notification of any changes in rates for cable programming service or associated equipment. 
(Code 1992, § 4.911)  
Sec. 8-217. - Initiation of review of basic cable service and equipment rates. 
A cable operator shall file its schedule of rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment with the city within 30 days of receiving written notification from the city that the city has been certified by the commission to regulate rates for the basic service tier. 
(Code 1992, § 4.912)  
Sec. 8-218. - City review of basic cable rate and equipment costs. 
(a)  After a cable operator has submitted to the city for review its existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment costs, or a proposed increase in these rates (including increases in the baseline channel charge that results from reductions in the number of channels in a tier), the existing rates will remain in effect or the proposed rates will become effective after 30 days from the date of submission to the city. Provided, however, that the city may toll this 30-day deadline for an additional time by issuing a brief written order as described in paragraph (d) of this section within 30 days of the rate submission explaining that it needs additional time to review the rates. The city may, at any time, require the cable operator to produce additional information, including proprietary information, that the city deems necessary in order to make a rate determination. If proprietary information is provided, the provisions of section 8-219 hereof will apply to such information. 
(b)  Upon receipt by the city, the cable operator's submittal shall be available for public inspection and copying. Comments on the submittal by interested persons may be submitted in writing or orally at a city council meeting held at any time during the initial 30-day review period. Written comments shall be addressed to the city manager, and must be received prior to the end of the 30-day review period. 
(c)  If a cable operator submits a proposed rate increase for review that appears to exceed the presumptively reasonable level and does not include a cost-of-service showing to justify the rate, the city will permit the cable operator to cure this deficiency and submit a cost-of-service showing. 
(d)  If the city is unable to determine, based upon the material submitted by the cable operator, that the existing or proposed rates are within the permitted basic service tier charge or actual cost of equipment as defined herein, or if a cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing pursuant to this article, seeking to justify a rate above the basic service tier charge as defined in this article hereof, the city may toll the 30-day deadline in paragraph (a) of this section to request and/or consider additional information or to consider the comments from interested parties as follows: 
(1)  For an additional 90 days in cases not involving cost-of-service showings; or 
(2)  For an additional 150 days in cases involving cost-of-service showings. 
The order tolling the effective date of the proposed rate shall explain why the city could not make the necessary determination, and it shall also provide the cable operator an opportunity to cure any deficiencies in its original filing. During the additional time periods provided in this paragraph, comments from interested persons may be submitted in writing, as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, or orally during at least one city council meeting during the period of abatement. 
(e)  If the city has availed itself of the additional 90 or 150 days permitted in paragraph (d) of this section, and has taken no action within these additional time periods, then the proposed rates will go into effect at the end of the 90 or 150 day periods, or existing rates will remain in effect at such times, subject to refunds if the city subsequently issues a written decision disapproving any portion of such rates. Provided, however, that in order to order refunds, the city must have issued a brief written order to the cable operator by the end of the 90 or 150-day period permitted in paragraph (d) of this section directing the operator to keep an accurate account of all amounts received by reason of the rate in issue and on whose behalf such amounts were paid. 
(Code 1992, § 4.913)  
Sec. 8-219. - Proprietary information. 
(a)  If the city has required the cable operator to produce proprietary information under the provisions of its ordinance, the cable operator may submit therewith a request that such information not be made routinely available for public inspection. A copy of the request shall be attached to and shall cover all of the materials to which it applies and all copies of those materials. If feasible, the materials to which the request applies shall be physically separated from any materials to which the request does not apply. If this is not feasible, the portion of the materials to which the request applies shall be identified. 
(b)  Each such request shall contain a statement of the reasons for withholding the materials from inspection and of the facts upon which those reasons are based. If the request is that the materials be withheld from inspection for a limited period of time, that period shall be specified. 
(c)  Casual requests which do not comply with the requirements of paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section will not be considered. 
(d)  Upon receipt of a request in compliance with paragraphs (a) and (b), the city will not grant routine public access to the materials. A letter to that effect will be placed in a public file in lieu of the materials withheld from public inspection. 
(e)  If a written request for the materials is received by the city pursuant to the Open Records Act, Chapter 552, Texas Government Code, the city will notify the person providing the materials of the request for the materials. If the person providing the materials requests the city to do so, the city will request an opinion from the attorney general, pursuant to the Open Records Act, regarding the public availability of the materials. If the person providing the materials does not request the city to request an opinion from the attorney general, the city may, at its option, either request such an opinion or provide the materials to the public. 
(f)  If the attorney general issues an opinion or letter ruling requiring the city to make the materials available to the public, the materials will be made available for public inspection. 
(g)  If no request for confidentiality is submitted the city assumes no obligation to consider the need for non-disclosure. 
(Code 1992, § 4.914)  
Sec. 8-220. - Burden of proof. 
(a)  A cable operator has the burden of proving that its existing or proposed rates for basic service and associated equipment comply with 47 USC 543, and sections 8-211 and 8-212 hereof. 
(b)  For an existing or a proposed rate for basic service tier or associated equipment that is within the permitted tier charge and actual cost of equipment as set forth in sections 8-211 and 8-212, the cable operator must submit the appropriate FCC form to the city. 
(c)  For an existing or a proposed rate for basic service tier that exceeds the permitted tier charge as set forth in sections 8-221 and 8-222 hereof, the cable operator must submit to the city a cost-of-service showing to justify the proposed rates. The cost-of-service showing must in conformance with accounting and cost allocation requirements as adopted and amended by the commission for cable system operators. 
(Code 1992, § 4.915)  
Sec. 8-221. - Small systems. 
(a)  Option 1. 
(1)  A small system, as defined in section 8-217, may certify that the small system's initial rates for basic service and associated equipment comply with section 8-211 hereof. A certification by a small system under this section shall be filed with the city within 30 days of receiving written notification from the city that the city has been certified by the commission to regulate rates for the basic service tier. The certification shall be in writing, shall be signed by the general manager of the system, and shall be verified. 
(2)  Such certification shall be subject to verification by the city on its own motion or upon complaint by a subscriber. The city may request additional information from the operator in order to verify the certification. In the event proprietary information is requested by the city, the provisions of section 8-219 hereof shall control the availability of such information to the public. 
(3)  As used in this section, "initial rates" shall mean those rates charged by the small system operator on the date on which the city gives written notice to the cable operator that the city has been certified by the commission to regulate rates for the basic service tier and this article has been adopted by the city. 
(4)  If the city determines that the small system's certification is in error, it shall so notify the small system operator and shall require the small system to comply with all filing requirements for non-small systems in this article. 
(5)  Subsequent rate filings by a small system operator shall comply in all respects with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Option 2. 
(1)  A small system, as defined in section 8-207, may certify that the small systems rates for basic service and associated equipment, and subsequent rate increases, comply with section 8-211 hereof. A certification by a small system under this section for its initial rates shall be filed with the city within 30 days of receiving written notification from the city that the city has been certified by the commission to regulate rates for the basic service tier. Certifications for subsequent rate increases shall be filed with the city at the same time that notice is given to the small system's subscribers of the proposed rate increase, in conformance with this article. All certifications shall be in writing, shall be signed by the general manager of the system, and shall be verified. 
(2)  Such certification shall be subject to verification by the city on its own motion or upon complaint by a subscriber. The city may request additional information from the operator in order to verify the certification. In the event proprietary information is requested by the city, the provisions of section 8-219 hereof shall control the availability of such information to the public. 
(3)  If the city determines that the small system's certification is in error, it shall so notify the small system operator and shall require the small system to comply with all filing requirements for non-small systems in this article. 
(Code 1992, § 4.916)  
Sec. 8-222. - Written decision. 
(a)  The city shall issue a written decision in a ratemaking proceeding whenever it disapproves an initial rate for the basic service tier or associated equipment in whole or in part, disapproves a request for a rate increase in whole or in part, or approves a request for an increase in whole or in part over the objections of interested parties. The city is not required to issue a written decision that approves an unopposed existing or proposed rate for the basic service tier or associated equipment. 
(b)  Public notice shall be given of any written decision required in paragraph (a) of this section, by making the text of any written decision available to the public, and by publication of the decision one time in the official newspaper of the city. 
(Code 1992, § 4.917)  
Sec. 8-223. - Reduction of rates; prescription of rates. 
(a)  The city may order a cable operator to implement a prospective reduction in basic service tier or associated equipment rates where necessary to bring rates into compliance with the standards set forth in sections 8-211 and 8-212 hereof. 
(b)  The city may prescribe a reasonable rate for the basic service tier or associated equipment after it determines that a proposed rate is unreasonable. 
(Code 1992, § 4.918)  
Sec. 8-224. - Refunds. 
(a)  The city may order a cable operator to refund to subscribers that portion of previously paid rates determined by the city to be in excess of the permitted tier charge or above the actual cost of equipment, unless the operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing which justifies the rate charges as reasonable. Before ordering a cable operator to refund previously paid rates to subscribers, the city shall give the operator notice and opportunity to comment. The operator's opportunity to comment upon the proposed refunds may be at any meeting of the city council during the city's period of review of the operator's rates. If the city has extended its review period under section 8-218, and has issued an accounting order under section 8-218(e), then the operator, prior to refunds being ordered, may request an opportunity to appear before the city council to comment upon the proposed refunds. 
(b)  An operator's liability for refunds is limited to a one-year period, except that an operator that fails to comply with a valid rate order issued by the city shall be liable for refunds commencing from the effective date of such order until such time as it complies with such order. 
(c)  The refund period shall run as follows: 
(1)  From the date the operator implements a prospective rate reduction back in time to September 1, 1993, or one year, whichever is shorter. 
(2)  From the date the city issues an accounting order pursuant to section 8-218(d) hereof, and ending on the date the operator implements a prospective rate reduction ordered by the city or one year, whichever is shorter. 
(d)  The cable operator, in its discretion, may implement a refund in the following manner: 
(1)  By returning overcharges to those subscribers who actually paid the overcharges, either through direct payment or as a specifically identified credit to those subscribers' bills; or 
(2)  By means of a prospective percentage reduction in the rates for the basic service tier or associated equipment to cover the cumulative overcharge. This shall be reflected as a specifically identified, one-time credit on prospective bills to the class of subscribers that currently subscribe to the cable system. 
(e)  Refunds shall include interest computed at applicable rates published by the Internal Revenue Service for tax refunds and additional tax payments. 
(Code 1992, § 4.919)  
Sec. 8-225. - Governing law; venue. 
This article shall be construed under and in accordance with the laws of the state [and the city Charter] and city codes to the extent that such [Charter and] codes are not in conflict with or in violation of the Constitution and laws of the United States or the state. All obligations of the parties hereunder are performable in Gillespie County, Texas. In the event that any proceeding is brought to enforce the terms of this article, the same shall be brought in Gillespie County, Texas. 
(Code 1992, § 4.921)  
Chapter 11 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND SERVICES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 11-1—11-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Local and interjurisdictional emergency management, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 418.101 et seq.; municipal programs, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.103; local planning required, 37 Tex. Admin. Code § 7.12; local government responsibility, 37 Tex. Admin. Code § 7.23; requesting state assistance, 37 Tex. Admin. Code § 7.24; local government control affirmed, 37 Tex. Admin. Code § 7.26; relating to emergency management and homeland security, Executive Order RP 32 (Jan. 28, 2004). 
 
Sec. 11-19. - Office of emergency management director. 
(a)  There exists the office of Emergency Management Director of the city, which shall be held by the Mayor in accordance with state law with the power to declare a disaster and sign such emergency aid requests as are required by state law, but such action may be subject to confirmation by the city council at its next meeting. 
(b)  An Emergency Management Coordinator may be appointed by, and serve at the pleasure of, the City Manager. The coordinator shall serve in an advisory capacity to the City and the Mayor. 
(c)  The Emergency Management Coordinator shall be responsible for conducting a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in section 11-22 of this chapter except as required of the Emergency Management Director as required by State Law. 
(Code 1992, § 1.701; Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016)  
Sec. 11-20. - Hazard mitigation; responsibilities and powers of Emergency Management Coordinator. 
The powers and duties of the Emergency Management Coordinator shall include an on-going survey of actual or potential major hazards which threaten life and property within the city; and an on-going program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur. As part of his/her responsibility in hazard mitigation, the Emergency Management Coordinator shall supervise the development of an emergency management plan for the city, and shall recommend that plan for adoption by the city council, along with any and all mutual aid plans and agreements which are deemed essential for the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence, or reduce the impact, of such hazards if a disaster did occur. The powers of the Emergency Management Coordinator shall include the authority to declare a state of disaster in the absence of the statutorily designated individuals. The duties of the Emergency Management Coordinator shall also include the causing of a survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could be used during a disaster, as well as a continuing study of the need for amendments and improvements in the emergency management plan. 
(Code 1992, § 1.702; Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016)  
Sec. 11-21. - County emergency management council; joint emergency management plan. 
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge of the County of Gillespie and the mayors of other cities in said county in the formation of an emergency management council for the county and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of a joint emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a county-wide program of emergency management, insofar as said program may affect the city. 
(Code 1992, § 1.703)  
Sec. 11-22. - Duties and responsibility of Emergency Management Coordinator. 
The duties and responsibilities of the Emergency Management Coordinator or his or her designee shall include the following, all subject to the statutorily required action of the Emergency Management Director: 
(1)  The direction and control of the actual disaster operations of the emergency management organization, as well as the training of emergency management personnel. 
(2)  The determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city. 
(3)  The maintenance of necessary liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional, federal, or other emergency management organizations. 
(4)  The marshaling, after declaration of a disaster as provided for above, of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan. 
(5)  The coordination of the issuance of all necessary proclamations as to the existence of a disaster and the immediate operational effectiveness of the city emergency management plan. 
(6)  The coordination of the issuance of reasonable rules, regulations or directives which are necessary for the protection of life and property in the city. Such rules and regulations shall be filed in the office of the city secretary. 
(7)  The supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which the city is located and with other municipalities within the county, for the county-wide coordination of emergency management efforts. 
(8)  The supervision of, and final authorization for, the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving management within the city. 
(9)  The authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes. 
(Code 1992, § 1.704; Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016)  
Sec. 11-23. - Emergency management organization. 
The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated in the emergency management plan, as well as all organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. Such plan shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign tasks, duties and powers, and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this article. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management and the federal government. 
(Code 1992, § 1.705; Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016)  
Sec. 11-24. - Liability. 
This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health and safety, and neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this article, shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license or privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack shall, together with his/her successors in interest, if any, be not civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission, or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Code 1992, § 1.706)  
Sec. 11-25. - Expenditure of city funds; contractual commitment of city. 
Except in accordance with the adopted fiscal policies of the city and any existing authority of the City Manager, no person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this article, without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council. 
(Code 1992, § 1.707; Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016)  
Sec. 11-26. - Misuse of warning signals. 
Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or the termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article and shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this article. 
(Code 1992, § 1.708)  
Sec. 11-27. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 26-014, adopted Oct. 3, 2016, repealed § 11-27, which pertained to oath or affirmation required and derived from Code of 1992, § 1.710.  
Sec. 11-28. - Interference with enforcement of section; unauthorized display of credentials; penalties. 
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article, or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. Convictions for violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable in accordance with the general penalty found in section 1-6 of this Code. 
(Code 1992, § 1.711)  
Secs. 11-29—11-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES 
 
Sec. 11-60. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Ambulance. Any vehicle used, designed or redesigned for the transport of a patient, whether in emergency or transfer service. 
Base station physician. A physician licensed to practice medicine in the State of Texas, certified by the medical director, knowledgeable in the pre-hospital emergency medical protocols, EMS radio procedure and the general operating policies of the ambulance system, and a person from whom ambulance personnel may take medical direction by radio or other remote communications device. 
City. The City of Fredericksburg, Texas. 
Emergency Medical (EMS) Administrator. Shall be the person who is responsible for administration in the emergency medical functions of the department. Such position shall be supervised by the Fire Chief. 
Emergency medical service personnel. Individuals who are qualified as ECA, basic, intermediate or paramedic emergency medical technicians under the Texas Health and Safety Code. 
EMS control center or control center. The facility designated as the central communications center from which all ambulances operating in the service area shall be dispatched and controlled. 
EMS inter-local agreement ("inter-local agreement"). That contract between the city and the County of Gillespie or other governmental or otherwise authorized entities with respect to the provision of EMS services by the city to such other entities. 
First responder. Any person, fire department vehicle, police vehicle or other vehicle not normally used for purposes of patient transport, but which vehicle and on-board personnel are capable of providing first responder services in medical emergencies. 
Helicopter rescue unit. Any rotary wing aircraft providing basic or advanced life support services and patient transportation originating from the scene of emergency incidents which occur within the service area. 
Medical audit. An official inquiry into the circumstances involving an ambulance run or request for ambulance service, conducted by the medical director or a licensed physician designated by the medical director. 
Medical control. Direction given ambulance personnel by a base station physician as required by applicable medical protocols promulgated by the medical director, and by the Texas Health and Safety Code. 
Medical director. The licensed physician appointed by the city council of the City of Fredericksburg to promulgate and update the system standard of care and to perform medical audits and otherwise monitor system performance. 
Medical protocol. Any diagnosis-specific or problem-oriented written statement of standard procedure, or algorithm, promulgated by the medical director as the normal standard of pre-hospital care for a given clinical condition. 
Mutual aid agreement. A written agreement between one or more entities whereby the signing parties agree to provide backup ambulance or other emergency medical or rescue service to one another under conditions and pursuant to terms specified in the agreement. 
Patient. Any person being transported in a reclining position from or to a health care facility from any point within the service area. 
Person. Any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, governmental entity or other group or combination acting as a unit. 
Response time. The actual elapsed time between receipt of notification at the EMS control center that an ambulance is needed and the actual arrival of an ambulance, as more particularly defined in the inter-local agreement. 
Service area. That geographic area which is contained within the limits of the County of Gillespie, Texas when an interlocal agreement is in place between the City of Fredericksburg and the Commissioners Court of the County of Gillespie. 
Special event. Any public event located within the service area, for which standby ambulance service is arranged in advance, and for which an ambulance (or ambulances) are hired by the sponsor of the event or other interested party. 
System standard of care. The combined compilation of all priority-dispatching protocols, pre-arrival instruction protocols, medical protocols (i.e., first responders and ambulances), standards for certification of pre-hospital care personnel (i.e., telephone call-takers, first responders, ambulance personnel and on-line medical control physicians), as well as standards governing requirements for on-board medical equipment and supplies, and licensure of ambulance services and first responder agencies. 
(Ord. No. 10-013a, § 6.502, 9-25-2000; Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016)  
Sec. 11-61. - Creation of ambulance service. 
(a)  There is hereby created an ambulance service, emergency and transfer, for the citizens of the service area, which service shall be operated within the Fire EMS department of the city. 
(b)  The ambulance service shall be available to the citizens and those located within the city, in accordance with the terms of this article, and to the citizens of Gillespie County and those located therein, pursuant to the terms of the Inter-local Agreement (or such other and subsequent agreement that may be entered into by the city and such other parties, as approved by the city council and the governing body of such other jurisdictions). 
(c)  The business of providing ambulance service, both emergency and transfer, is declared to be a business affected by the public interest, and no person, firm or organization shall operate said business (or part thereof) within the service area, except for transfer or service used in the manner set out in section 11-67(a)(4)d. of this article. 
(d)  The ambulance service equipment held by the city shall be utilized as an ambulance service for persons requesting or utilizing such service, which shall be subject to the further provisions of this article, and such ambulance service shall be under the immediate supervision of the Fire Chief of the city, and such equipment shall be maintained at locations under the direction of such Fire Chief, subject to the approval of the city manager of the city. 
(Ord. No. 10-013a, § 6.503, 9-25-2000; Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016)  
Sec. 11-62. - Medical director. 
(a)  City council to appoint. The city council of the City of Fredericksburg shall appoint a licensed physician as Medical Director of the emergency medical service. The medical director shall serve at the pleasure of the city council of the City of Fredericksburg. 
(b)  Appointing successors. In the event of the resignation, removal, death or disability of the medical director, a successor medical director shall be appointed by the city council of the City of Fredericksburg. The medical director shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To recommend to the city EMS Administrator medically appropriate response time standards and any necessary revisions; 
(2)  To approve the establishment and updating of the system standard of care, including without limitation medical standards for ambulance, transfer and first responder vehicles and on-board equipment; 
(3)  To approve the medical protocols and standing orders for ambulance and first responder services and periodically revise same; 
(4)  To approve the control center protocols and periodically revise same; 
(5)  To supervise medical audits and develop standard procedures for the conduct of such audits; 
(6)  To approve both written and practical tests for the certification and licensing of emergency medical services personnel, including ambulance personnel, first responders and EMS control center personnel; 
(7)  To monitor response time performance and to review reports, as necessary and furnish a report to the EMS advisory board; in this regard, the city shall furnish such, statistical information regarding response time performance as may be requested by the medical director; 
(8)  To authorize the issuance, restriction, suspension, denial, revocation and renewal by the city of emergency medical service personnel, first responders and EMS control center personnel; all subject to published procedures as may be developed by the medical director and the EMS advisory board and approved by the city council; 
(9)  To supervise periodic intensive reviews of the systems, performance relative to specific clinical types and to revise medical protocols and such other standards of the system as may be appropriate in the light of the findings; 
(10)  To conduct medical audits of individual cases as requested by the EMS advisory board, by any elected official of the city or by any licensed physician regarding a patient of such physician; 
(11)  To approve 911 protocols within the service area for "medical priority dispatch" (including pre-arrival instructions, priority code classifications and whether or not to dispatch a first responder); 
(12)  To review, as needed, a performance report to the EMS advisory board; and to present annually an oral report to the EMS advisory board concerning the state of clinical and response time performance of the ambulance system; 
(13)  To approve standards governing the operation of helicopter rescue units, including standards defining the circumstances under which such units may be dispatched to emergency scenes; and 
(14)  To conduct monthly continuing education classes/meetings with all emergency medical service personnel. 
(c)  Medical Director assistance. To the extent practical, the city, through the Fire/EMS department or other city personnel, will provide the following administrative assistance to the Medical Director. Such personnel will be designated by the Fire Chief and will be subject to medical or clinical oversight by the Medical Director in the performance of such duties; but the city personnel nevertheless will be under the ultimate supervision of the city; as employer. The typical duties of the assisting city personnel may include (but are not necessarily restricted to) the following: 
(1)  Assist in establishing ambulance and equipment standards for ambulance and first responder vehicles. 
(2)  Assist in economic impact study(ies) for new or additional equipment proposed by the medical director. 
(3)  Assist in development of control center standards and protocols. 
(4)  Administer tests for certification, licensing and permitting. 
(5)  Conduct inspections of ambulances, vehicles and equipment. 
(6)  Monitor response time performance and provide, as needed, reports to medical director and EMS advisory board. 
(7)  Assist with licensing, permitting and certificate issuance, restriction, suspension, denial, revocation and removal. 
(8)  Accumulate monthly performance data for clinical and response time performance. 
(9)  Interface with Medicare and the state as necessary. 
(10)  Handle citizen complaints. 
(Ord. No. 10-013a, § 6.504, 9-25-2000; Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016)  
Sec. 11-63. - EMS Administrator. 
(a)  The EMS Coordinator shall advise the Fire Chief with regard to the following: 
(1)  Evaluation of the response time performance and training and certification programs for city emergency medical service personnel, and such other aspects of the EMS ambulance system as may be directed by the Fire Chief. 
(2)  Advise the Fire Chief of the status of the entire emergency medical services system (i.e., county-wide and not limited to the city corporate limits), including first responder programs, public CPR, emergency management and other programs, etc., and assist in the implementation of same. 
(3)  Advise the Fire Chief from time to time as to any recommended changes in equipment needs or estimated response times. 
(4)  Advise and make recommendations to the Fire Chief with respect to resolution of issues and as to protocols, licensing and related or unrelated EMS issues. 
(Ord. No. 10-013a, § 6.505, 9-25-2000; Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016)  
Sec. 11-64. - Licenses, etc. 
Upon authorization by the Medical Director, the city, acting through its city manager or city clerk or other employee of the city designated by the city manager, shall be responsible for the actual issuance, restriction, suspension, revocation and renewal of all licenses, permits and certificates under this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-013a, § 6.506, 9-25-2000; Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016)  
Sec. 11-65. - Fees for service. 
(a)  Any person who utilizes the ambulance service of the city, whether such person requested the same or not, shall pay for such services the amounts specified in the schedule of fees set out in appendix A to this Code. 
(b)  The fees and charges set forth and/or established herein may be changed and amended from time to time by resolution of the city council of the City of Fredericksburg and such fees and charges (and any changes or amendments) shall be set forth in and made a part of the City of Fredericksburg Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. No. 10-013a, § 6.507, 9-25-2000)  
Sec. 11-66. - Failure to pay for services. 
(a)  Any person who utilizes the ambulance service of the city and who fails to pay for said service within 60 days after a statement of costs for such service has been mailed to the address of the user (or parent, in the event a minor is the user), which address for the purpose of this section will be the address which is supplied to the operator of the ambulance or which is obtained from the hospital where such person is delivered, shall be in violation of this article. 
(b)  It shall be prima facie evidence that the person utilizing such service did so with the intent to defraud upon (1) a showing that such person was notified in writing of the indebtedness for such service, which notice in writing shall be by certified or registered mail to the address as is set forth in subsection (a) hereof or by personal service of a peace officer of the city and (2) failure of such person to pay for such indebtedness within ten days after receipt of the notice. A copy of the caption of this section shall accompany the notice forwarded to the user of such services by certified or registered mail. 
(Ord. No. 10-013a, § 6.508, 9-25-2000)  
Sec. 11-67. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful: 
(1)  To knowingly use or cause to be used any ambulance service other than that of the city, except those services as described in subsection (a)(4) of this section. 
(2)  For any purpose to provide ambulance service within the service area, other than by the City of Fredericksburg; or to provide helicopter rescue services, or specialized mobile intensive care services except in accordance with regulations governing the delivery of such services promulgated by the Fire Chief or this jurisdiction for the operation of such units; or to provide first responder services without approval of the Medical Director. 
(3)  To negligently or knowingly give false information to induce dispatch of an ambulance or helicopter rescue unit. 
(4)  It shall be a defense to any alleged violation of this section that the ambulance, first responder or transfer vehicle or service is being used solely in any of the following manners: 
a.  A privately owned vehicle not ordinarily used in the business of transporting a patient. 
b.  A vehicle rendering service as an ambulance in the event of a major catastrophe or extreme system overload when such condition is declared by the city manager, or by the director of emergency services of the city, or by the mayor of the city. 
c.  Any ambulance owned or operated by the federal government or any agency thereof or state government or any political subdivision thereof. 
d.  Any transport to a location within the service area, which transport originated from outside the service area. 
e.  Transporting a patient who is picked up from a location within the service area and transported to a location beyond the service area, provided said ambulance or ambulance service initially transported said patient into the service area and is making the return trip. 
f.  Mutual aid calls when rendered pursuant to a mutual aid agreement executed by the city. 
g.  Special events coverage, so long as such service is provided without charge by an emergency medical services volunteer provider, as defined in the V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 773.003. 
h.  Wheelchair transportation services. 
i.  Medical transports by helicopter where such transports originate outside the service area or at a hospital location within the service area. 
j.  A person in favor of which the city council of the City of Fredericksburg has issued a certificate of public convenience and necessity, permitting the provision of ambulance service by such person within the service area as being necessary for the benefit and general welfare of the city and citizens. 
k.  Any transfer (non-emergency) to a location more than 90 miles outside the service area, if approved by the Emergency Services Director of the city or his designated representative. 
(b)  Violations of this section are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be prohibited and abated in actions at law or in equity. 
(c)  It shall not be necessary for the charging complaint to negate any exception contained in this section concerning any prohibited act, but any such exception made in this section may be urged as a defense by any person charged by such complaint. 
(Ord. No. 10-013a, § 6.509, 9-25-2000; Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016)  
Sec. 11-68. - Penalties. 
The following provisions for application of penalties violation of this article shall apply: 
(1)  Any person convicted of violating the provisions hereof shall be fined in accordance with section 1-6 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fredericksburg. This does not serve to limit any other remedies available in law or equity. 
(2)  Each day that any violation of this article is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 10-013a, § 6.510, 9-25-2000)  
Sec. 11-69. - Traffic laws exemption. 
When the driver of an ambulance has reasonable grounds to believe that an emergency exists, as determined by the EMS control center or a medic in charge of a case, the driver of the ambulance may: 
(1)  Park or stand, irrespective of the otherwise applicable provisions of law, ordinance or regulation; 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation; 
(3)  Exceed the maximum speed limits permitted by law, ordinance or regulation; provided, however, that life and property are not endangered thereby; and 
(4)  Disregard laws, ordinances and regulations governing directions or movements or turning in specific directions; provided, however, (1) that any exemption herein granted shall apply only when such ambulance is operating with siren and emergency lights in operating, and when such audible and visual signals meet the requirements of law, ordinance or regulation; and (2) that the foregoing provisions shall not operate to relieve the driver of any ambulance from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
(Ord. No. 10-013a, § 6.511, 9-25-2000)  
Secs. 11-70—11-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (NIMS) 
 
Sec. 11-101. - Adoption; background. 
(a)  Adoption. The city council adopts the National Incident Management System (NIMS), as required by HSPD-5, as the standard for incident management by the city. The NIMS, dated March 1, 2004, contains a practice model for the accomplishment of the significant responsibilities associated with prevention, preparedness, response, recovery, and mitigation of all major and national hazard situations. 
(b)  Background. On February 28, 2003, the President issued Homeland Security Presidential Directive (HSPD)-5 that directed the Department of Homeland Security, in cooperation with representatives of federal, state, and local governments, to develop a National Incident Management System (NIMS) to provide a consistent approach to the effective management of situations involving natural disasters, manmade disasters or terrorism. The final NIMS was released on March 1, 2004. The HSPD-5 requires that state and local governments adopt the NIMS by fiscal year 2005 as a pre-condition to the receipt of federal grants, contracts and activities related to the management and preparedness for certain disaster and hazard situations. 
(Ord. No. 15-007, art. IV, § 11-101, 7-18-2005)  
Secs. 11-102—110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - EMERGENCY SERVICES COST RECOVERY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 24-022, adopted Oct. 20, 2014, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 11-102—11-104. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 11-111—11-113. 
 
Sec. 11-111. - Fee collection authorized. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of a structure, vehicle, or property to which the Fire/EMS Department or other department of the City of Fredericksburg (the "City") provides fire suppression, emergency management services, vehicle extrication, hazardous material mitigation, or other fire department services, (collectively referred to in this article as "Emergency Response Services") or any person or entity causing the need for the City's Fire/EMS services to respond and/or provide any emergency response service (the "Responsible Party") shall pay the cost of such service, which shall include both the base response fees (which may be imposed by other provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fredericksburg) and the Cost Recovery Fees. Cost Recovery Fees are set forth in the Appendix A of this Code of Ordinances and are hereby found to not exceed the City's actual expense in providing such emergency response services. The fees enacted herein apply to any Emergency Response Services rendered by the City to whatever property or person, whether within the City of Fredericksburg, Gillespie County or elsewhere, if requested by any other person or entity, or if supplied by the City pursuant to any interlocal cooperation agreement. 
(b)  Within 30 days of the date of providing Emergency Response Services, the Fire Chief or his or her designee shall submit an invoice for all costs, fees, charges and expenses related to the provisions of such services to the owner, occupant or other responsible party or their designated agent, representatives and insurance companies. All such bills are to be paid within 60 days of the receipt thereof. 
(c)  In addition to the cost of service described in subsection (a) above, any bills, fines or penalties, including but not limited to clean up costs, fees or expenses, that are incurred by the City or any State or Federal agencies and which are related to the same situation or occurrence shall be charged and billed separately and due as provided in subsection (b) above. 
(d)  The fees provided for herein are in addition to other fees imposed by the City in any other ordinance, and specifically are in addition to ambulance and other fees charged by the Emergency Medical Services Department of the City. 
(Ord. No. 24-022, 10-20-2014; Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016)  
Sec. 11-112. - Cost recovery fee schedule. 
The cost recovery fees will be collected in the amounts set forth in Appendix A, Emergency Services Cost Recovery Fees of this code. 
(Ord. No. 24-022, 10-20-2014)  
Sec. 11-113. - Enforcement. 
The City may enforce the provisions of this article by civil actions in a court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of any amounts due hereunder plus attorney fees, costs and expenses and to obtain any other relief that may be appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 24-022, 10-20-2014)  
Chapter 14 - ENVIRONMENT  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 14-1—14-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - UNSIGHTLY OR INSANITARY ACCUMULATIONS - PUBLIC NUISANCE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of home-rule municipalities concerning sanitation and health, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.081; regulation of nuisances by home-rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 217.042; municipal power concerning weeds and other unsanitary matter, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.004; assessment of expenses and lien for abatement by municipality, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.007. 
 
Sec. 14-19. - Public nuisance declared. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, or entity who shall own or occupy any property in the city to allow stagnant water, weeds, brush, vegetation, junk, refuse, rubbish, carrion, or any other unsightly, unwholesome or objectionable or unsanitary matter to be kept, accumulate or grow on property owned or occupied by such person or entity. Violation hereof is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity who shall own or occupy any property in the City to use or allow the use of a vehicle, boat, trailer, recreational vehicle, container, part of a vehicle or trailer or other vehicle attachment for the storage of junk, trash and/or debris or for housekeeping, living or sleeping quarters not normally associated with the intended use of the said item. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the same was used for the collection of construction debris or materials during a construction project on the property upon which the item is placed. 
(c)  For the purposes hereof, the following definitions are used: 
(1)  Weeds, brush and vegetation shall mean and include brush, vines, grasses, clippings, fallen leaves, branches, fruit and other plant material and products on or about property which accumulate or have attained such growth as to have become a fire menace, a harbor for vermin, rats, insects, animals, reptiles or any other creatures which creates, or tends to create, a menace to health, safety or the public welfare, or an unsightly or blighting influence on the neighborhood of the property. Without limiting the foregoing definition, any growing weeds exceeding 12 inches in height shall be presumed to be a nuisance. 
(2)  Junk, refuse and rubbish shall mean and include all material decayable or non-decayable, new or used, which when kept, stored or accumulated upon property creates or tends to create an unsanitary, unsightly, unsafe environment or blighting influence on the property in question or the neighborhood. Junk, refuse and rubbish shall include all manner of items or material, dead animals or parts thereof, metal, household goods and appliances, machinery, fixtures, building materials, vehicles or motors, parts and accessories of the same. The keeping, storing and accumulating of such goods or materials shall not be considered to be a violation of this nuisance ordinance if: 
a.  The same is contained entirely within a closed receptacle or container composed of durable material designated to prevent the discharge of its contents and to be inaccessible to animals, vermin or other pests and to be inaccessible to children, or 
b.  Such material is owned or kept by a junk dealer, operating a business on the subject premises, in conformity with the zoning and other ordinances of the city. Such dealers are exempt from prosecution hereunder for keeping and accumulating such items, provided that the same be kept in a manner which does not create an unhealthy or unsafe condition and that the same be screened from public view by walls, fencing or landscaping. 
(Code 1992, § 6.301; Ord. No. 24-010, 7-21-2014)  
Sec. 14-20. - Notice to remove; authority of city to remove; assessment of cost. 
Should any owner of any lot or lots within the city who shall allow stagnant water, weeds, brush, vegetation, junk, refuse, rubbish, carrion or any other unsightly, objectionable or unsanitary matter to grow or accumulate thereon, fail and/or refuse to cut down and/or remove such weeds, rubbish, junk bush or other unsightly objectionable or unsanitary matter, as the case may be, within ten days after notice to said owner to so do, which notice shall be given as provided in V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.006(b) as the same may be amended from time to time, the city may do such cutting down and/or removing the same, or cause the same to be done. The city may pay therefor, and charge the expenses incurred in doing such work or having such work done or improvements made to the owner of such lot or lots or real estate. If such work is done or improvements made at the expense of the city then such expenses shall be assessed as a lien on the real estate, or lot or lots upon which such expense was incurred. The city, and the city's authorized assistants, employees, contracting agents or other representatives are hereby expressly authorized to enter upon private property at all reasonable hours for the purpose of cutting, destroying and/or removing such weeds, brush, vegetation, junk, refuse, rubbish, carrion or the unsightly or objectionable materials in a manner consistent with this article and with the laws governing the state. The municipal court of the city shall have authority to issue all orders necessary to enforce this article. Neither the city nor its employees, agents or contractors shall be answerable in damages or otherwise for damage to property due to the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 6.302)  
Sec. 14-21. - City's costs to constitute privileged lien. 
The city manager or other person authorized to act on behalf of the city shall file a statement of such expenses incurred under section 14-20 filing the amount of such expenses, the date on which said work was done or improvements made, with the county clerk of Gillespie County Texas. The city shall have a privileged lien on such lot or lots or real estate upon which said work was done or improvements made to secure the expenditures so made, in accordance with the provisions of said V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 342, which said lien shall be second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements. Said lien amount shall bear ten percent interest from the date said statement was filed. It is further provided that for any such expenditures, and interest, as aforesaid, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure of said lien may be had in the name of the city. The statement of expenses so made, as aforesaid, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for such work or improvements. 
(Code 1992, § 6.303)  
Sec. 14-22. - Work or improvements by municipality; notice. 
The municipality in the notice of a violation under section 14-20 may inform the owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, that if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the municipality without further notice may correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expense against the property. If a violation covered by a notice under this section occurs within the one-year period, and the municipality has not been informed in writing by the owner of an ownership change, then the municipality without notice may take any action permitted herein and assess its expense as provided by section 14-21 above. 
(Code 1992, § 6.304)  
Chapter 17 - FIRE PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Home rule municipality, fire department, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 342.011. 
 
ARTICLE I. - FIRE/EMS DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 17-1. - Created. 
There is hereby established and maintained for the City of Fredericksburg, a Fire/EMS Department to provide fire suppression, rescue, fire prevention, public fire education and emergency medical services (see Chapter 11) to the City and other jurisdictions in accordance with any interlocal agreement approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016)  
Sec. 17-2. - Fire Chief. 
The City Manager shall appoint the Fire Chief who shall be responsible for the management and administration of the Fire/EMS Department. The Fire Chief shall work at the pleasure of the City Manager. The Fire/EMS Chief may appoint and employ personnel for the Fire/EMS Department as authorized in the annual budget of the City, and as approved by the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016)  
ARTICLE II. - INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Former Art. I has been renumbered as Art. II, at the editor's discretion, to facilitate inclusion of Ord. No. 26-014, adopted Oct. 3, 2016, as new Art. I. 
 
Sec. 17-3. - International Fire Code adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by reference, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, the International Fire Code recommended by the Association of International Fire Chiefs, being particularly the 2015 edition thereof, Including Appendices "B", "C", "D", "H", and "I", and all amendments and corrections thereof, existing or issued after the date of the Ordinance from which this Section is derived. The modifications thereto adopted as section 17-3 shall also apply to the revised code hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 11-0146, § 5.101, 8-20-2001; Ord. No. 17-007, § 17-1, 3-19-2007; Ord. No. 23-013, 8-5-2013; Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016; Ord. No. 2019-27 , § 10, 10-7-2019) 
Editor's note— Former § 17-1 has been renumbered as § 17-3, at the editor's discretion, to facilitate inclusion of Ord. No. 26-014, adopted Oct. 3, 2016.  
Sec. 17-4. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention. Shall mean the Fire Chief of the City of Fredericksburg or his or her designee. 
Corporation counsel. The city attorney for the City of Fredericksburg. 
Municipality. As used in the International Fire Code adopted in this article, it shall be held to mean the City of Fredericksburg. 
(Ord. No. 11-0146, § 5.102, 8-20-2001; Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016) 
Editor's note— Former § 17-2 has been renumbered as § 17-4, at the editor's discretion, to facilitate inclusion of Ord. No. 26-014, adopted Oct. 3, 2016.  
Sec. 17-5. - Modifications to the International Fire Code. 
The Fire Chief shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of the Standard Fire Prevention Code adopted in this article upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his/her duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of such code, provided that the spirit of such code be observed, public safety be secured, and substantial justice be done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the Fire Chief thereon shall be entered upon his/her records and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. Reference in section 105 thereof to the board of adjustment shall refer to the Board of Adjustment of the City of Fredericksburg. 
(Code 1992, § 5.103; Ord. No. 11-0146, art. 5.100, 8-20-2001; Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016) 
Editor's note— Former § 17-3 has been renumbered as § 17-5, at the editor's discretion, to facilitate inclusion of Ord. No. 26-014, adopted Oct. 3, 2016.  
Sec. 17-6. - Removal of fire department equipment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, under any pretext whatsoever, other than for the purpose for which they are intended in the fire department, to take or use any engine, truck, ladder, hose or other apparatus belonging to or in possession of the fire department or volunteer fire department or to break, deface or injure the same in any manner. Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1992, art. 5.200; Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016) 
Editor's note— Former § 17-4 has been renumbered as § 17-6, at the editor's discretion, to facilitate inclusion of Ord. No. 26-014, adopted Oct. 3, 2016.  
Sec. 17-7. - Arson reward. 
A standing reward of $250.00 is hereby established to be paid to any person furnishing evidence as a result of which any person is arrested and finally convicted of the crime of arson, committed within the corporate limits. Such reward shall be paid out of the general fund of the city. The city council shall be the sole and exclusive judge in awarding any such reward. 
(Code 1992, art. 5.300; Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016) 
Editor's note— Former § 17-5 has been renumbered as § 17-7, at the editor's discretion, to facilitate inclusion of Ord. No. 26-014, adopted Oct. 3, 2016.  
Sec. 17-8. - Fire safety, automobile service stations. 
All storage tanks at automobile service stations shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Texas Natural Resources Conservation Commission. 
(Code 1992, art. 5.600; Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016) 
Editor's note— Former § 17-6 has been renumbered as § 17-8, at the editor's discretion, to facilitate inclusion of Ord. No. 26-014, adopted Oct. 3, 2016.  
Secs. 17-9—17-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIRE MARSHAL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Former Art. II has been renumbered as Art. III, at the editor's discretion, to facilitate inclusion of Ord. No. 26-014, adopted Oct. 3, 2016, as new Art. I. 
 
Sec. 17-31. - Created. 
The office of the Fire Marshal is hereby established. The Fire Marshal or his or her designee shall perform such duties as prescribed by law and by ordinance and shall be the authority having jurisdiction in nuisance code, arson, fire prevention and/or fire code matters. 
The Fire Marshal shall have authority to investigate all fires within the City. 
(Code 1992, § 5.401; Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016)  
Sec. 17-32. - Appointment. 
The Fire Marshal shall be appointed by the Fire Chief with the approval of the City Manager. The Fire Marshal shall report directly to and be supervised by the Fire Chief. 
(Code 1992, § 5.402; Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016)  
Sec. 17-33. - Duty to investigate fires. 
The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within the city by which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall be commenced as soon as reasonably practical. 
(Code 1992, § 5.403; Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016)  
Sec. 17-34. - Taking of testimony, summoning witnesses, administration of oaths, etc. 
(a)  The fire marshal, when, in his/her, opinion further investigation of a fire is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing. 
(b)  The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him/her to testify in relation to any matter which is, by the provisions of this article, a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any book, paper, or document deemed pertinent thereto. The fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirmations to any persons appearing as witnesses before him/her. 
(Code 1992, § 5.404)  
Sec. 17-35. - Investigations may be private; separation of witnesses. 
All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in his/her discretion, be private, and persons, other than those required to be present, may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held, and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other until they have been examined. 
(Code 1992, § 5.405)  
Sec. 17-36. - Duty when evidence indicates crime in connection with fire. 
If the fire marshal is of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or with an attempt to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal conduct in connection with a fire investigated by him/her, he/she shall cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such offense or either of them, and shall furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of witnesses and all of the information obtained by him/her, including a copy all the pertinent and material testimony taken in the case. 
(Code 1992, § 5.406)  
Sec. 17-37. - Periodic inspections of mercantile, manufacturing and public buildings. 
It shall be the duty of the fire marshal, as often as in his discretion is necessary to maintain adequate fire prevention activities, to enter upon and make or cause to be entered and made a thorough examination of all office mercantile, manufacturing and buildings to which the public has access, together with the premises belonging thereto. 
(Code 1992, § 5.407)  
Sec. 17-38. - Ordering correction or removal of defective conditions. 
Whenever the fire marshal shall find any building or other structure which, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition or for any cause, is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger other buildings or property, or so occupied that fire would endanger persons or property therein, and whenever he/she shall find an improper or dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges, furnaces, or other heating appliances of any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues and pipes with which the same may be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of lighting devices or systems, or a dangerous or unlawful storage of explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustible, inflammable and refuse materials, or other conditions which may be dangerous in character or liable to cause or promote fire or create conditions dangerous to the firemen or occupants, he/she shall order the same to be removed or remedied and such order shall be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant of the building or premises. If the owner or occupant deems himself/herself aggrieved by such order, he/she may, within five days, appeal to the city manager, who shall investigate the cause of the complaint and, unless by his/her authority the order is revoked, such order shall remain in force and be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant. Any person failing to comply with such order, after the expiration of such five days, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1992, § 5.408)  
Sec. 17-39. - Misconduct of witnesses summoned by fire marshal. 
Any witness who refuses to be sworn or who refuses to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of the fire marshal, or who fails or refuses to produce any book or document touching any matter under examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the fire marshal in the matter of such investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under investigation as provided in this article, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and it shall be the duty of the fire marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. 
(Code 1992, § 5.409)  
Sec. 17-40. - Records of fires to be kept. 
The fire marshal shall keep in his/her office a record of all fires, together with all facts, statistics and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the amount of the loss, which may be determined by the investigation required by this article. Such records shall be kept for a period of five years from the date of the fire loss. 
(Code 1992, § 5.410)  
Sec. 17-41. - Monthly reports to state fire marshal. 
At the end of each month, the fire marshal shall report to the state fire marshal all existing hazardous conditions, together with a separate report on each fire in the city during the month. 
(Code 1992, § 5.411)  
Sec. 17-42. - Right of entry. 
The fire marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary in the performance of the duties imposed upon him/her by the provisions of this article, to enter upon and examine any building or premises where any fire has occurred and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall be exercised only with reason and good discretion. The fire marshal shall have the right to enter any other building or premises, with or without complaint of adjacent property owners, for the purpose of examining the same for fire hazards. 
(Code 1992, § 5.412) 
Editor's note— Should entry be denied, the fire marshal may obtain entry by a search warrant issued as provided for by state law.  
Sec. 17-43. - Unsafe conditions in structures; notice for abatement; penalty for failure to comply with notice. 
(a)  Any owner or occupant of a building or other structure or premises, who shall keep or maintain the same when, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, such structure is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger buildings, or property of others, or is especially liable to fire and which is so occupied that fire would endanger other persons or their property therein, shall be punished according to the provisions of section 1-6 of this Code. 
(b)  Any owner or occupant of any building or other structure, or premises, who shall keep or maintain the same with an improper arrangement of a stove, range, furnace, or other heating appliance of any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues, and pipes with which the same may be connected so as to be dangerous in the matter of fire, or health, or safety of persons or property of others; or who shall keep or maintain any building, other structure or premise with an improper arrangement of a lighting device or system, or with a storage of explosives, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustibles, inflammable materials, refuse, or with any other condition which shall be dangerous in character to the health or property of others; or which shall be dangerous in the matter of promoting, augmenting or causing fires; or which shall create conditions dangerous to firemen or occupants of such building, structure or premises other than the maintainer thereof, shall be punished according to the provisions of section 1-6 of this Code. 
(c)  No prosecution shall be brought under paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section until the order provided for in section 17-39 be given and the party notified shall fail or refuse to comply with the same for a period of five days following the notice. 
(Code 1992, § 5.413) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority concerning substandard building, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 214.001; additional authority to secure substandard building, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 214.0011, 214.0015.  
Sec. 17-44. - Fire Marshal Fees and Charges. 
Fees shall be paid for permit review, plan review, inspections, and other miscellaneous fire protection services rendered by the City's Fire Marshal, as set forth in the fee schedule found in appendix A to this Code. 
(Ord. No. 28-020, § 1, 10-1-2018)  
Secs. 17-45—17-61. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - VOLUNTEERS FOR THE FIRE/EMS DEPARTMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Former Art. III has been renumbered as Art. IV, at the editor's discretion, to facilitate inclusion of Ord. No. 26-014, adopted Oct. 3, 2016, as new Art. I. 
State Law reference— Volunteer firefighters and fire departments, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 419.071. 
 
Sec. 17-62. - Number of members. 
The volunteer fire department shall consist of not more than 45 active members and as many more as the city council by resolution may find necessary. The volunteers will be supervised by the Fire Chief of the City of Fredericksburg. 
(Code 1992, § 5.501; Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016)  
Sec. 17-63. - Officers, election of officers. 
The officers of the volunteer fire department shall be classified into two groups: namely business officers and fire-fighting officers. The business officers shall be the president, vice-president, treasurer and secretary. The fire-fighting officers shall be the assistant chief, two captains, two lieutenants and one or more fire station officers who shall also serve as the role of Captain, and such other officers as may be necessary to carry out the work of such department. The Fire Chief shall serve as an at-large, voting member of the volunteer fire department and shall serve Ex officio for all meetings of the business and firefighting volunteers, and committees thereof, and shall offer support and assistance to all officers. All volunteer officers shall be elected by the volunteers annually on the second Thursday in December and shall take office the following January 1 for the entire calendar year. 
(Code 1992, § 5.502; Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016)  
Sec. 17-64. - Duties of officers generally. 
It shall be the responsibility of the Fire Chief and president to see that all laws, orders, rules and regulations concerning the volunteer fire department are carried out. Additionally, the Fire Chief and president will enforce the rules and regulations made to secure discipline in the volunteer fire department. The secretary of the volunteer fire department shall keep the minutes for each meeting and be responsible for all correspondence from the fire department. The treasurer shall be responsible for all funds and accounts belonging to the volunteer fire department and shall give a report each meeting to the general membership. The treasurer will also be responsible for paying all accounts payable and keeping a set of books for each account. The Fire Chief (with assistance from the volunteers) shall see that all apparatus and equipment of the Fire/EMS Department is kept in proper order and repair. The Fire Chief shall be responsible for the city municipal budget dealing with the Fire/EMS Department and approve all expenditures from that budget. The Fire Chief shall also oversee the administrative and operational activities of the Fire/EMS Department career personnel and the volunteer fire department officers and volunteers in the delivery of fire suppression and fire prevention activities. The Fire Chief or his designee, shall be the designated Fire/EMS representative of the unified command in any large incident or disaster that involves multiple agencies or disciplines. 
(Code 1992, § 5.503; Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016)  
Sec. 17-65. - Specific duties of the Fire Chief. 
The Fire Chief of the City of Fredericksburg shall have command over all other officers, members of the Fire/EMS department, volunteers and all persons who may be present at a fire or other emergency. In his/her absence, his or her designee, or in the absence of a designee, the next highest-ranking officer shall fill this position, generally and in the unified command system. The Fire Chief shall direct placement of the firefighting equipment, and shall take all proper measures for extinguishing the fire, protection of property, preservation of order, observance of state laws and city ordinances and regulations, respecting fires. 
(Code 1992, § 5.504; Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016)  
Sec. 17-66. - General duties of volunteer firefighters. 
Upon an alarm, all active members of the volunteer fire department shall report to the fire station, the location of the ambulances, or may go straight to the scene as the current rules of the Fire/EMS Department allows. The volunteer firefighters shall respond in full turnout gear or issued protective gear from the station in fire department apparatus under their care, and shall work the same under the direction of the officer in command at such fire until such fire is extinguished. Those who are certified as medical personnel shall respond as required with the equipment and under the protocols established for them. Apparatus shall then be returned to its place of keeping in a ready-to-respond mode (cleaned, stocked and re-fueled). The city council shall provide facilities for Fire/EMS Department vehicles. The members of the fire department, including the volunteer firefighters and medical personnel, shall keep all such apparatus and equipment in constant readiness for use. 
(Code 1992, § 5.505; Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016)  
Sec. 17-67. - Liability for damage. 
Neither the city council, city manager, the Fire Chief, or any member of the fire department, shall in any way be held responsible for damages occasioned to property during attempts to extinguish fires, or for the destruction thereof, or for damage done to any person, animal or vehicle coming into collision with the fire extinguishing apparatus or the vehicles driven by members of the department when proceeding to the place of a fire or to the fire station when responding to a fire call. 
(Code 1992, § 5.506; Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016)  
Sec. 17-68. - Roping off streets, buildings, etc., during a fire. 
The fire chief, or the officer in command, shall have the right to order the placing of ropes or guards across all streets, alleys or lanes on which may be situated any building on fire, and at such other points as may be deemed expedient and necessary, and they shall prevent the entrance of all persons, except firemen, into the danger zone. If advisable, owners and occupants of and employees in adjoining buildings, endangered by the existing fire, may be admitted. 
(Code 1992, § 5.507)  
Sec. 17-69. - Right-of-way; control of traffic when proceeding to a fire. 
All movable apparatus of the Fire/EMS Department and vehicles driven by members of the department shall have paramount right-of-way through all streets, lanes, alleys, places and courts of the city when running to a fire. In order to give such apparatus and the vehicles of the members of the department the unobstructed use of the public ways, upon an alarm, all pedestrians shall get off such public ways and vehicles thereon shall be parked at the curb, or drawn up on the right next to vehicles parked at the curb and halted, or shall be driven off at the next intersection, if necessary to clear the way for the fire apparatus and accompanying vehicles. Traffic shall not be continued until all fire-fighting equipment has cleared the immediate area. 
(Code 1992, § 5.508; Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016)  
Sec. 17-70. - Right to destroy buildings to prevent spread of fire. 
Whenever any building in the city is on fire, it shall be lawful for the chief, or acting chief, to direct such building, or adjoining buildings, erection, or fences likely to burn and communicate the fire to other buildings, to be torn down or blown up, or otherwise destroyed in order to check or extinguish the existing fire. 
(Code 1992, § 5.509; Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016)  
Sec. 17-71. - Right of arrest. 
During the progress of a fire in the city, and for 24 hours after its extinguishment, the chief of police, or other police officers of the city, may arrest and keep in custody all persons suspected of arson, idle, disorderly or suspicious persons, and persons who hinder any firefighter in the discharge of his or her duty or resist or refuse to obey any such officer while acting in the discharge of his/her duty. 
(Code 1992, § 5.510; Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016)  
Sec. 17-72. - Interference with fire department in fighting fires prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, not a member or members of the Fire/EMS Department, to interfere with or in any manner hinder the Fire/EMS Department or any member or employee of said fire department in the discharge of its or his/her duties as such, unless ordered to do so provided for in the previous section. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, not a member or employee of said Fire/EMS department, to handle or in any way interfere with any of the apparatus belonging to or used by said Fire/EMS department whether at a fire, going to or coming from a fire, while housed at the fire station, or at any time, unless requested to do so by a member of said Fire/EMS Department. 
(Code 1992, § 5.511; Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016)  
Sec. 17-73. - Passage of other rules and regulations. 
The Fire/EMS Department may pass such additional regulations not inconsistent with the provisions hereof, with other ordinances of the city, and with the laws of the state, which it deems necessary for its good government, and any member of the volunteer fire department who fails or refuses to comply therewith and with the provisions hereof shall forfeit his/her membership in such department. 
(Code 1992, § 5.512; Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016)  
Secs. 17-74—17-94. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OUTDOOR FIRES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Former Art. IV has been renumbered as Art. V, at the editor's discretion, to facilitate inclusion of Ord. No. 26-014, adopted Oct. 3, 2016, as new Art. I. 
 
Sec. 17-95. - Outdoor fires regulated. 
Whenever it shall become necessary for any person to have a fire out of doors for cooking, washing, or any other purely domestic purposes, such person is hereby required to build such fire in a fire proof container of some kind, made of brick, stone, metal or other fire proof material in such manner as to prevent said fire from escaping. All other fires shall require a permit from the building official and shall be subject to such conditions as he or she may place upon such permit. All other fires shall require a permit from the fire marshal and shall be subject to such conditions as that official may place on the permit. 
(Code 1992, § 5.701)  
Sec. 17-96. - Fire prohibited on public property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to light or have lighted any fire in any street, alley, thoroughfare, or public property. 
(Code 1992, § 5.702)  
Sec. 17-97. - Adoption of air pollution regulations by reference. 
The city hereby adopts in its entirety the Texas Clean Air Act and Federal Pollution Act by reference insofar as each of said acts pertains to cities, towns and villages in the category in which the city falls by a population category. 
(Code 1992, § 5.703) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to abate air pollution in matter consistent with state law and rules of Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 382.113.  
Secs. 17-98—17-117. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FIREWORKS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Former Art. V has been renumbered as Art. VI, at the editor's discretion, to facilitate inclusion of Ord. No. 26-014, adopted Oct. 3, 2016, as new Art. I. 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to regulate explosives, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.001; state law does not preempt municipal authority to prohibit or regulate use of fireworks, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2154.004; regulation of fireworks and fireworks displays, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code § 2154.001 et seq.; fireworks use, displays and regulations, 28 Tex. Admin. Code § 34.800 et seq. 
 
Sec. 17-118. - Use of fireworks prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to fire, explode or cause to be exploded any firecrackers, cannon crackers, Roman candles, sky rockets, torpedoes, or other fireworks or similar noise making articles, within the corporate limits or within 5,000 feet of the city limits; provided, however, that the Fire Marshal may issue permits to civic organizations for special fireworks displays and cannon firing upon a showing that such exhibits and/or firing will not create a fire hazard or be otherwise hazardous to any property, or dangerous to any person or persons, and provided that such organization complies with the safety provisions of the fire marshal. 
(Code 1992, § 7.501; Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016)  
Sec. 17-119. - Sale of fireworks prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit, or to have in his/her possession with the intent to give away, sell or offer for sale, or to sell within the city limits, any firecrackers, cannon crackers, Roman candles, sky rockets, torpedoes, or other combustible fireworks of any kind. 
(Code 1992, § 7.502; Ord. No. 26-014, 10-3-2016)  
Chapter 20 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipality may not enact or enforce a law making conduct covered under the state Penal Code an offense subject to criminal penalty, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 1.08; authority of municipality to define, prohibit, and enforce prohibition of nuisances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 217.042. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 20-1. - Discharge of firearms. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearm, including BB guns, in the city limits or within 5,000 feet of the city limits without first securing the permission of the chief of police or his/her deputies. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Law enforcement peace officers when acting in performance of their official duties. 
(2)  Shooting ranges which are operated by the police department or under the supervision of the park board, or which are privately operated if approved by the police department. 
(3)  The use of blank cartridges for a show or theatrical production, for signal or ceremonial purposes in athletics or sports, or by military organizations. 
(4)  Self defense or justifiable or excusable homicide situations. 
(5)  Hunting and/or shooting on one's own property or with written permission of the owner of the property. 
(6)  Destroying predatory animal on one's own property or with written permission of the owner of the property. 
(Code 1992, art. 7.400) 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to regulate firearms and explosives, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 229.001.  
Sec. 20-2. - Fishing, Lady Bird Johnson municipal park. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to take fish by means of any net, trotline, throwline or spear gun in any of the waters within the confines of Lady Bird Johnson Municipal Park. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person in any one day to catch and retain, or to place on or in any device or container for holding same while he/she is fishing, any fish that is taken from the waters within the confines of said park in excess of the limits established in the regulations of the state parks and wildlife department. 
(Code 1992, art. 7.600) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority concerning public waters within corporate limits, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code § 31.092.  
Sec. 20-3. - Camping in City Parks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to camp upon any City park land. 
(b)  This Section 20-3 shall not apply to: 
(1)  Camping in areas of City park land specifically set aside and clearly marked for public camping purposes; and 
(2)  Camping during special events located on City park land when specifically authorized by the Director of Parks and Recreation. 
(c)  For purposes of this Section 20-3, the term "camp" or "camping" shall be defined as: 
(1)  The parking and occupying of a recreational vehicle or camper to provide sleeping quarters for temporary human habitation; 
(2)  The erection of a tent to provide sleeping quarters for temporary human habitation; or 
(3)  The use of other materials, including but not limited to, sleeping bags, bedrolls, blankets, sheets, tarps, and cardboard, to provide sleeping quarters for temporary human habitation. 
(d)  For purposes of this Section 20-3, the term "City park land" shall be defined as: 
(1)  Cross Mountain Park; 
(2)  Elementary School Park; 
(3)  Ft. Martin Scott; 
(4)  Frantzen Park; 
(5)  Lady Bird Johnson Municipal Park; 
(6)  Marktplatz (Market Square); 
(7)  Oak Crest Park; 
(8)  Old Fair Park; 
(9)  Any City owned land specifically set aside and clearly marked for public use as a playground or organized sports field; and 
(10)  Any streets, roadways or parking areas within the boundaries of the land areas set forth above in Sections 20-3(d)(1) through 20-3(d)(9). 
(e)  Upon conviction of any violation of this Section 20-3, a person shall be subject to penalties as provided by Section 1-6 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 28-016, § 1, 10-1-2018)  
Sec. 20-4. - SEX OFFENDERS. 
A.  Finding and intent. The City Council finds that child sex predators, who are required to register as a sex offender under Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. ch. 62, present a threat to the health, safety and welfare of children. The City Council further finds that children lack the ability to protect themselves from sexual predators, and additional safety measures are required to prevent certain registered sex offenders from having access to children in areas where children generally feel safe. 
It is the intent of this Section 20-4 to serve the City's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City, by creating areas around locations where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers, wherein certain registered child sex offenders are prohibited from entering, loitering, or establishing temporary or permanent residency. 
B.  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Section 20-4, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this Subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, and terms not defined here shall be construed as in ordinary and common usage. 
Child safety area shall mean all improved and unimproved areas of a lot or tract of land that is used as a private or public elementary or secondary school, a day-care center or facility, a private or public playground, a private or public youth center, a public swimming pool, a video arcade facility, an amusement park, a carnival or fair, a public park, and any children's section of a public library. 
Child sex offender shall mean any person with a reportable conviction or adjudication, including an adjudication of delinquent conduct or a deferred adjudication, that, regardless of the pendency of an appeal, is a conviction for or an adjudication for or based on any of the following offenses: 
(1)  Continuous sexual abuse of a young child or children (V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 21.02); 
(2)  Indecency with a child (V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 21.11); 
(3)  Sexual assault of a child (V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 22.011); 
(4)  Aggravated sexual assault of a child (V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 22.021); 
(5)  Online solicitation of a minor (V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 33.021); 
(6)  Sexual performance by a child (V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 43.25); 
(7)  Possession or promotion of child pornography (V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 43.26); or 
(8)  A violation of the laws of another state, federal law, laws of a foreign country, or the Uniform Code of Military Justice, if the violation contained elements substantially similar to the elements of the violations described (1) through (7) of this paragraph. 
Day-care center or facility shall mean a facility licensed by the State of Texas, which provides care, training, education, custody, treatment, or supervision of children for less than 24 hours a day. 
Loiter shall mean standing or sitting idly or without apparent purpose, whether or not in a motor vehicle. 
Minor shall mean any person under 18 years of age. 
Permanent residence shall mean a place where the person abides, lodges, or resides for 14 or more consecutive days. 
Person in authority shall mean the owner, a person authorized by the owner, or a person or business with apparent authority to act for the owner, including but not limited to, a manager or a property management business. 
Playground, Premises, School, Video arcade facility , and Youth center shall have the meanings assigned by V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 481.134. 
Public park shall mean: 
(1)  any land, including improvements to said land, designated as a public park or public recreation area for use by the general public, including but not limited to City parks, water parks, conservation areas, jogging trails, and hiking trails; and 
(2)  any athletic field that is owned, leased, operated, managed, or maintained by the City, including but not limited to soccer fields, baseball fields, softball fields, basketball courts, and football fields. 
Reportable conviction or adjudication shall have the meaning assigned by Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. § 62.001(5). 
Temporary residence shall mean: 
(1)  a place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent residence; and 
(2)  a place where a person abides, resides, or lodges for a period of four or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence. 
C.  Sex offender entry and loitering restriction. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for a child sex offender to intentionally or knowingly enter a child safety area. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for a child sex offender to intentionally or knowingly loiter within 1,000 feet of a child safety area. Under this Subsection 20-4(C), any distance measurement is made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, between the child sex offender's location and the nearest property line of the child safety area. 
(3)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this Subsection 20-4(C) if at the time of the offense, a child sex offender has entered a child safety area for such time as is necessary to attend a regular, special, or called meeting of a governmental body that is open to the public pursuant to V.T.C.A., Texas Government Code ch. 551. The defense under this Subsection 20-4(C)(3) shall only apply to those areas of the child safety area that are necessary for attendance at the meeting of a governmental body. 
(4)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this Subsection 20-4(C) if at the time of the offense, a child sex offender has entered a child safety area for such time as is necessary for the limited purpose of voting at an official polling place located within a child safety area, if the child sex offender qualifies to vote at such polling place. The defense under this Subsection 20-4(C)(4) shall only apply to those areas of the child safety area that are necessary for the limited purpose of voting. 
(5)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this Subsection 20-4(C) if at the time of the offense, a child sex offender has entered the premises of any school during the standard operating hours of the school and complied with Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 62.064. 
(6)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this Subsection 20-4(C) if at the time of the offense, a child sex offender has entered a child safety area for such time as is necessary for the limited purpose of accompanying a child under 18 years of age on the premises of the child safety area, provided said child sex offender is the parent or legal guardian of the child. 
D.  Sex offender Halloween restrictions. 
(1)  On October 31 of each year, a child sex offender shall: 
(a)  Remain at their residence of registry between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 11:59 p.m.; 
(b)  Not illuminate any exterior lights upon the premises at their residence of registry between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 11:59 p.m.; and 
(c)  Not invite or entice trick-or-treaters to solicit the premises at their residence of registry. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for a child sex offender to fail to comply with this Subsection 20-4(D). A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this Subsection 20-4(D), and need not be alleged or proved. 
(3)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this Subsection 20-4(D) that the child sex offender was required to report and did report to a specified location on October 31 between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 11:59 p.m., as a condition of their probation or parole. 
(4)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this Subsection 20-4(D) that the child sex offender was at a location outside the City limits and remained outside the City limits, between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 11:59 p.m. on October 31. 
(5)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this Subsection 20-4(D) that the child sex offender was working at said offender's place of employment, or traveling directly to or from said offender's place of employment, between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 11:59 p.m. on October 31. 
E.  Sex offender residence restriction. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for a child sex offender to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within 1,000 feet of a child safety area. Under this Subsection 20-4(E), any distance measurement is made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, between the nearest property line of the premises of the child sex offender's residence and the nearest property line of the child safety area. 
(2)  It is a defense to prosecution under this Subsection 20-4(E) if at the time of the offense, a child sex offender: 
(a)  has established the residence and complied with all the sexual offender registration laws of the State of Texas prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this Section is derived; and 
(b)  has not received a reportable conviction or adjudication involving a minor victim after the effective date of the ordinance from which this Section is derived. 
(3)  It is a defense to prosecution under this Subsection 20-4(E) if at the time of the offense, a child sex offender: 
(a)  has established the residence and complied with all sexual offender registration laws of the State of Texas prior to the date a new child safety area is established within 1,000 feet of the residence; and 
(b)  has not received a reportable conviction or adjudication involving a minor victim after the date the new child safety area is established within 1,000 feet of the residence. 
(Ord. No. 2019-07, § 1, 2-4-2019)  
Secs. 20-5—20-22. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ABANDONED ICEBOXES, REFRIGERATORS, ETC.[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Leaving refrigerator or container accessible to children, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 756.012; types of containers, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 756.011. 
 
Sec. 20-23. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandon. The throwing away of an icebox, refrigerator or freezer on vacant property, junk heaps, trash piles or debris accumulations or any other act which at common law would constitute an abandonment of personal property. 
Dangerous exposure. The placing of an icebox, refrigerator or freezer not in use in a garage, barn, outbuilding, porch, yard, lot or other portion of premises where children at play may come upon it and be attracted to it. 
(Code 1992, § 7.201)  
Sec. 20-24. - Deemed public nuisance. 
The abandonment or dangerous exposure of an icebox, refrigerator or freezer with its door, or doors, in normal latching or locking condition is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and a serious menace to life because of the danger of children entering such an icebox, refrigerator or freezer and becoming locked inside and suffocating. 
(Code 1992, § 7.202)  
Sec. 20-25. - Owner to remove latches and/or locks. 
(a)  The owner of an abandoned or dangerously exposed icebox, refrigerator or freezer and the owner or occupant of the premises where an abandonment or dangerous exposure occurs, has the duty to remove the door or dismantle or remove the latch or lock holding the door shut on the icebox, refrigerator or freezer. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he or she abandons or dangerously exposes, or causes or permits to be abandoned or dangerously exposed, an icebox, refrigerator or freezer unless the latch or lock holding each door shut is dismantled or removed so that the door may be opened from within by simply pushing on it. 
(Code 1992, § 7.203)  
Secs. 20-26—20-54. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ROLLER SKATES, SKATE BOARDS AND BICYCLES 
 
Sec. 20-55. - Rights and duties of bicycles. 
A person operating a bicycle has the rights and duties applicable to a driver operating a vehicle, unless: 
(1)  A provision contained within the Code of Ordinances alters a right or duty; or 
(2)  A right or duty applicable to a driver operating a vehicle cannot by its nature apply to a person operating a bicycle. 
(Ord. No. 8-048, § 7.701, 8-4-1997; Ord. No. 8-066, § 7.701, 5-18-1998)  
Sec. 20-56. - Offenses pertaining to skate boards, roller skates, etc. 
(a)  A person shall not operate a skate board, roller skates, in-line skates, or bicycle on any public or private property where signs are posted prohibiting such activity. 
(b)  A person shall not operate a skate board, roller skates, in-line skates or bicycle on any public or private property where signs are posted indicating such property is closed to the public at certain times of the day or night, or certain day or days of the week. 
(c)  A person shall not operate a skate board, roller skates, in-line skates or bicycle in a manner which endangers the operator of such skate board, roller skates, in-line skates, or bicycle, or another individual or individuals, or the operator of motor propelled vehicles. 
(d)  A person shall not operate a skate board, roller skates, or in-line skates on any street, sidewalk or public area (whether publicly or privately owned) within the area of the city bounded as follows: Creek Street, Edison Street, Travis Street and Barons Creek Bridge. This prohibition shall include areas and properties fronting on each side of the named streets and the entirety of the Barons Creek Bridge. 
(e)  A parent of a child or guardian of a ward may not knowingly permit the child or ward to violate any provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 8-048, § 7.702, 8-4-1997; Ord. No. 8-066, § 7.702, 5-18-1998)  
Sec. 20-57. - Penalties. 
A person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed that specified in section 1-6. 
(Ord. No. 8-048, § 7.703, 8-4-1997; Ord. No. 8-066, § 7.700, 5-18-1998)  
Sec. 20-58. - Motor assisted scooters. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor assisted scooter on any sidewalk, street, or highway within the City. For the purposes of this Section 20-58, the term "motor assisted scooter" shall have the meaning assigned by V.T.C.A, Transportation Code § 551.351. 
(b)  Finding and intent. The City Council finds that a prohibition of the operation of motor assisted scooters on all sidewalks, streets, and highways within the City is necessary in the interest of safety. 
(c)  Upon conviction of any violation of this Section 20-58, a person shall be subject to penalties as provided by Section 1-6 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2019-06, § 1, 2-4-2019)  
Secs. 20-59—20-87. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MINORS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 20-88—20-117. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - JUVENILE CURFEW 
 
Sec. 20-118. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Curfew hours means: 
(1)  Between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday or Friday; and 
(2)  Between the hours of 1:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday. 
Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Establishment means any privately or publicly owned place of business to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment. 
Guardian means: 
(1)  A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or 
(2)  A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
Minor means any person under 17 years of age. 
Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation or other person in control of the premises. 
Parent means a person who is: 
(1)  A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person; or 
(2)  At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops. 
Remain means to: 
(1)  Linger or stay; or 
(2)  Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator, or other person in control of the premises. 
Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, or may cause serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(Ord. No. 19-003, § 20-118, 3-2-2009)  
Sec. 20-119. - Offenses; minors. 
(a)  A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. When the following day is a Fredericksburg independent school district holiday, the curfew hours shall be the same as on Saturday and Sunday. 
(b)  A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or, by insufficient control, allows the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(c)  The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. 
(Ord. No. 19-003, § 20-119, 3-2-2009)  
Sec. 20-120. - Defenses. 
(a)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 20-119 that the minor was: 
(1)  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian; 
(2)  On a lawful errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop; 
(3)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(4)  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
(5)  Involved in an emergency; 
(6)  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence; 
(7)  Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, Fredericksburg independent school district, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, Fredericksburg independent school district, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
(8)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; 
(9)  Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with state law; or 
(10)  Has graduated from high school. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 20-119 that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. 
(Ord. No. 19-003, § 20-120, 3-2-2009)  
Sec. 20-121. - Enforcement. 
Before taking any enforcement action under this article, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in section 20-120 is present. 
(Ord. No. 19-003, § 20-121, 3-2-2009)  
Sec. 20-122. - Penalties. 
(a)  A person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine as provided for in the general penalty provision found in section 1-6. 
(b)  When required by V.T.C.A., Family Code § 51.08 as amended, the municipal court shall waive original jurisdiction over a minor who violates section 20-119 and shall refer the minor to the juvenile court. 
(Ord. No. 19-003, § 20-122, 3-2-2009)  
Sec. 20-123. - Effective date and time. 
It is hereby declared that this article shall become effective on May 20, 2014 at 12:01 a.m. 
(Code 1992, § 7.806; Ord. No. 19-003, § 20-123, 3-2-2009; Ord. No. 24-004, 5-19-2014)  
Secs. 20-124—20-144. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - REGULATION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS 
 
Sec. 20-145. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial enterprise or commercial establishment shall be defined as any sale of tobacco products as defined herein. 
Minor is defined as any person under the age of 18 years of age. 
Possession is defined as actual care, custody, control, or management. 
Tobacco product is defined as any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or dipping tobacco. 
(Code 1992, § 7.901)  
Sec. 20-146. - Possession of tobacco products by a minor. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he or she is a minor as defined under this article and possesses a tobacco product within the incorporated limits of the city. 
(b)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that the minor's parent or legal guardian consented to the possession of the tobacco product by the minor and the possession of the tobacco product was either in the residence of the minor's parent or legal guardian or in the presence of the minor's parent or legal guardian. 
(c)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that the minor possessed a tobacco product as an employee of a commercial establishment that sells or distributes tobacco products, pursuant to a requirement by the minor's employer that the minor possess tobacco products in the performance of the minor's duties as an employee of the commercial establishment. 
(d)  It is not a violation of this section if the minor possesses the tobacco product while under the direction and supervision of a peace officer in the process of enforcing any provision of this division. 
(e)  In order to avoid a multiplicity of prosecutions, this section shall have no application if the procession of the tobacco product occurs at a location or under circumstances which also render such possession a violation of V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 48.01. 
(Code 1992, § 7.902)  
Sec. 20-147. - Purchase of tobacco product by minor. 
(a)  A minor commits an offense if he purchases or attempts to purchase a tobacco product. 
(b)  It is not a violation of this section if the minor purchases the tobacco product while under the direction and supervision of a police officer in the process of enforcing any provision of this division. 
(Code 1992, § 7.903)  
Sec. 20-148. - Sale or provision of tobacco products to minor. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person sells or provides a tobacco product to a minor. 
(b)  This division is intended to apply strict liability to sellers and providers of tobacco products. A culpable mental state is not required to prove a violation of this division. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under this division that the person to whom the tobacco product was sold or provided, presented to the defendant an apparently valid state driver's license of identification card, issued by the state department of public safety and containing a physical description consistent with the person's appearance, that purported to establish the person was 18 years of age or older. 
(Code 1992, § 7.904; Ord. No. 8-034, 12-16-1996)  
Secs. 20-149—20-179. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES 
 
Sec. 20-180. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bar means any commercial establishment that derives 51 percent or more of its annual gross sales receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages as defined by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code and has a valid on-premises consumption license issued by the state alcoholic beverage commission or a portion of a commercial/food establishment that is physically separated from the rest of the establishment by an impermeable barrier exclusive of appropriate openings for ingress and egress and that portion of the establishment is independently ventilated and that portion of the establishment derives 51 percent or more of its annual gross sales receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages as defined by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code and has a valid on-premises consumption license issued by the state alcoholic beverage commission. 
Director means the director of the department designated by the city manager to enforce and administer this article or the director's designated representative. 
Electronic Smoking Device means any product containing or delivering nicotine or any other substance intended for human consumption that can be used by a person to inhale or simulate smoking through the inhalation of vapor or aerosol from the product. The term includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, e-hookah, or vape pen, or under any other product name or descriptor, and any aerosol, liquid, or vapor used in such a device. 
Employee means any person who is employed by any employer from direct or indirect monetary wages, commissions or profit, or is in a position that would lead one to believe that such person is so employed. 
Employer means any person, partnership, corporation, association or other entity that employs one or more persons. 
Enclosed means closed in by a roof and walls with appropriate openings for ingress and egress. 
Food establishment means any operation engaged in the preparation or sale of prepared ready-to-eat food, if such operation accounts for more than 51 percent of annual gross sales receipts. For the purpose of this section a food establishment does not include an outdoor patio. 
Governmental entity means a state, a municipality, county, school district, or appraisal district. 
Health care facility means any hospital or institution that provides medical or surgical services for patients. 
Independently ventilated means that the heating, ventilation and air conditioning system for a bar area does not allow for the mixing of air from the bar area to a public area or public place served by the same ventilation system or another ventilation system. 
Movie theater means any establishment engaged in the business of exhibiting motion pictures to public. The same are regulated hereby even if meeting the definition of private club. 
Outdoors means any area that is not enclosed. 
Private club means any building, premises or portion thereof which is wholly owned or leased from other than a governmental entity by a non-profit corporation organized under chapter 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code, as amended. 
Private office is an individual's office from which the public is not barred but to which the public goes primarily by invitation or appointment. Such office shall be an office in which there are no employees. 
Public place means any enclosed area that is open to or is used by the general public, or that is a place of employment and includes, but is not limited to: retail stores, grocery stores, offices, professional, commercial or financial establishments, food establishments, movie theaters, public and private institutions of education, health care facilities, nursing and convalescent homes, residential treatment facilities, buildings owned or occupied by political subdivisions and public restrooms. For the purpose of this article, a public place does not include a private residence, bar, tobacco shop, hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests, private clubs or outdoors or private offices. Any public places regulated by other statutes or other governmental administrative rules which conflict with or which preempt local regulation are exempt from the provisions hereof to the extent of such conflict or preemption. 
Smoke or smoking means inhaling, exhaling, lighting, or burning: 
(1)  Any cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed, plant, or other smoking material of any kind; or 
(2)  Any Electronic Smoking Device as defined in this Section. 
Tobacco means any tobacco, cigarette, cigar, pipe tobacco, smokeless tobacco, snuff or any other form of tobacco, which may be utilized for smoking, chewing, inhalation or other means of ingestion or absorption. 
Tobacco shop means any commercial establishment that derives 51 percent of its annual gross receipts from the sale of tobacco, Electronic Smoking Devices, and tobacco accessories. 
(Ord. No. 12-018, § 7.1001, 11-7-2002; Ord. No. 27-015, § 1, 11-20-2017)  
Sec. 20-181. - Smoking prohibited in public places. 
(a)  Smoking is hereby prohibited in all public places within the city limits. 
(b)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this article that the person was smoking in a bar, tobacco shop, a rented hotel or motel room of any kind, private clubs, outdoors, or in a place where these regulations are in conflict with or preempted by other law as defined above. 
(Ord. No. 12-018, § 7.1002, 11-7-2002)  
Sec. 20-182. - Signs and receptacles. 
(a)  The owner or other person having authority to manage and/or control any area designated as a public place, pursuant to this article, shall post or cause to be posted and visibly displayed, and shall maintain "No Smoking" signs in a form approved by the director, in conspicuous locations within such public place. Such signs shall clearly and conspicuously recite the phrase "No Smoking" in the English and Spanish language and/or use the international no-smoking symbol. 
(b)  The owner or other person having authority to manage and/or control any area designed as a public place pursuant to this article shall cause to be placed a receptacle for smoking materials which is approved by the fire marshal of the city outdoors at each entrance to all public places as defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 12-018, § 7.1003, 11-7-2002)  
Sec. 20-183. - Reporting violations. 
This article does not require the owner, operator, employer, manager or any employee to report a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-018, § 7.1004, 11-7-2002)  
Sec. 20-184. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  Any person, firm, partnership or corporation who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a Class "C" Misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine within the limits established by section 1-6 of this Code. 
(b)  It is hereby declared that the culpable mental state required by the V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 6.02 is specifically negated and clearly dispensed with, and such offense is declared to be a strict liability offense. 
(Ord. No. 12-018, § 7.1005, 11-7-2002)  
Secs. 20-185—20-206. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - NOISE AND SOUND LEVEL REGULATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 27-006, adopted May 15, 2017, amended the former Art. VI, §§ 20-207—20-213, to read as set out herein. The former Art. VI pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 22-030 adopted Nov. 19, 2012. 
 
Sec. 20-207. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context of their usage clearly indicates another meaning: 
(a)  Daytime hours shall mean the hours from 7:00 a.m. on one day until 8:00 p.m. the same day. 
(b)  dB(A) shall mean the intensity of a sound expressed in decibels. 
(c)  Emergency shall mean any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage or loss that demands immediate action. 
(d)  Emergency work shall mean any work performed for the purpose of: 
(i)  Preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency; 
(ii)  Restoring property to a safe condition following a fire, accident, or natural disaster; 
(iii)  Protecting persons or property from exposure to danger; or 
(iv)  Restoring public utilities. 
(e)  Evening Hours Commercial shall mean the hours from 8:00 p.m. on one day until 11:00 p.m. the same day for Sundays through Thursdays of each week. Evening hours shall mean the hours from 8:00 p.m. on one day until 12:00 midnight the same day for Friday and Saturday nights of each week for properties in the following zoning districts: C-1, C-2, CBD, I, M-1, M-2, M-3 or related PUDs. 
(f)  Evening Hours Residential shall mean the hours from 8:00 p.m. on one day until 10:00 p.m. the same day for properties in the following zoning districts: R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, Rural Residential or related PUDs AND for commercial, manufacturing or industrial properties (C-1, C-2, CBD, I, M-1, M-2, M-3 or related PUDs) when measured at a Property line which separates that property from any residentially zoned property (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, Rural Residential or related PUDs. 
(g)  Nighttime Hours Commercial shall mean the hours from 11:00 p.m. on one day until 7:00 a.m. the following day for Sundays through Thursdays, and 12:00 midnight on one day and 7:00 a.m. the same day on Saturday and Sunday mornings for properties in the following zoning districts: C-1, C-2, CBD, I, M-1, M-2, M-3 or related PUDs. 
(h)  Nighttime Hours Residential shall mean the hours from 10:00 p.m. on one day until 7:00 a.m. the following day for properties in the following zoning districts: R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, Rural Residential or related PUDs AND for commercial, manufacturing or industrial properties (C-1, C-2, CBD, I, M-1, M-2, M-3 or related PUDs) when measured at a Property line which separates that property from any residentially zoned property (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, Rural Residential or related PUDs. 
(i)  Outdoor Amplified Sound means any sound produced, projected or generated outdoors utilizing speakers or other sound projection or enhancement equipment. 
(j)  Plainly audible means any sound that can be detected by a person using his or her unaided hearing faculties. For example, if the sound source under investigation is a portable or personal vehicular sound amplification or reproduction device, the enforcement officer need not determine the name of the song, specific words or the artist performing it. The detection of the rhythmic bass component of the music is sufficient to constitute a plainly audible sound. 
(k)  Property line shall mean, with respect to single occupancy properties, the line along the ground surface and its vertical extension that separates the real property owned, leased, or occupied by one person from that owned, leased, or occupied by another person. With respect to shared occupancy properties the term shall mean the imaginary line that represents the legal limits of occupancy of any person who owns, leases, or otherwise occupies an apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, office, or any other type of occupancy from that of other occupants. 
(l)  Responsible Party shall mean any of the following persons, including entities (including but not limited to corporations, trusts, partnerships, associations and the like), who or which violates the terms of this Article including, as applicable: 
(1)  Any person present at the time of the offense who makes, assists in making or continuing, permits, causes or permits sound in excess of the provisions of this Article to be made or continued; 
(2)  Any person who has the ability to control the level of noise at the time of the offense; 
(3)  Any owner of the property on which the violation occurs, any owner or manager (including an employee in charge at the time of the offense) of the business being conducted on the property on which the violation occurs; 
(4)  Any operator of, or person in charge of the sound generating instrument or equipment at the time of the offense; or 
(5)  Any person who leaves unattended any equipment, machine, instrument, device, child, animal, or any combination of same, which thereafter commences producing noise in violation of this article. 
(m)  Sound shall include a single source or collective sources emanating from a single property. 
(n)  Zoning Ordinance shall mean the City of Fredericksburg Zoning Ordinance as the same may be amended from time to time. Any reference to the location of properties or Zoned properties or areas shall be to the zones established in the Zoning Ordinance as may be modified in a specific violation description. 
(Ord. No. 27-006, 5-15-2017)  
Sec. 20-208. - Prohibitions. 
Sounds exceeding, or not complying with, the following under the conditions and measurement criteria set forth in this chapter shall be unlawful and no Responsible Party shall make, assist in making, permit, continue or cause to be made or continued such sounds in any Zoning area except as defined in this Article. 
(a)  Sound levels shall not exceed the following: 
(1)  Eight-five db(A) during Daytime Hours; or 
(2)  Seventy-five db(A) during Evening Hours Commercial or Evening Hours Residential as applicable; or 
(3)  Sixty-five db(A) during Nighttime Hours Commercial. 
(4)  Fifty-five db(A) Nighttime Hours Residential. 
(b)  Outdoor Amplified sound is prohibited from 10:00 p.m. on any day until 7:00 a.m. the following day in residentially zoned properties (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, Rural Residential or related PUDs). 
(c)  The pouring of a slab, demolishing a building, or utilizing any yard tools, mechanically powered saw, drill, sander, router, grinder, lawn or garden tool, lawnmower, or any other similar device, commercial or industrial power tools is prohibited from 10:00 p.m. on any day until 7:00 a.m. the following day on any residentially zoned property (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, Rural Residential or related PUDs) or commercially zoned property (C-1, C-2, CBD or related PUDs) on any day without first having obtained a permit issued in accordance with section 20-211 below for such work. 
(d)  Knowingly making, assisting in making, permitting, continuing, or causing to be made or continued of any unreasonable sound that annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of others is prohibited on any residentially zoned property (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, Rural Residential or related PUDs). In determining whether a sound is unreasonable, the following factors shall be considered as applicable to the circumstances: 
1.  That the sound is loud, unnecessary, or unusual; 
2.  That the sound occurs between Midnight and 7:00 a.m.; 
3.  That the sound is not compatible with the normal activity of the area in which the property is located at that time of day; 
4.  That the sound created at a location where the sound emanates is due to an excessive number of people for that time of day; 
5.  That the sound is recurrent, intermittent, or constant; 
6.  That the volume and intensity of the sound is excessive; 
7.  That the sound has been enhanced in volume or range by any type of electronic, mechanical or other means, and is operated with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing of persons who are in the vehicle, or within the property or premises, from which such sound originates and who are voluntary listeners thereto; 
8.  That the sound is subject to being controlled without unreasonable effort or expense to the creator thereof; 
9.  That the sound is plainly audible or physically detectable at a distance defined in section 20-210(b) below. 
Prior to issuance of a complaint the City Police Department and or Municipal Court Prosecutor may require a written complaint from anyone complaining of an excessive noise under this section (d). 
Upon receipt of a prior notice or warning, verbal or otherwise, from a peace officer or a code enforcement officer of the City of Fredericksburg, it shall be presumed that the person has knowledge that the sound is unreasonable. 
(e)  The use of any motor vehicle so that it creates any loud and unreasonable or unusual sound which is heard above all other vehicles at a distance of 50 feet from the vehicle is prohibited. 
(f)  The making, assisting in making, permitting, continuing, causing to be made or continued, or permitting the continuance of Amplified Sound from a motor vehicle on a public roadway that is plainly audible from a distance of 50 feet from the vehicle on abutting streets of, or properties which are zoned PF, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, Rural Residential, C-1, C-2, CBD or related PUDs is prohibited. 
(g)  The operation of an engine of any motor vehicle as defined by the Texas Transportation Code so as to "brake" or slow the same through the use of gears (commonly known as "jake braking") or by any other method which produces any noise in addition to the normal operating engine noise is prohibited. 
(h)  The operation of or allowing of an engine of any sort of motor vehicle, except emergency equipment at any location or vehicles then located at a permitted public event or parade, to idle for more than one hour is prohibited. 
(i)  Reserved. 
(j)  The acts enumerated in the foregoing sections of this chapter, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noises and nuisances in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 27-006, 5-15-2017)  
Sec. 20-209. - Noisy animals and birds. 
(a)  The keeping of any animal or bird that causes or makes frequent or long and continued sound that unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of ordinary, reasonable persons of normal sensibilities and ordinary tastes, habits, and modes of living who reside in the vicinity thereof is hereby prohibited and declared to be unlawful as a sound nuisance in violation of this chapter, regardless of whether the sound so created by said animal or bird is otherwise within the permissible levels specified in section 20-208(a) above. 
(b)  In any prosecution for a violation of this section, the fact that any loud animal noise which disturbed any person and which occurs in residential areas (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, Rural Residential, or related PUDs) either: 
(1)  during Nighttime Hours Residential; or 
(2)  when none of the residents who reside at the place where the animal or bird is being kept are at home shall create a rebuttable presumption that such noise was in violation of this article. 
(c)  In any prosecution for a violation of this section, the fact that any animal or bird has been allowed or permitted to persistently and chronically violate this section, as demonstrated by the issuance of two or more citations within a six month period shall create a rebuttable presumption that such noise was in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 27-006, 5-15-2017)  
Sec. 20-210. - Method of sound measurement. 
(a)  Whenever portions of this chapter prohibit sound over a certain decibel limit, measurement shall be made with a Type 1 or Type 2 calibrated sound level meter utilizing the A-weighting scale and the slow meter response as specified by the American Standards Association or better. Measurements recorded shall be taken so as to provide a proper representation of the sound being measured. The microphone of the meter shall be positioned so as not to create any unnatural enhancement or diminution of the measured sound. Traffic, aircraft, and other transportation noise shall not be considered in taking measurements except where such background noise interferes with the noise being measured and cannot reasonably be distinguished from the primary noise. Measurements will be made for a duration of no less than 30 seconds. Violations will be based on the highest registered reading within such time period which is attained more than one time in said time period or sustained. 
(b)  Measurements of sound shall be taken from either: 
(1)  the property line of the property from which the sound originates but in no event less than 50 feet from the sound source (where the sound is generated), and all measurements shall be taken toward the source of the sound; 
(2)  the property line nearest the sound source of a property occupied by a person who reports a violation of this Chapter to the City but in no event less than 50 feet from the sound source (where the sound is generated); or 
(3)  a minimum of 50 feet from the sound source in the event the sound violation originates from a source where property lines are not applicable. 
(Ord. No. 27-006, 5-15-2017)  
Sec. 20-211. - Permit for construction or use of tools, equipment. 
(a)  The permit required in section 20-208 (c) shall be issued upon compliance with the requirements of this section. Properties for which a permit is issued for construction or for the use of outdoor tools or equipment (except equipment related to Amplified Sound) may exceed the sound levels of section 20-208(a) above. 
(b)  For properties which are commercially zoned (C-1, C-2, CBD or related PUDs) at any time of the year, but may be issued for properties which are residentially zoned (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, Rural Residential or related PUDs) only during the time period from Memorial Day through Labor Day of each year. 
(c)  Shall be obtained by making application to the City Police Department or other person or department of the City so designated by the City Manager. 
(d)  Upon payment of an administrative fee for the costs of issuing the permit or a sworn statement of inability to pay the fee; and 
(e)  Is valid for the requested day between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight. 
(f)  Shall not be issued to the same or any other person for the same location more than twice nor for more than two consecutive days during any 30 day period. 
(g)  Shall not be issued unless the applicant provides proof to the City that he or she has notified all persons who occupy or own properties adjacent to the site for which the permit is sought or the activity/work to be done and the expected duration of the activity/work. Such notice shall be sent in the same manner as set out in the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Fredericksburg, or hand delivered to the properties. Notices shall be sent at least ten days in advance of the proposed activity. 
(h)  The permit application required to be filed pursuant to this section shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The date of the application and the date and hours for which the permit is requested. 
(2)  The name and address of the applicant, and the name and address of the person in charge of the activity/work. 
(3)  A description and diagram of the property on which the activity/work will occur. 
(4)  The address and a description of the location where the equipment will be used. 
(5)  A description of the type of equipment, tools or other devices to be used. 
(i)  All permits must be posted on site in a clearly visible location. No permit may be issued for a period of one year from the date of the latest conviction for any property which is the subject of two convictions or deferrals of convictions within any twelve month period even if there is a change in ownership or management. 
(Ord. No. 27-006, 5-15-2017)  
Sec. 20-212. - Exemptions and defenses. 
(a)  The following are exemptions from prosecution under this ordinance, but which need not be specifically plead in any complaint or indictment: 
(1)  The sound was generated or produced as a result of an emergency, by an authorized emergency vehicle or due to emergency work to restore utilities or other public works. 
(2)  The sound was generated or produced: 
(i)  By any public utility or public works or by governmental authority including, but not limited to, street and road construction and repair, operation of water treatment plants, animal shelters and the like, the alerting persons to the existence of an emergency, danger, or attempted crime; 
(ii)  At a lawfully scheduled stadium event or at the Gillespie County Fair Grounds as currently located at 2000 South US Highway 16; 
(iii)  By a parade and spectators and participants on the parade route during a lawful parade; 
(iv)  By patrons and participants using cannons and gunfire during historical battle re-enactments or demonstrations for which a pyrotechnic permit was obtained and the explosives for which were inspected by the fire marshal provided that such events shall not exceed one weekend in any 30 calendar day period or 12 weekends in any one calendar year; 
(v)  By a pyrotechnic display that was inspected and approved by the fire marshal; 
(vi)  By spectators and participants of any outdoor event, fun run, race, festival, fiesta, or concert that was sponsored or co-sponsored by the City of Fredericksburg, which has received a Special Events review and Permit in accordance with the City's promulgated Special Events policies provided that said permit establishes different standards than are provided for by this chapter, otherwise this exemption does not apply, and is in compliance with any provisions of such permit and otherwise in full compliance with City regulations; 
(vii)  By aircraft, in flight or in operation at an airport, or bus, trolley, or other public transportation equipment in operation on streets or other rights-of-way, if any; 
(viii)  By church bells or church chimes when used as part of a religious observance or service during Daytime Hours or Evening Hours; or 
(ix)  During Daytime Hours by activities conducted on public parks, public playgrounds, and public or private school grounds, including, but not limited to, school athletics, band and school entertainment practice or events. 
(3)  The sound emits from or is produced by lawful manufacturing or industrial pursuits on Manufacturing or Industrially zoned property (I, M-1, M-2 or M-3 or an Industrial or manufacturing related PUD) or is the sound of animals emitting from a veterinary business, animal shelter or other animal or livestock related business lawfully located within the City in accordance with the City of Fredericksburg's Zoning Ordinance. 
(4)  The following defenses shall apply to any offense established in this chapter, and the same must be specifically plead by anyone charged with a violation, the burden of proof being upon the person claiming such defense: 
(i)  The emission of any sound was for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency, danger, or attempted crime, or was produced pursuant to any safety rule or regulation of any governmental entity or agency and is not generated by governmental authority; 
(ii)  The sound was produced by or for emergency work not exempted as set forth in (a)(2) above; or 
(iii)  The sound was generated as authorized under the terms of a permit issued under section 20-212 of this Code. 
(b)  The regulations hereof are not required for the purpose of regulating speech which is protected speech or to conflict with any law of any superior governmental authority. Any regulation hereof that is in conflict with any such right or authority is hereby declared to be inoperative and severable from the other regulations herein, and is additionally declared to be an exemption. 
(Ord. No. 27-006, 5-15-2017)  
Sec. 20-213. - Penalty. 
(a)  The provisions of section 20-208 provide the various violations, and a person or entity may be prosecuted under any or all of the subsections thereto. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than that defined in section 1-6 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fredericksburg. In addition, following notification by a Police Officer of the City of Fredericksburg or a Code Enforcement officer of the City of Fredericksburg, each 15 minutes in which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. For purposes of setting fines, violations hereof are declared to be health and safety violations. 
(b)  Enforcement hereunder shall not require the pleading or proving of any culpable mental state. 
(Ord. No. 27-006, 5-15-2017)  
Sec. 20-214. - Sunset. 
The provisions of this Article shall expire on May 15, 2018 unless specifically continued by the City Council of the City of Fredericksburg. 
(Ord. No. 27-006, 5-15-2017) 
Editor's note— Per instructions of the City on Sept. 19, 2019, the ordinance from which Ch. 20, Art. VI is derived is continued.  
Secs. 20-215—20-216. - Reserved.  
Chapter 23 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Federal law reference— Preservation of local zoning authority concerning wireless telecommunications facilities, 47 USC 322(c)(7); limited federal preemption of state and local zoning laws affecting amateur radio facilities, Memorandum Opinion and Order , PRB-1, 101 FCC 2d 952 (1985) and 47 CFR 97.15(b); Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act, 42 USC 2000 cc et seq. 
State Law reference— Municipal zoning authority, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 23-1—23-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Duties and powers of zoning commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 211.007. 
 
Sec. 23-19. - Creation; membership. 
There is hereby created and established for the city, a planning and zoning commission which shall be composed of nine members. The members shall be resident citizens, taxpayers and qualified voters of the city, all of whom shall be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by the governing body, to serve as hereinafter provided or until their successors are appointed. The mayor, city council, water and sewer superintendent, electrical superintendent, and street superintendent, shall be ex officio members. 
(Code 1992, § 12.101)  
Sec. 23-20. - Procedure for appointment of members. 
Each member appointed or reappointed shall serve for a full three year term unless he or she resigns or is removed as herein provided. Any member who fails to attend at least 75 percent of all regular meetings of the commission within any 12 month period shall be removed from the commission, unless such failure to attend was the result of illness or other acceptable excuse, as determined by the city council. 
(Code 1992, § 12.102)  
Sec. 23-21. - Organization. 
The planning and zoning commission shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from its members and shall have the power to employ such qualified persons as may be necessary for the proper conduct of the undertakings of the commission and to pay for such services and other necessary expenses provided that the cost thereof shall not exceed the amount appropriated by the governing body for the use of such commission. Such commission shall also have the power to make rules, regulations and by-laws for its own government, which shall conform as nearly as possible to those governing the city council and shall be subject to approval by such governing body. Such by-laws shall include, among other items, provision for: 
(1)  Regular and special meetings, open to the public; 
(2)  Records of its proceedings, to be open for inspection by the public; 
(3)  Reports to the governing body and the public from time to time and annually; and 
(4)  Public hearings on its recommendations. 
(Code 1992, § 12.103)  
Sec. 23-22. - Compensation of members. 
Members of the zoning and planning commission shall serve without compensation. However, the city council may authorize the payment of expenses for travel and meetings and similar costs which may be incurred by members incident to the performance of the duties of members of such commission. 
(Code 1992, § 12.104)  
Sec. 23-23. - Duties and powers acting as zoning commission. 
In its capacity as zoning commission, the commission shall have the power and it shall be its duty to make and recommend for adoption an ordinance for zoning the city in accordance with the provisions of chapter 283, acts of the regular session of the legislature, 1927 (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 211) as amended, and shall hold public hearings and make recommendations to the city council on all requests or proposals for amending, changing or adding to the zoning ordinance. In performing its duties the commission shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities prescribed by statutes of the state and the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1992, § 12.105)  
Sec. 23-24. - Duties and powers acting as planning commission. 
In acting in its capacity as a planning commission, the commission shall be responsible for, and is hereby authorized to act as follows: 
(1)  To perform all functions related to the review and approval of subdivision plats which may be assigned to the planning commission by the statutes of the state and/or ordinances of the city. 
(2)  To prepare or cause to be prepared a comprehensive plan for the physical development of the city and its environs, including but not limited to: 
a.  Land use. 
b.  Thoroughfares and transportation by rail, water, air or highway. 
c.  Parks and school sites. 
d.  Public buildings. 
e.  Housing and neighborhood improvement. 
f.  Drainage. 
g.  Utilities and services. 
h.  Municipal expansion and annexation. 
i.  Slum clearance and blighted areas. 
j.  Parking and use of streets and alleys. 
(3)  To adopt with the approval of the city council, the comprehensive plan as a whole or as individual parts thereof and to be the custodian of the comprehensive plan and all parts thereof. The adoption of any portion of the comprehensive plan shall be by resolution carried by the affirmative votes of not less than a majority of the commission. Prior to initiating action of the adoption of any part of the comprehensive plan, the planning commission shall refer said plan to the city council for concurrence and comment. The city council may, by resolution, recommend the adoption as submitted with changes, of the comprehensive plan or any part thereof by the planning commission. 
(4)  To recommend and advise the city council on matters involving the physical improvement of the city including capital improvement programs, approval of subdivision plats and other changes or additions involving the physical arrangement of the city. 
(Code 1992, § 12.106)  
Sec. 23-25. - Quorum. 
Five members of the commission shall constitute a quorum, and any action taken by a majority of the members of the commission shall be sufficient for the passage of any question placed before it. 
(Code 1992, § 12.107)  
Secs. 23-26—23-53. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 27-007, adopted July 5, 2017, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, §§ 23-54—23-66, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Code 1992, §§ 12.201—12.209; Ord. No. 13-015, 11-17-2003; Ord. No. 17-019, 8-6-2007; Ord. No. 20-001, 3-22-2010; Ord. No. 26-005, 5-2-2016. 
 
Sec. 23-54. - Statement of purpose. 
(a)  The City of Fredericksburg, Texas (herein after called the "City") hereby recognizes it is known for its unique stone architecture, historic sites, collection of German pioneer Sunday houses, Victorian inspired homes, and thriving historic Marktplatz (Market Square) and downtown area. 
(b)  The City's unique qualities have proven to be increasingly attractive to residents, businesses, and tourists. 
(c)  As a matter of public policy, the City desires to preserve those aspects of the City which have historical, cultural, or architectural merit. Such preservation activities will promote the health, safety, prosperity, education, and general welfare of the people living in and visiting Fredericksburg. 
(d)  This historic preservation article is intended to achieve the following policy goals: 
(1)  Protect, enhance, and perpetuate historic landmarks which represent or reflect distinctive and important elements of the City's and state's architectural, landscape architectural, archeological, cultural, social, economic, ethnic and political history, and to develop appropriate settings for such places; 
(2)  Safeguard the City's historic and cultural heritage, as embodied and reflected in such historic landmarks by appropriate regulations; 
(3)  Stabilize and improve property values in such locations; 
(4)  Foster civic and cultural pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past; 
(5)  Protect and enhance the City's attractions to tourists and visitors and provide incidental support and stimulus to business and industry; 
(6)  Strengthen the economy of the City; 
(7)  Promote the use of historic landmarks and historic landmark districts for the culture, prosperity, education, and general welfare of the people of the City and visitors to the City; and 
(8)  Provide a review process for the continued preservation and appropriate development of the City's historic resources. 
(Ord. No. 27-007, 7-5-2017)  
Sec. 23-55. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative Certificate of Appropriateness. A document evidencing the approval of the Historic Preservation Officer, signed and dated by him or her for Insignificant Alterations of a Resource as further defined herein where approval for the same is required. 
Appurtenance. A feature related to a parcel of land or to a building, structure, object, site, or a related group thereof. The term includes, but is not limited to, buildings, structures, cisterns, barns, windmills, objects, sites, landscaping features, walls, fences, light fixtures, steps, paving, sidewalks, shutters, awnings, and signs. An appurtenance has the same rating as the main structure, unless the owner requests that individual ratings be given to each appurtenance. Such requests will be processed as an original application for a rating. 
Certificate of appropriateness. A document evidencing the approval of the Historic Review Board signed and dated by the chairman of the Historic Review Board, or the Historic Preservation Officer, as applicable for the addition, installation, construction, alteration, change, restoration, removal, or demolition of any exterior architectural feature, resource or other significant appurtenance of any historic landmark or of any building or structure located within the Historic District to be issued in cases further defined in this article, where approval for the same is required. 
Demolition. An act or process which destroys a site or structure in its entirety, or which destroys a part of a site or structure or Appurtenance and permanently impairs its structural, historic or architectural integrity. 
Design guidelines for the City of Fredericksburg. Written guidelines adopted by the City Council in 1997, as the same may be amended from time to time without the necessity of re-adoption, as a reference and guide to provide information on appropriate methods for rehabilitation or restoration of historic resources. 
Exterior architectural feature. The architectural style, design, general arrangement and components of all of the outer surfaces of a building structure, or Appurtenance as distinguished from the interior surfaces enclosed by such outer surfaces. Exterior architectural features shall include, by way of example but not by limitation, the kind, color, texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, lights, signs and other fixtures of such building, structure or Appurtenance. 
Fredericksburg Historic Resource Survey. A comprehensive architectural survey of all properties within the City's historic district and adjoining areas, as updated in 2002; future amendments to the same shall be automatically included herein. 
Historic district. An area of the City designated by the City council under subsection 23-58(a) of this article, as having definable geographic boundaries, a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, or structures united historically or aesthetically by plan, appearance, or physical development. The designation "historic district" recognizes that the component Resources, being historic buildings, structures, accessory buildings, fences, or other appurtenances of the district are of basic and of vital importance for the preservation of culture and neighborhoods and economic development and promotion of tourism. 
Historic landmark. A Resource which is an individual property (including its component parts as are regulated for properties in the Historic District) designated by the City council under subsection 23-58(b) of this article, as having outstanding historical and cultural significance in the nation, region, or community. The designation "historic landmark" recognizes that the historic place, or the building(s), structure(s), accessory building(s), fences, or other appurtenances at the place are of basic and vital importance for the preservation of culture and neighborhoods and economic development and promotion of tourism. 
Historic Preservation Officer. The person who is appointed by the City to administer the provisions of this Article, or his or her designee. 
Insignificant Alteration. Those activities which constitute minor alterations, additions, repairs or maintenance to any Resource include but are not limited to: 
Ordinary repair and maintenance. Repairs, replacement or repainting using the same design and color and the same, or updated similar materials which match the original material as closely as possible, and which does not require structural alteration, and the following exterior alterations: 
(1)  Replacement of a non-historic door with one in keeping with the character and era in which the home was built; 
(2)  Removal of extraneous non-historic features such as burglar bars, awnings, inappropriate shutters and the like; 
(3)  Restoration of original window openings, replacement of non-historic windows with those that match the original windows as closely as possible; 
(4)  Slight modification to exterior steps, walkways or stairways using same material or that which matches the original material as closely as possible; 
(5)  Reopening of porch; 
(6)  Addition of louvers and vents if placed in an existing opening with no other exterior alteration needed; 
(7)  Removal of non-historic siding to expose historic siding materials; 
(8)  Removal of roofing and replacement with original material, changing color of roofing material if within the color guidelines; 
(9)  Construction of rear addition under 200 square feet using same (non-historic) material as existing structure as well as existing roof ridgeline for low rated structures; 
(10)  Changes to paint colors on previously painted surfaces or changes of fabric colors which are consistent with the color guidelines, removal of paint to expose original masonry; 
(11)  Changes to landscape as follows: replacement of inappropriate fence or construction of new fence of historically appropriate materials, design and color; 
(12)  Changes to sign content that involve no other changes; 
(13)  New construction of ADA ramps, rear porches, decks, pools, fountains and other backyard amenities; 
(14)  Demolition of non-historic accessory structure, addition or carport that is made of non-historic materials; 
(15)  Installation of temporary features to protect a historic resource or to weatherize or stabilize subject to formal approval within a reasonable time; 
(16)  Installation of mechanical units, electrical or plumbing facilities or fixtures, antennas, rooftop HVAC, mechanical or communication equipment that is not visible from the public right-of-way and results in no modifications to the Resource. 
Preservation priority rating. Three-tier rating system used in the 2002 Fredericksburg Historic Resource Survey to evaluate all Resources (including components of properties) within, and adjoining to, the City's historic district. Ratings are based upon current determinations of architectural value and integrity and, if known, historical and cultural value, and may be altered from time to time as additional information is discovered or circumstances change. No rating shall be considered vested and the same may be established or changed at any time in accordance with subsections 23-58(d) and 23-58(e) below. Additionally, structures or properties may have more than one rating (e.g., the main structure may be high but an addition or Appurtenance may be medium or low): 
(1)  High rating. The most significant Resources identified in the 2002 Fredericksburg Historic Resource Survey. These properties are considered to be outstanding, unique, or good examples of architecture, engineering, or design. Some are unique to the Fredericksburg area and are indicative of German-Texan vernacular forms and/or building techniques. Others are noteworthy examples of 19th and early 20th century architectural types, styles, and forms, erected using local building materials and construction technologies. Properties designated with a high rating are to be the most protected from alteration and demolition. 
(2)  Medium rating. Resources that may or may not be identified as architecturally significant on an individual basis, but are nonetheless valuable resources that add to the historic district's overall character, and may be so ranked due to their or its proximity or contribution to the cultural, historic, architectural, or archeological character of the historic district or surrounding properties. These properties may have been moderately altered or are typical examples of a common architectural style or form, but generally retain their historic integrity to a good or moderate degree. Properties designated with a medium rating shall be protected from demolition and where possible will be required or encouraged to maintain or improve architectural features. 
(3)  Low rating. Resources that minimally enhance the district's ability to convey a sense of time and place. These properties may be typical examples of more recent, common local building forms, architectural styles, or plan types; be examples of distinctive building forms, architectural styles, or plan types that have been significantly altered; lack the necessary age to meet the usual 50 year threshold for possible National Register of Historic Places listing and do not appear to meet the National Register of Historic Places standard for exceptional significance for properties less than 50 years of age, but which nevertheless may have relative value within the historic district, meriting preservation. Properties or improvements with a low rating may be considered for relocation or demolition upon a determination by the Historic Review Board that the same can be accomplished with little or no consequence to the historical, cultural, architectural, or archeological character of the district or property. 
Resource. A landmark, landmark site, and all land or water within a preservation district, together with the structures, Appurtenances and improvements, if any. The term Resource includes, but is not limited to, separate districts, buildings, structures, sites, objects, landscape features, and related groups thereof. In the event of a conflict between an address in the Fredericksburg Historic Resource Survey and its pictorial, the picture shall be used to identify the historic resource. 
Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation. A set of ten basic philosophical principles created by the U.S. Secretary of the Interior and administered by the National Park Service, to help preserve the distinctive character of a historic building and its site, while allowing for reasonable change to meet new needs. The Standards for Rehabilitation are codified at 36 CFR 67, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties with guidelines for preserving, rehabilitating, restoring, and reconstructing historic buildings. Basic philosophical principles (standards) and recommended actions and approaches (guidelines) developed by the U.S. Secretary of the Interior, for each of the four primary treatment options for historic properties: preservation, rehabilitation, restoration, and reconstruction. The Guidelines are meant to establish a model process to follow when planning for treatment, providing technical and design recommendations within a consistent philosophical context. 
Standards for signs, additional. Basic requirements and guidelines as are established in the Sign Ordinance for the City of Fredericksburg. 
Unreasonable economic hardship. The inability of an owner to obtain a reasonable return or a reasonable beneficial use from a resource as required by the United States Supreme Court in Penn Central Transportation Company vs. New York City , 438 U.S. 104 (1978), and subsequent decisions, and as further defined by the provisions of Section 23-64 below. 
(Ord. No. 27-007, 7-5-2017)  
Sec. 23-56 - Historic Preservation Officer. 
The city Historic Preservation Officer shall administer this article and shall advise the Historic Review Board on each application under this article that shall come before the Board. This person shall have expertise in archaeology, history, architectural history, historic preservation, city planning or a closely related field. The Historic Preservation Officer shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To coordinate the city's preservation activities with those of local, state and federal agencies and with local, state, and national preservation organizations in the private sector, 
(2)  To recommend to the Historic Review Board buildings, objects, sites, structures, and districts for designation as landmarks or historic districts in accordance with the criteria established by this chapter, 
(3)  To recommend to the Historic Review Board buildings, objects, sites, structures, and districts for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places. Such recommendations shall be guided by the criteria established in the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, 
(4)  To maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of historic preservation regulations, and to keep a copy available for public viewing all historic district guidelines, Secretary of the Interior Standards, and any other guidelines. Public viewing may include available office of historic preservation website, 
(5)  To review, approve or deny applications for relocation or demolition permits as set forth in Section 23-63 below, 
(6)  To review plans for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from these federal, state or local government agencies from which prior approval is required as provided in this chapter for historic and design review, 
(7)  To administratively review historic preservation applications and forms for completeness, 
(8)  To approve administrative certificates of appropriateness, 
(9)  To convene meetings of committees of the historic review Board, and 
(10)  To provide orientations for all new members of the Board, and to provide other training as the Historic Preservation Officer deems appropriate. Board members are expected to participate in such orientation and training. 
(Ord. No. 27-007, 7-5-2017)  
Sec. 23-57. - Historic Review Board. 
(a)  Creation of Board. There is hereby created a Historic Review Board of the City, hereinafter sometimes called the "Board," consisting of seven members and three alternates appointed by the City council. 
(b)  Term of appointment. Each Board member and alternate shall be appointed for a term of three years, except that of the members of the first Board to be appointed, two shall be appointed to serve for two years, and two for one year. One alternate shall be appointed each year except for the year 2007, in which three alternates with staggered terms shall be appointed. The term shall expire on July 1 of the appropriate year. Any vacancy on the Board shall be filled by the City council for the remainder of the non-expired term. Any regular member of the Board who fails to attend at least 75 percent of all regular meetings of the Board within any 12-month period shall be removed from the Board, unless such failure to attend was the result of illness or other acceptable excuse as determined by the City council. 
(c)  Qualifications. Each Board member and alternate shall be either: a resident of the City who is qualified to vote in City elections, or a resident of Gillespie County, Texas, who owns real property located within the City's historic district or which is designated as a historic landmark and who is qualified to vote in Gillespie County elections. 
(d)  Composition. The Board shall include at least one member of the Gillespie County Historical Society or Gillespie County Historical Commission. Not less than two Board members shall reside in or own, a historical landmark or reside in or own property within the historic district. Not less than one Board member shall have a license, degree, or professional experience in the field of architecture, architectural history, history, historic preservation or historic restoration. Alternates must have at least one of the previously stated attributes. All Board members and alternates shall be persons who, in the opinion of the City council, have demonstrated interest in and knowledge of the historical preservation of the City. 
(e)  Chairman and vice chairman of the Board. The chairman and vice chairman of the Board shall be elected annually by a majority of the members of the Board, and shall serve a term of one year and until their successors are elected. 
(f)  Secretary of the Board. The Historic Preservation Officer or his/her representative shall act as secretary of the Board and shall attend and keep the minutes of all meetings. 
(g)  Ex officio members. The Historic Preservation officer and City Attorney or their representatives may serve on the Board as ex officio members. Ex officio members shall have no right to vote or count toward establishment of a quorum, but shall assist the Board in its various functions. 
(h)  Functions of the Board. The Board shall review all applications proposing additions, alterations, changes, construction, demolition, or relocation within the historic district and historic landmarks. In addition: 
(1)  The Board shall grant or deny certificates of appropriateness contingent upon review according to the further provisions of this Article. 
(2)  The Board shall make recommendations to the City council regarding the designation or re-designation of Resources as historic landmarks or districts, or amendment or removal of such designation(s), and shall determine the preservation priority rating of each Resource subject to this article. 
(3)  The Board shall make an annual report to the City council on the state of historic preservation in the City and shall include in the report a summary of its activities for the past year and a proposed program for the next year. 
(4)  The Board shall have the further responsibility of recommending to the City council, planning and zoning commission, and City departments the adoption of policies, the source of funds, and designation of historic districts and historic landmarks that may further the City's preservation effort. 
(i)  Meetings. The Board shall meet at least once a month at a regularly scheduled time. Special meetings may be called upon request of the chairman or vice chairman, or upon the written request of four members, or upon a notice from the Historic Preservation Officer that a matter requires the consideration of the Board. All meetings shall have advance notice posted in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act and shall be conducted in full compliance therewith. Four members, which may include one or more alternates, shall constitute a quorum and action taken at a meeting shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of the members present and voting at such meeting. Alternates shall not participate in constituting a quorum or in voting if all regular members of the Board are present, and then only so many of them as are necessary to constitute seven (designated by the Chairman) shall participate in any meeting or action of the Board. 
(j)  The Board shall otherwise determine its own rules of procedure except as may be specifically set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 27-007, 7-5-2017)  
Sec. 23-58. - Designation of historic districts, historic landmarks, and preservation priority rating. 
(a)  Historic districts. Historic district zoning designation. The City Council may, from time to time, after receiving a recommendation either for or against such designation by the Historic Review Board and Planning and Zoning Commission, designate certain areas in the City as historic districts, and define, amend, or eliminate the boundaries of same. Such districts shall bear the word "historic overlay" in their zoning designation. Such designation and the requirements thereof shall be in addition to any other zoning district designation or requirement established in the City's zoning ordinance and in this article. All zoning maps shall reflect the historic district by the letters "HO" as a suffix to the use designated. This area shall encompass the area shown on the map adopted herewith and on file in the office of the Historic Preservation Officer, as may be amended from time to time. 
(b)  Historic landmarks. Historic landmark designation. The City council may, from time to time, designate individual property, part or parts thereof or a Resource thereon (Resources) in the City as historic landmarks. Each such property or Resource shall bear the words "historic landmark" (HL) in its zoning designation. Such designation shall indicate that such property/Resource is subject to the terms of this article. Provided, however, with regard to site plans, uses, setbacks and other development and/or building regulations, such property shall be governed by its zoning district. Initially, the historic landmarks shall consist of the properties shown on the list adopted herewith and on file in the office of the Historic Preservation Officer as may be amended from time to time. 
(c)  Criteria. 
(1)  Historic district criteria. In making the designation of an area as a historic district, the City council shall affirmatively find that the area has one or more of the following characteristics: 
a.  Character, interest, or value as a part of the development, heritage, or cultural characteristics of the City; 
b.  Location as the site of a significant historical event; 
c.  Embodiment of distinctive characteristics of an architectural type or specimen; 
d.  Relationship to other distinctive buildings, sites, districts, or structures which are historically significant; 
e.  Unique location of singular physical characteristics representing an established and familiar visual feature of a neighborhood, community or the City; 
f.  Value as an aspect of community sentiment or public pride; 
g.  Identification with a person or persons who significantly contributed to the development or culture of the City, the state or the nation; 
h.  Value as protective of a historical resource. 
(2)  Historic landmark criteria. In making the designation of a place as a historic landmark, the City council shall follow the criteria set forth in the historic district criteria subsection of this section as the same relate to an individual property, part of a property or Resource thereof. 
(d)  Establishment of preservation priority rating. At such time as a Resource/property is either incorporated into the historic district or designated as a historic landmark, such Resource/property shall be rated high, medium, or low by the Board. The Board shall rate the same at its meeting considering the request or application and the Board's rating shall become effective at such time as the City Council either incorporates the Resource/property or designates it as a historic landmark. Appeals of the rating (see section 23-66 below) may occur only following incorporation into the historic district or following designation as a historic landmark, and shall follow the procedure set forth below. The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant seeking to change the rating. 
(e)  Changes to district and landmarks. 
(1)  Districts. Changes to the same may be initiated by any person by request submitted to the Historic Review Board which will forward its recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission prior to the submittal to the City council. The Historic Review Board shall consider the request at a meeting held in accordance with the procedures set forth in subsection 23-61(f) below. Upon forwarding of a recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission, the designation process will follow the procedures provided for in section 5.200 of the City's zoning ordinance, pertaining to hearing and action by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council. Applications for changes in the boundaries of the historic district shall be on forms and shall contain the information required thereon as determined by the City's Historic Preservation Officer and shall be accompanied by the fee set forth in subsection 23-61(c). An application initiated by the Historic Review Board or the City staff shall not require the payment of a fee. 
(2)  Landmarks. The designation of new historic landmarks or the removal of the designation may be initiated by any person by request submitted to the Historic Review Board which will forward its recommendation to the City Council. The Historic Review Board shall consider the request at a meeting held in accordance with the procedures set forth in subsection 23-61(f) below. The City Council shall consider the request at the next regular meeting of the City Council following the meeting of the historic review Board at which the request was heard. Applications for designation of or changes to historic landmarks shall be on forms and shall contain the information required thereon as determined by the Historic Preservation Officer, and shall be accompanied by the fee set forth in subsection 23-61(c) unless initiated by the Historic Review Board or City staff. 
(Ord. No. 27-007, 7-5-2017)  
Sec. 23-59. - Review required by Historic Review Board or Historic Preservation Officer. 
(a)  No person or entity shall install, construct, reconstruct, alter, change, restore, remove, or demolish any Resource, structure or exterior architectural feature or other significant appurtenance of any historic landmark or of any building or structure located within the historic district unless and until such person or entity has completed review of his/her/its proposed changes by the Historic Review Board or the Historic Preservation Officer, and has obtained a certificate of appropriateness in accordance with the further provisions hereof. 
(b)  Such review shall consist of the granting or denial of a Certificate of Appropriateness with regard to the subjects set forth in sections 23-62, 23-63, as applicable. With regard to the subject matters thereof, obtaining a Certificate of Appropriateness is mandatory and compliance with its requirements is mandatory. 
(Ord. No. 27-007, 7-5-2017)  
Sec. 23-60. - Certificates of Appropriateness. 
(a)  No exterior feature of any Resource, whether designated as a landmark or whether located in the historic district, shall be installed, constructed, reconstructed, altered, changed, restored, removed, or demolished, nor shall any new structure be constructed in the historic district until after a Certificate of Appropriateness of such work has been issued by the Board or by the Historic Preservation Officer as applicable. Additionally, neither a demolition permit nor a building permit may be granted for a property in the historic district or designated as a landmark unless the Board or Historic Preservation Officer issues a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Certificates of Appropriateness shall be issued by the Board. Provided however, if the application sought to be approved under this article qualifies as an Insignificant Alteration (SEE DEFINITION OF INSIGNIFICANT ALTERATION ABOVE), an Administrative Certificate of Appropriateness may be issued by the Historic Preservation Officer as an administrative approval without review by the Board. 
(c)  Therefore: 
(1)  In reviewing, approving and denying applications for certificates, the Board and the Historic Preservation Officer shall seek to accomplish the purposes of this article. 
(2)  All decisions of the Board and Historic Preservation Officer shall be in writing and shall state the findings, recommendations or requirements. The same may appear in the written minutes of the Board's meetings. 
(3)  A certificate shall expire 12 months after its issuance and shall continue as long as work is not discontinued for a period of 12 months in which case a new certificate is required. 
(4)  An application for certificate of Appropriateness shall not be resubmitted for review sooner than 12 months following its initial review unless it is submitted with a significant change, or if the originally approved plans have changed significantly as determined by the Historic Preservation Officer with an additional fee. 
(5)  Certificates of Appropriateness may be issued for distinct and separate phases of an ongoing project. 
(Ord. No. 27-007, 7-5-2017)  
Sec. 23-61. - Certificates; application and procedure. 
(a)  Application. The applicant shall submit to the Historic Preservation Officer application for certificate of appropriateness which includes data and information in writing which thoroughly describes the project as determined by the Historic Preservation Officer, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Name and signature of applicant and property owner. 
(2)  Mailing address, phone number and email address of applicant (including owner's representative if applicable) and address, phone number and email address of property owner. 
(3)  Location of property which is the subject of the application. 
(4)  A detailed description of the nature of the proposed work. 
(5)  A description of the history of the property or the measures taken to determine the same, and how the proposed change will be in character with the architectural or historical aspect of the structure or site. 
(6)  Any circumstances or conditions concerning the property or financial hardship which may affect compliance with the article. 
(7)  Drawings and photographs of all sides of the Resource which would explain the proposed work. 
(8)  Color chips of the colors which will be used, and examples and/or samples of other materials requested to be used which are not original to the Resource. 
(b)  Completeness. The applicant shall submit all required data and information to the Historic Preservation Officer, not less than 14 days prior to the next scheduled regular meeting of the Board. The application shall not be accepted and processed until it is deemed complete by the Historic Preservation Officer, including sufficient description to adequately and completely convey the full effect of the work to be done. In cases which do not require Board review, the Historic Preservation Officer shall have at least five business days to review a completed application. 
(c)  Fee. An administration fee will be assessed to the applicant reflecting the cost to the City for processing the application. (See appendix A to this Code.) The application will not be deemed complete, nor will it be processed until such fee is paid in full. 
(d)  Insignificant alteration. If the Historic Preservation Officer determines that the application is for an Insignificant Alteration (SEE DEFINITION OF INSIGNIFICANT ALTERATION ABOVE), or if the Historic Preservation Officer receives an application to renew an expired certificate of appropriateness, he/she may, within 14 days, approve the application and issue or deny the certificate of appropriateness. The Design Guidelines for the City of Fredericksburg, The Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and The Secretary of the Interior's Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings, the Sign Ordinance will be used when assessing the application. These documents will be made available to the public in the office of the City secretary and/or Historic Preservation Officer on the City's website, and/or at the local public library. 
(e)  All other alteration. If the Historic Preservation Officer determines that the application does not qualify as an Insignificant Alteration, or for any other reason does not desire to act under subsection (d) above; he/she shall refer the application to the Board and call for a meeting of the Board to consider the Certificate of Appropriateness application. 
(f)  Time for approval. The Board shall hold a meeting to consider the application within 40 days after the receipt of a completed application. The applicant shall be given notice of the time and place of the meeting by regular mail to the applicant's address on the application or, if provided, solely to the email address of the applicant. Notice of the meeting and subject matter shall be posted in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act. The Board may hold any additional meetings within 60 days following submission of a completed application as may be necessary to carry out its responsibilities under this article. The applicant or his/her agent or representative, shall attend at least one meeting of the Board during which his/her application is considered, otherwise the Board shall not take action, and the application will be deemed to be incomplete and added to the agenda of the next regular meeting of the Board for up to two additional times, and if the applicant or his/her agent or representative fails to attend, then the application shall be deemed withdrawn. The Board shall make its determination and report the same to the Historic Preservation Officer within 60 days after receipt of a completed application unless the Board and the applicant mutually agree to extend the period of review. If action is not taken within 60 days after receipt of a completed application, (except as to demolition cases as set out below) it shall be deemed that the Board recommends approval of the application and the certificate of appropriateness will be issued. The certificate of appropriateness shall be issued within three days following the decision of the Board. 
(g)  The Historic Preservation Officer shall issue a certificate of appropriateness for administrative approvals within 14 days following receipt of a completed application. If it is not issued for whatever reason the same shall be presented to the Board and processed as a regular application. 
(h)  Special time period for demolition. Anything in this article to the contrary notwithstanding, the Board shall make its determination within 120 days after receipt of a completed application for a permit to demolish a historic Resource, landmark or building within the historic district, a historic landmark or Resource outside the historic district, or to move a historic landmark, or to move a building (Resource) into or out of a historic district. 
(Ord. No. 27-007, 7-5-2017)  
Sec. 23-62. - Criteria for approval of a certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  In determining the recommendation and action on an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness, the Historic Preservation Officer and historic review Board shall review and decide the appropriateness of the proposed work of the following with regard to: 
(1)  Removal, addition or modification of architectural detail. The distinguishing historic qualities or character of a building, structure, or site and its environment shall not be destroyed. Removal or modification of any historic material or distinctive architectural features may be accomplished upon issue of a certificate of appropriateness; however, this should be avoided when possible. Architectural features include, but are not limited to, exterior wall materials, windows, railings, decorative woodwork, masonry, or stone elements. 
(2)  Paint color and application. Traditionally, the base colors of Fredericksburg's buildings have been soft muted shades of greens, blues, whites, and tans. In order to continue the historic integrity of the buildings in the district, these colors continue to be acceptable today, and do not require review or issuance of a certificate. The Historic Preservation Officer shall determine whether the proposed color is within the approved list of colors, as outlined in the Fredericksburg Design Guidelines. If the Historic Preservation Officer determines the color is inconsistent with said guidelines, then the proposed color application will be referred to the Board for approval or denial. Base colors such as vibrant or "hot" shades, deep dark shades, and black shades are not acceptable. A certificate of appropriateness must be granted in advance of paint application. The painting of existing materials such as unpainted stone or unpainted masonry is prohibited. 
(3)  New construction in historic districts. The Board will review all new construction plans within historic districts in order to ensure visual compatibility with the surrounding buildings and environment in relation to design, height, gross volume, massing, scale, proportion, and setback in accordance with the Design Guidelines. 
(4)  Additional criteria for issuance of certificate of appropriateness. The Board will also consider and make determinations on the following additional criteria prior to the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness. It will consider the following as to new construction as are applicable. 
a.  The proposed change will not negatively impact the general historic, cultural, unique, and architectural nature of the historic district or landmark. 
b.  The proposed change will not negatively impact exterior architectural features. 
c.  The proposed change to the general design, arrangement, texture, color, and material of the building, or structure, will be compatible with and not negatively impact the relation of such factors to similar features of buildings, or structures, in the district. This consideration shall not be the aesthetic appeal of the structure to the Board nor the proposed remodeling, but rather its conformity to the general character of the particular historic area involved. 
d.  The signage conforms to the general historic, cultural, and architectural character of the historic district or landmark and the City's Sign Ordinance. 
e.  The Design Guidelines for the City of Fredericksburg, the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation, the Secretary of the Interior's Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings and Sign Ordinance, will be used when assessing the application subject to the further requirements of all applicable city ordinances. These documents will be made available to the public in the office of the Historic Preservation Officer or on the City's website. 
f.  The importance of finding a way to meet the current needs of the property owner and the importance of approving plans that will be economically reasonable for the property owner to carry out. 
(b)  The decision of the Historic Preservation Officer or the decision of the Board, as applicable, are mandatory, and must be met in order to receive a certificate of occupancy upon completion of construction. 
(Ord. No. 27-007, 7-5-2017)  
Sec. 23-63. - Demolition/removal. 
(a)  In addition to the requirements of obtaining Board approval for demolitions, all demolitions in the City of Fredericksburg which are required to have a demolition permit, will be reviewed by the Historic Preservation Officer prior to the issuance of a demolition permit by the Building Official of the City. This is to assure that a historic Resource is not inadvertently overlooked in the rating or landmark designation process. If the Historic Preservation Officer determines, with 14 days following the submission of a request to demolish that the Resource should be preserved, then the demolition permit will be abated for a period of 120 days. During such time, the Historic Preservation Officer shall process the Resource under the historic landmark or rating provisions of this Article, and if it is determined to be a historic landmark, or require rating or re-rating, then the provisions of section (b) below will be used to further process the demolition request. The application for demolition will contain the information and be on the forms described in section 23-61(a) above. No building permit will be issued for any demolition of a historic structure which is subject to regulation under Chapter 23 Article III, Historic Preservation of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fredericksburg unless a building permit for the construction of the replacement structure at the same site is issued at the same time. 
(b)  In addition to the criteria specified in section 23-62, the following additional criteria will be used when reviewing and determining the recommendation and action on an application for a certificate of appropriateness with regard to demolition or removal or relocation, as applicable, of a historic landmark or a Resource within a historic district: 
(1)  The demolition, removal or relocation of a historic Resource with a rating of "high" or the demolition or removal of a historic Resource with a rating of "medium" in the Fredericksburg Historic Resource Survey is strictly prohibited. 
(2)  The demolition, removal or relocation of a Resource with a rating of "low," or of a historic resource not rated in the Fredericksburg Historic Resource Survey, may occur only when the Board issues a certificate of appropriateness for that express purpose. Refer to section 23-55 and the Fredericksburg Historic Resource Survey for a more detailed definition of the preservation priority rating system. 
(c)  As an exception to (b) above, any Resource with a rating of Medium or Low may be relocated within the same tract of land upon which it is located, or to a tract so close as to be considered essentially the same location, if permitted by the Board which must issue a certificate of appropriateness for such purpose, and the Board may place reasonable conditions and safeguards for the Resource when issuing its Certificate. 
(d)  As a further exception to (b) above, a resource may be demolished or removed if the Board determines that it is a hazardous or dangerous building, or that the requirements of section 23-64, economic hardship, below are met. 
(e)  The Design Guidelines for the City of Fredericksburg, The Secretary's Standards for Rehabilitation and The Secretary's Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings will be used to guide the Board in decisions regarding issuance of a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or removal of a Resource, historic landmark or within the historic district when permitted. 
(f)  In the case of a demolition application, the Board shall affirmatively find that: 
(1)  Reasonable measures could not be taken to adaptively reuse, rehabilitate, or restore the Resource building or structure at its existing site; 
(2)  Reasonable measures have been taken to relocate the Resource to a new site first within the same property, secondly within the historic district (if applicable), or thirdly to an area that will be enhanced by the Resource or where the goals of this article will be furthered and that the same cannot reasonably be done; 
(3)  The condition of the Resource building or structure is such that it has been so altered or deteriorated that it has lost its value for promoting the goals of this article, and is no longer significant, and in such event that the condition is not due to demolition by neglect or action of the owner or another related person or entity; 
(4)  Plans for proposed new construction or other reuse of the property, and their effects on the historical, cultural, social, or architectural identity of the surrounding area will be positive and promote the goals of this article. 
(g)  In the case of a removal application, the Board shall affirmatively find that: 
(1)  Reasonable measures could not be taken to adaptively reuse, rehabilitate, or restore the Resource building or structure at its existing site; 
(2)  The Resource is no longer significant to the area in which it is situated; 
(3)  Reasonable measures have been taken to relocate the Resource within the same property, and that the same cannot reasonably be done; 
(4)  Reasonable measures have been taken to relocate the Resource within the historic district (if applicable), or that it will be relocated to an area that will be enhanced by the resource and where the goals of this article will be furthered; and 
(5)  That the condition is not due to demolition by neglect. 
(h)  In making the determination to permit demolition or removal of a historic Resource, the Board may place reasonable conditions on the same even if such conditions are not related to the mandatory requirements of this article but which are related to the demolition or removal, and to ensure compliance with the plans approved by the Board. The same may include, but is not limited to, the requirement that all conditions be fulfilled prior to issuance of a building permit for the original Resource's location. 
(i)  Prior to demolition, the Historic Preservation Officer may, as a condition of approval of a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or removal, require the owner, at the owner's expense, to provide documentation of the subject Resources in accordance with the standards of the Historic American Building Survey. Such documentation may include photographs, floor plans, measured drawings, an archeological survey, or other information specified. 
(j)  The special time period for demolition as described in section 23-61(i) above shall apply to all requests under this section. 
(Ord. No. 27-007, 7-5-2017)  
Sec. 23-64 - Economic Hardship. 
No Certificate of Appropriateness for demolition or removal as applicable, involving a claim of economic hardship may be approved by the Board, nor shall a demolition permit be issued by the city based upon economic hardship unless the Board finds: 
(1)  The property is incapable of earning a reasonable return in its current or rehabilitated state, regardless of whether that return represents the most profitable return possible, and 
(2)  The property cannot be adapted for any other use, whether by the current owner or by a purchaser, which would result in a reasonable return, and 
(3)  Earnest and reasonable efforts to find a purchaser interested in acquiring the property and preserving it have failed, and 
(4)  The property cannot be moved or relocated to another site, similar site or within the District. 
(5)  Reasonable return, for the purposes of determination of economic hardship shall include consideration of the following information, but is not limited thereto: 
a.  Purchase date price and financing arrangements; 
b.  Current market value; 
c.  Form of ownership; 
d.  Type of occupancy; 
e.  Cost estimates of demolition and post demolition plans for development; 
f.  Maintenance and operating costs; 
g.  Inspection report by licensed architect or structural engineer having experience working with historic properties; 
h.  Costs and engineering feasibility for rehabilitation; 
i.  Property tax information; 
j.  Rental rates and gross income from the property; 
k.  Other additional information as deemed appropriate. 
(6)  Claims of economic hardship by the owner shall not be based on conditions resulting from: 
a.  Evidence of demolition by neglect or other willful and negligent acts by the owner; 
b.  Purchasing the property for substantially more than market value at the time of purchase; 
c.  Failure to perform normal maintenance and repairs; 
d.  Failure to diligently solicit and retain tenants; 
e.  Failure to provide normal improvements or accommodations for tenants. 
(7)  That throughout the process, the applicant has consulted in good faith with the Historic Preservation Officer, local preservation groups and interested parties in a diligent effort to seek an alternative that will result in preservation of the property. 
(Ord. No. 27-007, 7-5-2017)  
Sec. 23-65. - Prevention of demolition by neglect. 
(a)  Duty to maintain. All historic Resources landmarks and all significant buildings, objects, sites, and structures located in the historic district, shall be preserved against decay, deterioration, and kept free from certain structural defects by the owner thereof or such person, persons, or entities who may have custody or control thereof. Such owners, or other persons shall repair such building, object, site, or structure if it has any of the following defects: 
(1)  Deteriorated or inadequate foundations; 
(2)  Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety; 
(3)  Members of walls or other vertical supports that split lean, list, or buckle due to defective material, workmanship, or deterioration; 
(4)  Members of walls or other vertical supports that are insufficient to carry imposed loads with safety; 
(5)  Members of ceilings, roofs, and their support system, or other horizontal members which sag, split, or buckle due to defective material, workmanship, or deterioration; 
(6)  Members of ceiling and roof supports or other horizontal members that are insufficient to carry imposed loads with safety; 
(7)  Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge, or settle due to defective material, workmanship, or deterioration; 
(8)  Deterioration or defects in paints, coating systems, or flashing resulting in destructive moisture penetration or rot; 
(9)  Any fault, defect, or condition in the building which renders the same structurally unsafe or not properly watertight. 
(b)  Neglect. 
(1)  Determination of neglect. If the Board upon recommendation or presentation by the Historic Preservation Officer or a building official of the City or his or her designee, makes a determination that a Resource is being demolished or deteriorated by neglect, it shall direct the Historic Preservation Officer to notify the owner or owners of the Resource of this preliminary determination, stating the reasons therefor, and shall give the owner of record 30 days from the date of such notice to correct the defects or present to the Board a plan for remediation if the defect cannot be remedied within such 30-day period. 
(2)  Subsequent determination. If, within 30 days following such initial determination, the Board shall again determine that the resource is being demolished or deteriorated by neglect, it may direct the Historic Preservation Officer to file a complaint for a violation of a zoning ordinance of the City, against the owner or owners if the necessary repairs are not completed within 90 days of the second determination by the Board that the subject building or structure is being demolished or deteriorated by neglect. 
(3)  City stabilization. Additionally, the Historic Review Board may direct the Historic Preservation Officer to accomplish the repairs necessary to stabilize and protect the Resource. The City shall then pay therefor, and charge the expenses incurred in doing such work or having such work done or improvements made to the record owner of such Resource. If such work is done or improvements made at the expense of the City, then such expenses shall be assessed as a lien on the real estate, lot or lots upon which such expense was incurred except as prohibited by law. The City, and the City's authorized assistants, employees, contracting agents, or other representatives, are hereby expressly authorized to enter upon private property at all reasonable hours for the purpose of completing repairs necessary for the stabilization and repair of a Resource. Any court having jurisdiction over such cases including the municipal court of the City shall have authority to issue all orders necessary to enforce this article. Neither the City nor its employees, agents or contractors shall be answerable in damages or otherwise for damage to property due to the enforcement of this article. 
(4)  Lien establishment. The City Manager or other person authorized to act on behalf of the City shall file a statement of such expenses incurred by filing the amount of such expenses, the date on which said work was done or improvements made, with the county clerk of Gillespie County, Texas in the Real Property Records of such county. The City shall have a privileged lien on such lot, lots or real estate upon which said work was done or improvements made to secure the expenditures so made. Said lien amount shall bear interest per annum from the date said statement was filed at the greater of the maximum rate published by the state Board of control, or the rate of ten percent. For any such expenditures, and interest, as aforesaid, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure of said lien may be had in the name of the City. The statement of expenses so made, as aforesaid, shall be a prima facie proof of the amount expended for such work or improvements. 
(Ord. No. 27-007, 7-5-2017)  
Sec. 23-66. - Appeal. 
(a)  An applicant or owner may appeal any decision of the Board to the City's Board of Adjustment under the following conditions: 
(1)  That a written notice of appeal by the applicant or owner be received by the Historic Preservation Officer within ten days following the decision to be appealed. The application shall follow the form required for a variance request under the City's Zoning Ordinance. 
(2)  The Board of Adjustment may overturn the Board's decision or requirement if it makes affirmative findings of fact on each of the following criteria: 
a.  The historic review regulations set forth herein, or findings of the Board do not allow for a reasonable use. 
b.  The action of the Board was not based upon the preponderance of the evidence presented to the Board. 
c.  The plight of the owner of the property is due to unique circumstances existing on the property, and the unique circumstances were not created by the owner of the property and are not merely financial, and are not due to or the result of general conditions in the zoning district in which the property is located. 
d.  The reversal of the Board's decision or requirement will not alter the character of the area adjacent to the property, will not impair the use of adjacent conforming property and will not impair the purposes of this article or regulations to the Zoning District in which the property is located. 
e.  In addition, or alternately, other legal precedent or established law or is challenging or requesting a change to a rating. 
f.  The Board of Adjustment may apply conditions to its decision or modification of the Board's decision or requirement. 
(3)  The Board of Adjustment shall schedule a hearing on such appeal within 30 days after the receipt of the notice of appeal, or as soon thereafter as is reasonably practicable. Notice of such hearing shall be published in the City's official newspaper not less than the tenth day before the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the applicant, owner and all interested parties, including local preservation groups, will have the opportunity to be heard. The Board of Adjustment shall uphold, reverse or modify the decision or requirement of the Historic Review Board or the Historic Preservation Officer within 30 days of the appeal hearing unless a continuance is agreed to by the owner. The Board of Adjustment will consider the same criteria and standard of review considered by the Historic Review Board or the Historic Preservation Officer. 
(b)  Only one appeal shall be allowed. 
(c)  Prior to an appeal to judicial authorities or institution of suit, and as a mandatory prerequisite thereof, the applicant must file a written notice of appeal with the City secretary within ten days following the adverse Board of Adjustment decision, as applicable, stating specifically grounds for such appeal, and the resultant appeal or suit shall be had on that ground or those grounds. 
(Ord. No. 27-007, 7-5-2017)  
Sec. 23-67. - Penalties and Enforcement. 
(a)  Violation of article. A person, firm, corporation or other entity commits an offense if he/she/it violates this article. Each day the offense continues constitutes a separate offense. The following penalties, which are nonexclusive, and in addition to other provisions of this Article III, and the exercise of one or more of which shall not preclude exercise of the others, shall be imposed on those persons or entities found to have violated this article: 
(1)  The same penalties as set forth in the zoning ordinance of the City for all violations of requirements set forth in the said zoning ordinance; or the penalties set forth in section 1-6 of this Code of Ordinances of the City for zoning violations (currently up to $2,000.00 per day). 
(2)  A certificate of occupancy will not be granted for any property until compliance with all Certificate of Appropriateness requirements are verified by the Historic Preservation Officer or building official of the City. 
(3)  Stop Work order. 
a.  Whenever the building official finds any work regulated by this Article being performed in a manner either contrary to the provisions of this Article or dangerous or unsafe, the building official is authorized to issue a stop work order. 
b.  The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume. 
c.  Any person, firm, corporation or other entity who or which shall continue any work having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove the violation or unsafe condition, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed by law. 
(4)  If work, which is required to be reviewed, is commenced without a Certificate of Appropriateness, or if a stop-work order is issued, an administrative fee, which is in addition to any other applicable fees, of $300.00 shall be due in order to apply or re-apply for a building permit or to re-start construction as applicable. 
(5)  In the event the requirements of the Board or Historic Preservation Officer, as applicable, are not met, the building permit shall be revoked. Notice of Revocation shall be delivered or mailed to the applicant by the building official or his or her designee to the address provided on the application. 
(6)  Restrictions on future development. If a Resource, either a landmark or one located within the boundaries of the historic district is demolished, removed or relocated without a certificate of appropriateness, or in the event the plans are changed for the property from which the Resource was demolished, removed or relocated without approval of the changed plans by the Historic Review Board, then the following restrictions, in addition to any other penalties or remedies set forth in this article, shall be applicable to the site where the Resource was formerly located: 
a.  No building or other permits will be issued for construction on the site, with the exception of a permit to restore such Resource after obtaining a certificate of appropriateness, for a period of five years after the date of such demolition, removal or relocation. 
b.  No permits shall be issued by the City for any curb cuts on the site for a period of five years from and after the date of such demolition, removal or relocation. 
c.  No parking lot for vehicles shall be operated whether for remuneration or not on the site for a period of five years from and after the date of such demolition, removal, or relocation. 
d.  The owner of the site shall maintain the site in a clean and orderly state and shall properly maintain all existing trees and landscaping on the site. When these restrictions become applicable to a particular site, the Historic Preservation Officer shall cause to be filed a notice thereof in the real property records of Gillespie County and such restrictions shall then be binding on future owners of the property. 
(7)  Civil action. As an additional remedy in addition to the penalties stated above, the City Attorney for the City of Fredericksburg or his or her designee shall have the power to take all necessary civil action to enjoin non-compliance or enforce the provisions hereof and to request appropriate legal or equitable remedies or relief. 
(8)  Cumulative remedies. The provisions of this section shall apply in addition to other enforcement procedures or penalties which are available at law or in equity, including, but not limited to, those available for adversely affecting historic structures or property under Texas Local Government Code § 315.006 and Texas Government Code § 442.016 as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 27-007, 7-5-2017)  
Secs. 23-68—23-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ANNEXATION PLAN 
 
Sec. 23-91. - Annexation restricted to certain areas. 
The City of Fredericksburg shall annex only those areas not required to be included in an annexation plan as set forth in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 43.052, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 9-011, art. 12.301, 12-6-1999)  
Secs. 23-92—23-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SHORT TERM RENTALS 
 
Sec. 23-100. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this Article is to establish regulations for the use of privately owned dwellings as Short Term Rentals, to minimize negative ancillary impact on surrounding properties, and to ensure the collection and payment of Hotel Occupancy Tax. 
(Ord. No. 28-001, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
Sec. 23-101. - Definitions. 
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
City. The City of Fredericksburg, Texas. 
Guest. The overnight occupants renting a Short Term Rental Unit for a specified period and the daytime visitors of the overnight occupants. 
Local Contact Person. The Owner, Operator, or person designated by the Owner or the Operator, who shall be available 24 hours per day for the purpose of responding to concerns or requests for assistance related to the Owner's Short Term Rental. 
Operator. The Owner or the Owner's authorized representative who is responsible for compliance with this Article while advertising and/or operating a Short Term Rental. 
Owner. The person or entity that holds legal or equitable title to the Short Term Rental property. 
Short Term Rental. A privately owned dwelling, including but not limited to, a single family dwelling, multiple family attached dwelling, apartment house, condominium, duplex, mobile home, or any portion of such dwellings, rented by the public for consideration, and used for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes for any period less than 30 consecutive days. 
The following are exempt from the regulations under this Article: hotel, motel, dormitory, public or private club, recreational vehicle park, hospital and medical clinic, nursing home or convalescent home, foster home, halfway house, transitional housing facility, any housing operated or used exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes, and any housing owned by a governmental agency and used to house its employees or for governmental purposes. 
Short Term Rental Permit. A permit issued by the City authorizing the use of a privately owned dwelling as a Short Term Rental. 
Short Term Rental Unit. One or more habitable rooms forming a single habitable division within a Short Term Rental, or an entire undivided Short Term Rental, which is advertised to be occupied, is occupied, or is intended to be occupied by a single party of Guests under a single reservation and/or single rental payment. 
(Ord. No. 28-001, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
Sec. 23-102. - Short Term Rental Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to rent, or offer to rent, any Short Term Rental without a valid Short Term Rental Permit issued under this Article. 
(Ord. No. 28-001, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
Sec. 23-103. - Short Term Rental Permit registration fee and application. 
(a)  An applicant shall submit an application for a Short Term Rental Permit using a format and method promulgated by the City Manager or his/her designee. The application form shall require, at a minimum, the following information from applicants: 
(1)  The name, address, email and telephone number of the Owner of the Short Term Rental. 
(2)  The name, address, email and telephone number of the Operator of the Short Term Rental. 
(3)  The name, address, email and 24 hour telephone number of the Local Contact Person. 
(4)  The name and address of the Short Term Rental. 
(5)  The number of bedrooms and the proposed overnight and daytime occupancy limit of the Short Term Rental. 
(6)  A diagram showing the proposed layout of the property use and any on-site parking available for the Short Term Rental. 
(7)  A general description of any food service to be offered to Guests of the Short Term Rental. 
(b)  An applicant for a Short Term Rental Permit shall pay to the City a permit fee of $150.00. 
(c)  A separate Short Term Rental Permit application and permit fee must be submitted for each individual Short Term Rental Unit. Each individual Short Term Rental Unit shall be assigned a unique permit number upon permit issuance by the City. 
(d)  Prior to issuance of a Short Term Rental Permit, the Operator shall allow an on-site inspection of the Short Term Rental Unit by a City Code Enforcement officer, to ensure compliance with the following: 
(1)  The requirements set forth in Section 23-104(a) of this Article; and 
(2)  The requirements set forth in Sections 23-104(b)(1) through 23-104(b)(3) of this Article. 
(e)  A Short Term Rental Permit issued under this Article shall be valid for a period of one calendar year from the date of issuance. The Short Term Rental Permit shall expire immediately upon any change in Owner of the Short Term Rental Unit. 
(f)  The Owner has a duty to notify the City within 20 calendar days, in writing, of any changes to information submitted as part of a Short Term Rental Permit application under this Article. 
(g)  An application for Short Term Rental Permit may be denied if the Owner has had a Short Term Rental Permit suspended or revoked during the previous 365 calendar days. 
(Ord. No. 28-001, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
Sec. 23-104. - Short Term Rental operational requirements. 
(a)  The Operator shall post the following information in a prominent location within the Short Term Rental Unit, using a form promulgated by the City: 
(1)  The unique Short Term Rental Permit number assigned to the Short Term Rental Unit; 
(2)  Operator name and number; 
(3)  Local Contact Person name and number; 
(4)  The location of any on-site and off-site parking spaces available for Guests; 
(5)  The overnight and daytime occupancy limits; 
(6)  Instructions to Guests concerning disposal of garbage and handling of garbage containers; 
(7)  Notification that the Guests are responsible for compliance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations pertaining to the use and occupancy of the Short Term Rental, and that Guests may be fined by the City for violations of this Article; and 
(8)  Notification that all functions such as weddings, parties or other gatherings are prohibited at the Short Term Rental, excepting Short Term Rentals located in the Commercial Zoning District. 
(b)  The Operator shall operate a Short Term Rental in compliance with the following: 
(1)  Zoning regulations prescribed for the zoning district in which such Short Term Rental is located, set forth in Appendix B of the Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  City of Fredericksburg Sign Ordinance, as applicable, set forth in Chapter 29 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  Maximum occupancy limits prescribed by the City Fire Marshal, pursuant to the International Fire Code as adopted in Chapter 17 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(4)  City of Fredericksburg Hotel Occupancy Tax Ordinance, set forth in Chapter 41 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(5)  City of Fredericksburg Noise and Sound Level Regulation Ordinance, set forth in Chapter 20 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(6)  City of Fredericksburg Garbage Collection Ordinance, set forth in Chapter 32 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(7)  During any period when a Short Term Rental is occupied or intended to be occupied by Guests, the Local Contact Person shall be available 24 hours per day for the purpose of responding to concerns or requests for assistance related to the condition, operation, or conduct of Guests of the Short Term Rental. The Local Contact Person shall respond within 60 minutes of being notified of concerns or requests for assistance regarding the condition, operation, or conduct of Guests of the Short Term Rental, and shall take immediate remedial action as needed to resolve such concerns or requests for assistance. 
(c)  Any advertisement that promotes the availability of a Short Term Rental, listed in any medium, including but not limited to newspaper, magazine, brochure, website, or mobile application, shall include the current Short Term Rental Permit number assigned by the City. 
(Ord. No. 28-001, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
Sec. 23-105. - Notification of complaints. 
Complaints related to the operation of a Short Term Rental, including but not limited to complaints concerning noise, garbage, parking, and disorderly conduct by Guests, shall be reported to the City Code Enforcement office. 
(Ord. No. 28-001, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
Sec. 23-106. - Compliance with other law. 
The Owner, Operator, Local Contact Person, and Guests shall comply with all applicable laws, rules and regulations pertaining to the operation, use, and occupancy of a Short Term Rental. The Owner shall not be relieved from any civil or criminal liability for a violation of this Article, regardless of whether such violation is committed by the Owner, Operator, Local Contact Person, or Guest of the Owner's Short Term Rental. 
Nothing in this Article shall be construed to relieve any person or Owner of any other applicable requirements of federal, state, or local law, rules, or regulations. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to provide any property owner with the right or privilege to violate any private conditions, covenants, and restrictions applicable to the Owner's property that may prohibit the use of such Owner's property as a Short Term Rental as defined in this Article. 
(Ord. No. 28-001, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
Sec. 23-107. - Compliance and Penalty provision. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to violate any provision of this Article. Proof that a violation of this Article occurred at a Short Term Rental shall create a rebuttable presumption that the Owner of said Short Term Rental committed the violation. 
(b)  Any violation of this Article is a Class C misdemeanor offense, and upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine as set forth in Section 1-6 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(c)  Prosecution under this Article shall not require the pleading or proving of any culpable mental state. 
(d)  Penalties provided for in this Article are in addition to any other criminal or civil remedies that the City may pursue under federal, state, or local law. 
(Ord. No. 28-001, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
Sec. 23-108. - Permit suspension or revocation; appeal. 
Upon conviction for a violation of this Article, the City Manager may suspend or revoke any Short Term Rental Permit issued for the same Short Term Rental where the violation occurred. The City Manager shall notify an Owner of a suspension or revocation under this Section in writing, delivered by Certified Mail, Return Receipt Requested, and mailed to the address of the Owner as set forth on the most recent Short Term Rental Permit application submitted to the City. 
An Owner may appeal a notice of suspension or revocation under this Section by filing a written appeal with the City Manager within ten business days following the date said notice was deposited in the U.S. Mail. Following a timely filing of an appeal hereunder, the Owner may present evidence to the City Manager related to the suspension or revocation under this Section. Following the City Manager's final decision on appeal, the Owner may appeal an adverse decision of the City Manager by filing a written appeal with the City Council within five business days following the date of the City Manager's final decision. 
(Ord. No. 28-001, § 1, 1-2-2018)  
Chapter 26 - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to regulate, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 243.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations on the operation of the same without imposing a limitation or restriction on the contents of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. 
(Code 1992, § 4.701)  
Sec. 26-2. - Definitions. 
Adult arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein. 
Adult bookstore or adult video store. A commercial establishment which as one of its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which depict or describe "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified sexual activities". 
Adult cabaret. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
(1)  Persons who appear in a state of nudity; 
(2)  Live performance which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; or 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas". 
Adult motel. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and has a sign visible from the public right of way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
Adult motion picture theater. A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas". 
Adult theater. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities". 
City manager. The city manager of the City of Fredericksburg or his/her designated agent. 
Escort agency. A person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts, as one of its primary business purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
Establishment. Any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)  The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
Licensee. A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license. 
Massage establishment. Any building, room, place, or establishment, other than a regularly licensed hospital, where manipulated massage or manipulated exercises are practiced upon the human body by anyone not a duly licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor or a registered nurse or a doctor whether with or without the use of mechanical, therapeutic or bathing devices, and shall include Turkish bathhouses. This term shall not include, however, duly licensed beauty parlors or barber shops or a place wherein registered physical therapists treat only patients recommended by a licensed physician and operate only under such physician's direction. 
Nude model studio. Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays "specified anatomical areas" is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. 
Nudity or a state of nudity. 
(1)  The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast; or 
(2)  A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or areola of the female breast. 
Operates or causes to be operated. To cause to function or to put or keep in operation. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business. 
Person. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
Residential district. A single family, duplex, townhouse, multiple family, or mobile home zoning district as defined in the Fredericksburg zoning ordinance. 
Residential use. A single family, duplex, multiple family, or "mobile home park, mobile home subdivision" as defined in the Fredericksburg zoning ordinance. 
Semi-nude. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
Sexual encounter center. A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: 
(1)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
(2)  Sexual activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity. 
Sexually oriented business. An adult arcade, adult bookstore, or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater or nude model studio. 
Specified anatomical areas. Less than completely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
Specified sexual activities. Any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anus, or female breasts. 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy. 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated. 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) through (3) above. 
Transfer of ownership or control. Includes any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Code 1992, § 4.702)  
Sec. 26-3. - Classification of sexually oriented businesses. 
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows: 
(1)  Adult arcades; 
(2)  Adult bookstores or adult video stores; 
(3)  Adult cabarets; 
(4)  Adult motels; 
(5)  Adult motion picture theaters; 
(6)  Adult theaters; 
(7)  Escort agencies; 
(8)  Massage establishments; 
(9)  Nude model studios; and 
(10)  Sexual encounter centers. 
(Code 1992, § 4.703)  
Sec. 26-4. - Location of sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he/she operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of: 
(1)  A church; 
(2)  A public or private elementary or secondary school; 
(3)  A boundary of a residential district as defined in this chapter; 
(4)  A public park adjacent to a residential district as defined in this chapter, or 
(5)  The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use as defined in this chapter. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if he/she causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of another sexually oriented business. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he/she causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof. 
(d)  For the purposes of subsection (a), measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church or public or private elementary or secondary school, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, residential district, or residential lot. 
(e)  For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structure or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
(f)  A sexually oriented business lawfully operating in conformance with this chapter is not rendered nonconforming by the location, subsequent to the grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a church, public or private elementary or secondary school, public park, residential district, or residential lot within 1,000 feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or has been revoked. 
(Code 1992, § 4.704) 
State Law reference— General authority to regulate location of sexually oriented business, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 243.  
Sec. 26-5. - License required. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he/she operates a sexually oriented business without a valid license, issued by the city for the particular type of business. 
(b)  The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he/she must fully execute the application for a license. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a ten percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license. Each applicant must be qualified under section 26-6 and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(Code 1992, § 4.705) 
State Law reference— Authority to require a permit, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 243.007.  
Sec. 26-6. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  The city manager shall approve the issuance of a license to an applicant within 30 days after receipt of an application unless he/she finds one or more of the following to be true: 
(1)  An applicant is under 18 years of age. 
(2)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant or applicant's spouse in relation to a sexually oriented business. 
(3)  An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(4)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this article, other than the offense of operating a sexually oriented business without a license, within two years immediately preceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect. 
(5)  The license fee required has not been paid. 
(6)  An applicant has been employed in a sexually oriented business in a managerial capacity within the preceding 12 months and has demonstrated that he/she is unable to operate or manage a sexually oriented business premises in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(7)  An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with sections 26-4, 26-8, 26-13, 26-14, 26-15, 26-16, 26-17, 26-18, or 26-19 hereof. 
(8)  An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a crime: 
a.  Involving: 
1.  Any of the following offenses as described in Chapter 43 of the Texas Penal Code: 
(i)  Prostitution; 
(ii)  Promotion of prostitution; 
(iii)  Aggravated promotion of prostitution; 
(iv)  Compelling prostitution; 
(v)  Obscenity; 
(vi)  Sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to minor; 
(vii)  Sexual performance by a child; or 
(viii)  Possession of child pornography. 
2.  Any of the following offenses as described in Chapter 21 of the Texas Penal Code: 
(i)  Public lewdness; 
(ii)  Indecent exposure; or 
(iii)  Indecency with a child. 
3.  Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in Chapter 22 of the Texas Penal Code; 
4.  Incest, solicitation of a child, or harboring a runaway child as described in Chapter 25 of the Texas Penal Code; or 
5.  Criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses. 
b.  For which: 
1.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
2.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
3.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24 month period. 
(b)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or applicant's spouse. 
(c)  An applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has been convicted of an offense listed in subsection (a)(8)a. may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when the time period required by subsection (a)(8)b. has elapsed. 
(d)  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(Code 1992, § 4.706) 
State Law reference— Regarding public indecency, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, ch. 43. 
State Law reference— Regarding sexual offenses, V.T.C.A., Penal Code §§ 21.07, 21.08, and 21.11. 
State Law reference— Regarding offenses against the family, V.T.C.A., Penal Code §§ 25.02, 25.06, and 25.07.  
Sec. 26-7. - Fee. 
The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license is set forth in the fee schedule found in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1992, § 4.707)  
Sec. 26-8. - Inspection. 
(a)  An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police department, health department, fire department, and building inspection division to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(b)  A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his/her agent or employee commits an offense if he/she refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the police department at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(c)  The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation. 
(Code 1992, § 4.708) 
Note— Although inspections can be had to determine the presence of any fire or health hazard or unsafe building condition or a violation of any fire, health, or building regulation, statute, or ordinance, entry without permission of a private residence or property cannot be had for code inspections without a search warrant if the owner denies permission to enter and search the premises (unless otherwise allowed by law under exigent circumstances). See Vernon's Ann. C.C.P., Arts. 1.06 and 18.05.  
Sec. 26-9. - Expiration and renewal of license. 
(a)  Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 26-5. Application for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the expiration date. Applications made less than 30 days before the expiration date will have no effect on the expiration of the license. 
(b)  When the city manager denies renewal of a permit, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the city manager finds that the basis for the denial of the renewal has been corrected, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date denial became final. 
(Code 1992, § 4.709)  
Sec. 26-10. - Suspension. 
The city manager shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if he/she determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has: 
(1)  Violated or is not in compliance with sections 26-4, 26-8, 26-13, 26-14, 26-15, 26-16, 26-17, 26-18, or 26-19 of this chapter; 
(2)  Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually oriented business premises; 
(3)  Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this article; 
(4)  Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises; or 
(5)  Demonstrated inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(Code 1992, § 4.710)  
Sec. 26-11. - Revocation. 
(a)  The city manager shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in section 26-10 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months. 
(b)  The city manager shall remove a license if he/she determines that: 
(1)  A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the city manager during the application process; 
(2)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(3)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(4)  A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(5)  A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in subsection 26-6 (a)(8)a. for which the time period required in subsection 26-6 (a)(8)b. has not elapsed; 
(6)  On two or more occasions within a 12 month period, a person or persons committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed premises of a crime listed in subsection 26-6 (a)(8)a., for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed; 
(7)  A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term "sexual contact" shall have the same meaning as it is defined in section 21.01, Texas Penal Code; 
(8)  A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for hotel occupancy taxes, ad valorem taxes, or sales taxes related to the sexually oriented business; or 
(9)  A licensee has refused to permit an inspection of the premises by the city manager or his/her designee. 
(c)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license. 
(d)  Subsection (b)(7) does not apply to adult motels as a ground for revoking the license unless the licensee or employee knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public view. 
(e)  When the city manager revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the city manager finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the license was revoked under subsection (b)(5), an applicant may not be granted another license until the appropriate number of years required under section 26-6(a)(8)b. has elapsed. 
(Code 1992, § 4.711)  
Sec. 26-12. - Appeal; exemption from locational requirements. 
(a)  If the city manager denies the issuance of a license or the renewal of a license, he or she shall send to the applicant, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his or her action and the right to an appeal. The aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the city manager to the city council. The filing of an appeal stays the action of the city. 
(b)  The applicant may, not later than ten calendar days after receiving notice of the denial, file with the city secretary a written request for a hearing before the city council. 
(c)  A hearing by the city council may proceed if a quorum is present. The city council shall hear and consider evidence offered by any interested person. 
(d)  The city council may, in its discretion, grant an exemption from the locational restrictions of this chapter if the following is found: 
(1)  That the location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not have a detrimental effect on nearby properties or be contrary to the public safety or welfare; 
(2)  That the granting of the exemption will not violate the spirit and intent of this article of this Code; 
(3)  That the location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not downgrade the property values or quality of life in the adjacent areas or encourage the development of urban blight; 
(4)  That the location of an additional sexually oriented business in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any efforts of urban renewal or restoration; and 
(5)  That all other applicable provisions of this chapter will be observed. 
(e)  The city council shall grant or deny the exemption by majority vote. Failure to reach a majority vote shall result in denial of the exemption. Disputes of fact shall be decided on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence. The decision of the city council regarding the permit appeal is final. 
(f)  If the city council grants the exemption, the exemption is valid for one year from the date of the council's action. Upon expiration of an exemption, the sexually oriented business is in violation of the locational restrictions until the applicant applies for and receives another exemption. 
(g)  If the city council denies the exemption, the applicant may not re-apply for an exemption until at least 12 months have elapsed since the date of the council's action. 
(h)  The grant of an exemption does not exempt the applicant from any other provisions of this chapter other than the locational restrictions. 
(Code 1992, § 4.712)  
Sec. 26-13. - Transfer of license. 
A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. 
(Code 1992, § 4.713)  
Sec. 26-14. - Additional regulations for nude model studios. 
(a)  A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)  A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he/she appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex. 
(c)  A person commits an offense if he/she appears in a state of nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right of way. 
(d)  A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public. 
(Code 1992, § 4.714)  
Sec. 26-15. - Additional regulations for adult theaters and adult motion picture theaters. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he/she knowingly allows a person under the age of 18 years to appear in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(b)  A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he/she knowingly appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsections (a) and (b) above if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex. 
(Code 1992, § 4.715)  
Sec. 26-16. - Additional regulations for adult motels. 
(a)  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel as that term is defined in this chapter. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented business license, he/she rents or sub-rents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, he/she rents or sub-rents the same sleeping room again. 
(c)  For purposes of subsection (b) above, the terms "rent" or "sub-rent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(Code 1992, § 4.716)  
Sec. 26-17. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room, a film, video cassette, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The city manager may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the city manager or his/her designee. 
(4)  It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that a least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the view area specified in paragraph (5) above remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to paragraph (1) above. 
(7)  The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle as measured at the floor level. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the illumination described above, is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(b)  A person having a duty under paragraphs (1) through (8) of subsection (a) above commits an offense if he/she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Code 1992, § 4.717)  
Sec. 26-18. - Display of sexually explicit material to minors. 
The display of sexually explicit material to minors is unlawful and punishable in accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 43.24. 
(Code 1992, § 4.718)  
Sec. 26-19. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Except as provided by subsection (b) below, any person violating section 26-4, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine as provided for in the general penalty provision found in Chapter 1 of this Code. 
(b)  If the sexually oriented business involved is a nude model studio, then violation of section 26-4 is punishable as a Class A misdemeanor. 
(c)  Except as provided by subsection (b) above, a violation of any provision of this article other than section 26-4, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine as provided for in the general penalty provision found in section 1-6 of this Code. 
(d)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 26-4 or section 26-14 (d) that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a proprietary school licensed by the State of Texas; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(3)  In a structure: 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; 
b.  Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
c.  Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
(e)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 26-4 or subsection 26-5(a) that each item of descriptive, printed, or film, or video material offered for sale or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. 
(Code 1992, § 4.719)  
Sec. 26-20. - Injunction. 
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license or in violation of section 26-5 herein, is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. 
(Code 1992, § 4.720) 
State Law reference— Authority to enjoin, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 243.01.  
Chapter 29 - SIGNS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Regulation of signs by home-rule municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.901; regulation of political signs by municipality, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 216.903. 
 
Sec. 29-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of these rules and regulations are to provide uniform sign standards and regulations in order to ensure public safety and promote a positive city image reflecting order, harmony and pride, thereby strengthening the economic stability of Fredericksburg's business, cultural, historical, and residential areas. 
(Code 1992, § 3.1001; Ord. No. 18-009, § 29-1, 11-3-2008)  
Sec. 29-2. - Jurisdiction. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply within the city limits, and within the extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) of the city as defined by the Municipal Annexation Act (Article 970a, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas). For the purposes of these sign regulations, all signs erected within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Fredericksburg shall be erected in accordance with the standards imposed for property inside the city limits within the C-2 commercial zone. 
(Code 1992, § 3.1002)  
Sec. 29-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
A-frame sign. See Unattached sign. 
Area sign means the square foot area enclosed by the perimeter of the sign face with each face contributing to the aggregate area. The sign face shall exclude decorative wood or metal devices, frames, and sign supports, but shall include sign supports which are defined as a monolith. However, double-faced sign faces shall be counted only as the area of one face. In cases where the sign, or portion thereof, is composed only of letters, figures, or other characters, standing against no sign face background or secured to a monolith, then the sign face area shall be the sum of the area of an imaginary figure (circle, triangle, rectangle, or other) which fully contains all words, figures, devices, designs, or trademarks which constitute the sign. 
Auxiliary sign means any sign attached to a building or canopy indicating general information, such as trading stamps, credit cards, official notices or services required by law, or giving directions to offices, restrooms, exits, and like facilities. References to a product, service, business, name or pricing shall disqualify a sign as an auxiliary sign. 
Banner means a sign intended to be hung without frames made of paper, plastic, or fabric of any kind which may possess colors, characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentations. Flags of governmental jurisdiction and flags carrying the emblem of a business or institution are not to be considered a banner for the purposes of this chapter. 
Billboard means a sign that is designed for changeable copy, so the characters, letters or illustrations can be changed or rearranged within a fixed sign face which advertises a business, organization, event, person, place or thing not located on the same site (or property) as the billboard. 
Building frontage means the distance or length of the primary building on the property adjacent and generally parallel to the business frontage or lot frontage. In the case of multitenant buildings, each tenant space shall be lease space portions of the building frontage. 
Building lot means a lot or a portion of a lot or a combination of lots when used for construction of one building or commercial center. 
Building official means the building official of the City of Fredericksburg, Texas, or his agent. 
Business frontage/or lot frontage means the distance along the adjacent street frontage between the two side lot lines. On an interior lot, such distance shall be measured along the lot line abutting the street. On a corner lot, the shorter lot line abutting a street or the line designated as the front lot line by the subdivision or parcel map shall be used. On a through lot, the lot line abutting the street providing the primary access to the lot shall be used. On a flag (panhandle) lot, the interior lot line designated as a front lot line by a subdivision or parcel map, or the line determined by the director of development services to be the front line shall be used. Where such identification is in doubt, the same shall be determined in accordance with Section 7.220 (or its successor in the event the section number is changed) of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Fredericksburg. On corner lots, the business/lot frontage shall be measured along a highway or street. Lot lines shall be those established by the most recent deed to the property as recorded in the real property records of the County Clerk of Gillespie County. If one business, or integrated business, occupies and utilizes more than one lot, the frontage distance of all lots occupied by the business, or integrated business, may be combined. 
Canopy sign means a sign attached to a canopy that extends over a public right-of-way that is attached to or an extension of a building. 
Chalkboard or daily-special-type signs are signs which announce daily specials and special sales and are signs which are typically written or have menu attachments and the like. These shall be permitted and otherwise treated as a wall sign provided, however, that: 
(1)  No location may display more than one of these signs; 
(2)  The sign will be counted in the maximum allowable sign area for the purveyor of the sign; 
(3)  The sign does not exceed four square feet; and 
(4)  It is otherwise secured and not hazardous. 
Changeable lighted message sign means a sign which permits light to be turned on or off intermittently or which is operated in a way whereby light is turned on or off intermittently, including any illuminated sign on which such illumination is not kept stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times when such sign is in use, including an LED (light emitting diode) or digital sign, and which varies in intensity or color however generated. This definition includes signs which utilize lights to form letters, words, figures, symbols, etc., and a sign with lights which illuminate intermittently (e.g., a sign with blinking or moving lights) regardless of wattage, whether directly or indirectly illuminated, except for time and temperature signs. This definition does not include a sign located within the right-of-way that functions as a traffic control device and that is described and identified in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices approved by the Federal Highway Administrator as the National Standard or by the Texas Department of Public Safety and is for governmental use. 
Community service (public service) sign means a sign which solicits support for or advertises a nonprofit community use, social institution, or public use. Such signs may include, but shall not be limited to, seasonal holidays such as Christmas or Easter, school activities, charitable programs, religious activities, or location of places or events of community or tourist interest and may include business advertising, provided that the same shall constitute not more than 25 percent of the sign. 
Construction sign means a sign temporarily placed on a construction site identifying the project and/or owner, developer, contractor, or architect, and may include other information regarding the project. 
Damaged sign means a sign which is unsafe, unsecured, disfigured, or broken. 
Directional sign means an on-premises sign that is freestanding, the primary purpose of which is to give directions to parking lots, exits, entrances, drive-through windows, or similar directions. Reference to a product, service, business, or name, other than a subordinate business name or logo, shall disqualify a sign as a directional sign. 
Double-faced sign means one structure containing either one sign with two faces back-to-back, oriented in opposite directions, or two signs back-to-back, with the faces oriented in opposite directions and with a distance of not more than three feet between the two signs. 
Externally illuminated sign means a sign illuminated in any manner by an artificial light source which is detached from the sign. 
Freestanding sign means any sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are independent from any building or other structure. 
Governmental sign means a sign indicating a public works project or other program or activity conducted or required by any governmental subdivision. This is also considered a community service sign. 
Ground sign means a sign which is secured to the ground and which is not affixed to a building. The term "secured" is defined in the definition of unattached signs in this section. 
Height, sign, means the vertical distance between the highest part of the sign or its supporting structure, whichever is higher, and the average established ground level beneath the sign, unless curb elevation is higher than the ground level, in which case the height shall be measured from curb level. 
Integral sign means a memorial sign or tablet, name of a building, or date of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other incombustible material mounted on the face of a building. 
Integrated business means a commercial business which is operated by more than one business owner and which meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Each business owner has shares of stock or a partnership interest in a corporation that owns the grounds and buildings; 
(2)  Each business owner owns his own space under an undivided interest arrangement or a condominium arrangement; 
(3)  Each business owner rents/leases his own space within the same building; or 
(4)  Each business owner is a member of a merchants association which contributes to the joint promotional efforts of the center. 
Internally illuminated sign means a sign illuminated in any manner by an artificial light source as an integral part of the sign. 
Marquee sign means a sign hung from or affixed to a marquee. It shall be synonymous with a canopy sign. 
Medallion sign means a two-sided panel bearing a decorative figure or a relief or identifying emblem and limited to the business, address, proprietor and date of establishment. 
No Solicitation sign is an on-premises sign of weather proof material not exceeding four inches in height and eight inches in width in size, with block letters at least one inch in height which is placed on a building or residence within three feet of either side of the front door clearly indicating that the occupant does not to be contacted by peddlers, solicitors or canvassers. The phrase "no solicitation" or "no solicitors" shall be sufficient for such purpose. 
Nonconforming sign means a sign that does not conform to the regulations of this chapter or city ordinances, but which was placed or constructed in accordance with city ordinances existing at the time of its placement or construction. 
Off-premises sign means a sign designed for identifying or advertising a specific establishment, merchandise, service product, or entertainment which exists or is sold, produced, manufactured, and/or furnished at a place other than on the property on which such sign is located. 
Party responsible means the person whose name of business is being advertised on the sign and the owner of the property upon which the sign is located. 
Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, firm or organization. 
Portable sign. See Unattached sign. 
Professional nameplate (shingle sign) means a sign denoting only the name, occupation and address of an occupant in a commercial, public, or institutional building. 
Projecting sign means a sign, other than a wall sign, which is affixed to any building or wall, and whose leading edge extends more than two feet beyond such building or wall. A canopy or marquee sign is not defined as a projecting sign. 
Realty sign means a sign which is used to offer property for sale, lease, or rent. 
Roof sign means a sign that is mounted on, and is wholly supported by, the roof of a building and does not extend beyond the wall line. 
Sandwich sign. See Unattached sign. 
Shield sign. See Medallion sign. 
Sign means any letters, figures, symbols, trademarks, or devices designed to inform people or attract the attention of persons to an individual, firm, profession, business, commodity or service, and which is recognizable from any public right-of-way, and which is more specifically defined in various definitions in this section. 
Snipe sign means a sign made of any material when such sign is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued, or otherwise attached to trees, poles, stakes, fences, or other objects, and the advertising matter appearing thereon is not applicable to the use of the premises upon which such sign is located. 
Temporary sign means a sign to be hung with a frame, made of paper, plastic, fabric of any kind, wood, or metal, which may possess colors, characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentations. 
Unattached sign means a sign which is carried, wheeled, or moved about without having to detach the sign from a secure anchoring device which is set in the ground or affixed to a building which is set on an approved foundation, or a sign which is not secured in a manner approved by the building official and designed to withstand wind pressures as specified in Section 1605 of the International Building Code adopted by the City of Fredericksburg, Texas. Such signs are considered to be unattached if they can reasonably be expected to be blown out or about in high winds and may cause injuries to pedestrians and traffic hazards. 
(1)  The term "unattached sign" includes: 
a.  Portable signs; 
b.  A-frame signs; and 
c.  Sandwich signs. 
(2)  The term "unattached sign" does not include: 
a.  Realty signs; 
b.  Individual contractor signs; 
c.  Political signs which are six square feet in area or less; 
d.  Signs intended for temporary use for safety reasons due to construction, danger, or traffic control; and 
e.  Governmental or community service signs which are to inform the public. 
Wall sign means a sign that is painted on, or attached to and erected parallel or approximately parallel to, the face of, or erected and confined within the limits of, the outside wall of any building and supported by such wall or building and which displays only one surface for display/advertising. No wall sign shall be affixed to any structural addition to a building which has been added primarily to evade the limitations of this chapter, or which projects above the roof line of the building. 
(Code 1992, § 3.1003; Ord. No. 18-009, § 29-3, 11-3-2008; Ord. No. 23-008, 6-3-2013; Ord. No. 25-008, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 29-4. - Permit required. 
(a)  No person shall erect, construct, alter, repair, or relocate a sign without first obtaining a permit from the building official. The signs described in section 29-5 shall be an exception to the requirement. 
(b)  Each application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by such drawings, descriptions, and specifications as are determined by the building official. 
(c)  After a sign permit has been issued by the building official, it shall be unlawful to change, modify, alter, or otherwise deviate from the terms and conditions of such sign permit without prior approval by the building official. 
(d)  Whenever the building official or any police officer finds a sign which was erected after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and which was erected, constructed, altered, repaired, or relocated in violation thereof, the building official or officer shall require the party responsible for such sign to remove same. If the party responsible fails to remove the sign within three days after being notified to do, or if it appears to the building official or officer that the illegal sign placement poses an immediate danger to the public, such sign may be removed by the city at the expense of the party responsible. Any sign so removed shall be stored or impounded and shall not be returned to the party responsible until all applicable charges are paid. If any sign remains unclaimed for a period of 30 days after its removal, or if the removal and storage costs are not paid within the 30-day period, the city may destroy, sell, or otherwise dispose of the sign. 
(e)  Maintenance of signs and replacement of nonconforming signs. 
(1)  Ordinary maintenance of all signs is permitted without the necessity of obtaining a permit as required by section 29-4. Ordinary maintenance shall mean the refurbishment of signs as they exist with no alteration. Replacement or reconstruction of any part of a sign shall not be considered ordinary maintenance. Examples of permissible maintenance would be replacement of a rotten board, repainting of the sign elements with no alteration of content or repair of loose parts of the sign. An example of impermissible maintenance is replacement of any part of the sign such as a plastic face. Changes other than ordinary maintenance require that the sign be brought into conformity with this chapter. 
(2)  In the event a change in use, occupancy, or ownership occurs and necessitates the alteration of a sign in any manner, the entire sign must then comply with any provisions of this Code. 
(3)  Nonconforming signs which have been damaged, blown down or otherwise destroyed or dismantled for any purpose, other than ordinary maintenance as described in subsection (e)(1) of this section, may not be replaced. 
(Code 1992, § 3.1004; Ord. No. 18-009, § 29-4, 11-3-2008)  
Sec. 29-5. - Signs exempted from certain regulations. 
The signs described in the following subsections are exempt from the regulations provided for in this chapter. However, such signs shall remain subject to the construction and electrical standards of the city codes: 
(1)  Realty signs advertising the sale, lease, rental, will build to suit of or on the premises upon which the sign is located, provided such signs do not exceed 32 square feet in area in nonresidential districts, and six square feet in area in residential districts, and do not exceed five feet in height. This exception includes garage sale or similar signs in residential districts. These signs shall be limited to one per lot. 
(2)  Professional nameplates or shingle signs on premises, provided that such signs do not exceed four square feet in area. 
(3)  Signs denoting the name and address of occupants of the premises on the premises, provided that such signs are not more than two square feet in area. Such signs are permitted in addition to any required address sign otherwise required by any Ordinance of the City of Fredericksburg. 
(4)  Signs or bulletin boards customarily incidental to places of worship, libraries, museums, social clubs, societies, or charitable organizations and located on the premises of such institutions, provided that if it is a freestanding sign such signs do not exceed 32 square feet in area. 
(5)  One sign per street frontage of a building which is under construction, structural alteration or repair announcing the character of the building or enterprise or the purpose for which the building is intended, including names of architects, engineers, contractors, developers, financiers, owners, and others, provided the area of such signs does not exceed 32 square feet in nonresidential districts, and 16 feet in residential districts. Individual contractor signs (one per contractor), not exceeding three square feet in area, are allowed in addition to the construction sign described earlier in this subsection. All such contractor or construction signs shall be removed within 30 days after the completion of the construction project. All such signs which are larger than three square feet in area shall be set back from the property line to the normal building setback line required in the applicable zoning district. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "under construction" means under active construction and before substantial completion. Such signs shall not be erected, placed or allowed to remain in the absence or lapse of a building permit for the property to which it relates, or if a certificate of occupancy has been issued for such property. Trade repair or improvement signs (e.g., landscape and air conditioner repair signs) are limited to four square feet and may be placed only for the length of time the active repair or installation is underway not to include any maintenance period. 
(6)  Governmental signs, provided that such signs do not exceed 32 square feet in area. 
(7)  Community service signs may be placed on or over public property or on or over a public right-of-way only by units of local, state or federal governments or their agents. All signs in this category shall be maintained in good condition and if not the city building official shall cause such sign to be removed. If any sign in this category is for a special event, the sign shall not be erected more than two weeks prior to the event and shall be removed no later than five days after the event. The owner or organization shall be responsible for all costs involved in the erection and removal of such signs. A freestanding community service sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area in nonresidential districts, and six square feet in area in residential districts. Signs hung across a public right-of-way shall be constructed of minnow seine material and shall be no larger than four feet in width and 36 square feet in length. 
(8)  Official flags of governmental jurisdictions, U.S. military regimental flags, school flags and flags placed with permission of the city for special events or occasions. Business flags carrying the emblem, name, logo or other information of a business shall be included in the calculation of the maximum allowable sign area for such business. Business flags shall be limited to a maximum flag size of five by three feet. 
(9)  Commemorative plaques placed by governmental or civic organizations and integral signs. 
(10)  Signs specifically approved in a planned unit development; provided, however no prohibited signs shall be permitted. 
(11)  Political election signs and signs the regulation of which is prohibited by the First Amendment as free speech, provided that such signs do not exceed 36 square feet in area or eight feet in height, on private real property with the consent of the owner, and are nonilluminated and without moving elements, and provided that such signs shall not be placed in, on or over any public street right-of-way. This provision shall not prohibit the use of signs in lawful demonstrations or speech in the public forum. 
(12)  Public service signs indicating time and temperature, provided no company name, logo, or advertisement appears thereon. 
(13)  Window signs, either painted or attached to a window of a building. 
(14)  Auxiliary signs, not exceeding four signs of four square feet each per business property. 
(15)  Directional signs, provided that such signs do not exceed six square feet in area or five feet in height. 
(16)  No solicitation signs. 
(17)  Signs specifically listed and permitted by the City under a Special Event Promoter/Sponsor Checklist or Special Event Permit Application, as set forth in Chapter 36 of this Code of Ordinances, for a Special Event held on Marktplatz (Market Square); provided that no prohibited signs, excepting signs set forth in Sections 29-6(3), 29-6(4), 29-6(6), 29-6(9), and 29-6(11), shall be permitted under this subsection (17) or under Chapter 36 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1992, § 3.1005; Ord. No. 16-007, §§ 4, 16, 7-17-2006; Ord. No. 18-009, § 29-5, 11-3-2008; Ord. No. 22-010, 4-16-2012; Ord. No. 22-022, 8-20-2012; Ord. No. 25-008, 6-1-2015; Ord. No. 28-005, § 1, 5-7-2018)  
Sec. 29-6. - Prohibited signs. 
The construction, placement, existence, use of or advertisement on signs of the following nature are prohibited unless specifically authorized by this chapter. 
(1)  Signs or billboards off premises from the location of the subject of the advertising content. 
(2)  Signs which advertise an activity, business or service which has been out of business for 45 days. 
(3)  Signs which move or contain visible moving parts. 
(4)  Banners, posters, pennants, ribbons, streamers, strings of light bulbs, spinners, balloons, inflatable objects or other similar devices. Flags listed in section 29-5(8) are exempted, as are displays of historic, political, religious and military flags on residential property and on private property used by religious organizations. Strings of lights outlining windows or buildings are exempted and not considered to be prohibited. 
(5)  Signs which contain statements, words or pictures of an obscene character. 
(6)  Signs which are located on or extend over any public sidewalk, street, alley or other public property, except for canopy signs or projecting signs on buildings built up to the public right-of-way, or portions thereof, permitted in section 29-7(4)f and g. Signs required or authorized by governmental authorities for public purposes are exempted from this provision. 
(7)  Signs which constitute a hazard to pedestrians or vehicular traffic, and signs which may be confused with, interfere with or obstruct the view of a traffic sign, signal or device. 
(8)  Signs which make use of any word, phrase, symbol or character in such manner as to interfere with or mislead or confuse vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(9)  Portable or wheeled signs. 
(10)  Changeable lighted message signs. 
(11)  Signs attached to or located upon amenities such as benches, trash containers or fences. 
(12)  Signs placed on the side or rear of any building or property when such sign faces upon a contiguous residential district. 
(13)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit the display of the flag of the United States, State of Texas or any political subdivision permitted in section 29-5(8). 
(14)  Roof signs mounted on, wholly supported by or painted on the roof of a building. 
(15)  Signs listed in section 29-5 that do not meet the requirements listed in that section and signs that do not meet the requirements of section 29-7. 
(16)  Damaged signs which are not repaired within 30 days following the date of the damage or following the date of notice to repair same given by the building official, or any police officer, to the party responsible for such sign whichever is sooner. Such 30-day period shall be extended provided that a bona fide work order bearing a delivery date for repairs is submitted to the building official within the 30-day period. The 30-day period shall be extended until seven days after the delivery date shown on the work order. The provisions of this subsection are subject to the provisions of section 29-4. 
(17)  Snipe signs. 
(Code 1992, § 3.1006; Ord. No. 18-009, § 29-6, 11-3-2008)  
Sec. 29-7. - Permanent signs permitted by district. 
All signs listed in this section shall be required to meet any applicable standards as listed in this section and a construction permit shall be required prior to the erection of any signs described in this section: 
(1)  The following signs shall be permitted in residential (R-1, R-2, R-3, RM and MPH) districts: 
a.  Residential subdivisions are allowed one permanent identification sign at each major entrance with not more than 32 square feet of sign area per sign. The height of each sign shall not exceed five feet and the lowest point of the sign facing shall not exceed 24 inches above the adjacent ground. 
b.  Multiple family complexes and mobile home parks are allowed one permanent identification sign with not more than 32 square feet of sign area. Permitted signs may be wall or ground signs, but if ground mounted the top shall not exceed five feet and the lowest point of the sign facing shall not exceed 24 inches above the adjacent ground. If building mounted, such signs shall be flush mounted and shall not project above the roof line. 
c.  Temporary real estate signs. 
1.  A maximum of two temporary real estate development signs, with a combined total of 90 square feet of sign area and limited to 64 square feet for any one sign, may be located in a new subdivision. 
2.  Each sign shall be located at a separate location with maximum separation as practicable. Two signs at the subdivision entrance are prohibited. 
3.  The maximum sign height shall be 15 feet. 
4.  Such temporary real estate subdivision signs shall be removed 24 months from the date the building permit for the sign is issued unless an application for extension of the same is made prior to the expiration of the 24-month period, in which case the 24-month period shall be extended for one additional period up to 24 months. 
(2)  The following signs shall be permitted in neighborhood commercial (C-1) districts: 
a.  Residential signs. Residential signs as permitted in subsection (1) of this section. 
b.  Maximum sign area. The maximum sign area of the combination of subsections (2)a, c, and d of this section for any property in this district shall not exceed 64 square feet. 
c.  Wall signs. 
1.  One wall sign is permitted for each property provided that the total sign area shall not exceed 1½ square feet for each linear foot of building frontage but in no case shall such wall sign exceed 50 square feet. 
2.  A wall sign shall not project above the building roof line to which it is attached and shall not exceed 25 feet in height. 
3.  A wall sign shall not extend outward more than 12 inches from the building wall to which it is attached. 
d.  Ground signs. 
1.  One ground sign is permitted for each property provided that the total sign area shall not exceed 32 square feet. 
2.  The height of the sign, including the sign structure, shall not exceed five feet above the adjacent ground and the lowest point of the sign facing shall not exceed 24 inches above the adjacent ground. 
e.  Banners/temporary signs. 
1.  One banner for a temporary sign shall be permitted for each business property provided it is not more than 16 square feet in area. 
2.  A permit shall be issued for a 20-day period. 
3.  The number of permits shall be limited to six per calendar year per property. 
4.  Each permit may be linked together for a consecutive period (e.g., 20, 40, 60, 80, 100, 120 days). Each 20-day period, even if linked together, shall carry a separate permit fee. 
5.  Banners/temporary signs shall be mounted as wall signs on a building in accordance with subsection (3)d of this section or as freestanding or ground signs in accordance with subsection (3)e of this section, or erected as medallion or shield signs in accordance with subsection (7)b of this section. 
(3)  The following signs shall be permitted in commercial (C-2) districts: 
a.  Residential signs. Residential signs as permitted in subsection (1) of this section. 
b.  Banners/temporary signs. 
1.  Banners shall be permitted for each business property provided they do not exceed either two square feet per lineal foot of business building frontage or 80 square feet maximum in area. This applies to C-2 and industrial districts only. 
2.  Temporary signs shall be permitted for each business property provided they are not more than 16 square feet in area. 
3.  A permit shall be issued for a 20-day period. 
4.  The number of permits shall be limited to six per calendar year per property. 
5.  Each permit may be linked together for a consecutive period (e.g., 20, 40, 60, 80, 100 or 120 days). Each 20-day period, even if linked together, shall carry a separate permit fee. 
6.  Temporary signs shall be mounted as wall signs on a building in accordance with subsection (3)d of this section or as freestanding or ground signs in accordance with subsection (3)e of this section, or erected as medallion or shield signs in accordance with subsection (7)b of this section. 
7.  Banners shall be mounted wholly within the business property on either the building entirely, or on an existing freestanding sign entirely, and shall not be attached to any utility pole or structure within the right-of-way. 
c.  Maximum sign area. The maximum sign area of the combination of subsections (3)a, d, and e of this section for a property in this district shall not exceed 80 square feet for each 125 feet of business frontage, provided that such shall not be prorated based on the number of actual feet of business frontage, nor shall such allowable square footage be combined into one sign except as provided for in subsection (6) of this section. For example, a business must have 250 feet of business frontage in order to erect a second sign containing not more than 80 square feet. 
d.  Wall signs. 
1.  Wall signs are permitted for each business with a maximum total sign area of 1½ square feet for each linear foot of building frontage. 
2.  No wall signs shall project above the roof line of the building to which they are attached. 
3.  Wall signs shall not extend outward more than two feet from the building wall to which they are attached. 
e.  Ground signs. 
1.  One ground sign is permitted for each 125 feet of business frontage. A business must have 250 feet of business frontage in order to erect a second sign. 
2.  The maximum total sign area per sign shall not exceed 50 square feet. 
3.  The height of the sign, including the sign structure, shall not exceed five feet above the adjacent ground and the lowest point of the sign face shall not exceed two feet above the ground. 
(4)  The following signs shall be permitted in the central business district (CBD): 
a.  Residential signs as permitted in subsections (1) and (2)a of this section. 
b.  Banners/temporary signs as permitted in subsection (2)e of this section. 
c.  The maximum total sign area of the combination of subsections (4)a, b, and d through g of this section shall not exceed two square feet of sign area per foot of business frontage and in no case shall the sign area exceed 80 square feet. 
d.  Wall signs. 
1.  Wall signs are permitted for each business property with a maximum total sign area of 1½ square feet for each linear foot of building frontage. 
2.  No wall signs shall project above the roof line of the building to which they are attached. 
3.  Wall signs shall be erected parallel to and extend not more than 12 inches outward from the facade of any building to which they are attached. 
4.  Wall signs that are boxed graphic or individual letters placed in a space between windows may not exceed two-thirds of the distance between the top of the lower window, or canopy, and the sill of the upper window. 
e.  Ground signs. 
1.  One ground sign is permitted for each business property provided the total sign area shall not exceed 20 square feet. 
2.  The height of the sign, including the sign structure, shall not exceed five feet and the lowest point of the sign face shall not exceed 24 inches above the adjacent ground, except for the alternate freestanding sign option erected in accordance with subsection (7) of this section. 
f.  Projecting signs. 
1.  One projecting sign per building face, or wall, of a business property. 
2.  A projecting sign shall not extend more than four feet from the building face, or wall, to which it is attached and shall not exceed 12½ square feet in area. 
3.  The distance from the bottom of the sign to the ground or sidewalk shall be a minimum of eight feet. 
4.  Projecting signs shall be pinned away from the building wall at least six inches. 
5.  Projecting signs may not extend vertically above the window sill of a second story. 
g.  Canopy signs. 
1.  The edge of the canopy sign shall not extend beyond the length or width of the canopy to which it is attached. 
2.  A canopy sign shall not extend either two feet above or two feet below the horizontal underside of the canopy, and in no case shall the sign provide less than six feet, eight inches of clearance from the bottom of the sign and the ground. For a two-story porch canopy, the sign may extend more than two feet below the bottom of the porch structure, but in no case shall the sign provide less than seven feet of clearance from the bottom of the porch and the ground. 
3.  Signs mounted on the underside or topside of the canopy, which are perpendicular to the building face, may not exceed two-thirds the width of the canopy. A minimum spacing of ten feet from sign to sign and five feet from the end of the canopy, except that a canopy at a street corner is required. 
4.  Signs mounted on the underside or topside of the canopy and parallel to the building face shall not exceed two-thirds of the length of the canopy. A minimum spacing of five feet from the end of the canopy shall be provided, except that a canopy at a street corner is required. 
(5)  The following signs shall be permitted in industrial (M-1, M-2 and M-3) districts: 
a.  Banners/temporary signs as permitted in subsection (3)b of this section. 
b.  Areas zoned for industrial uses shall have the same regulations for wall signs and ground signs as permitted in subsections (3)d and e, respectively, of this section. 
(6)  The following signs shall be permitted for integrated businesses in commercial (C-1 and C-2) districts and industrial (M-1, M-2 and M-3) districts: 
a.  Banners/temporary signs. Banners/temporary signs as permitted in subsection (3)b of this section. 
b.  Freestanding sign. One freestanding sign shall be permitted for each integrated business property. 
1.  Total sign area. The total sign area for a freestanding sign shall not exceed the greater of: 
i.  32 square feet; or 
ii.  One square foot for each five linear feet of lot frontage, with a maximum of 100 square feet. 
2.  Total height. The total height of the sign shall not exceed 15 feet and the lowest point of the sign face shall not exceed 24 inches above the adjacent ground, provided that such sign advertises more than one business. In the event that only one business is advertised, the height limitation shall be five feet. 
c.  Wall signs. Regulations for wall signs shall be the same as provided in subsection (3)d of this section but shall be limited to a maximum of 80 square feet of sign area per business or tenant. For buildings with multiple businesses or tenants arranged in such a fashion that each business or tenant does not have a separate building frontage, the wall signage per business or tenant shall be calculated as 0.03 square feet of sign area per square foot of business or tenant lease space, but shall not exceed 80 square feet of sign area per business or tenant. 
(7)  Historic district. 
a.  Signs, other than exempted signs under section 29-5, to be placed in the historic district shall also be subject to the review requirements of the historic preservation ordinance. 
b.  Businesses located in the historic district shall have the option of erecting a medallion or shield sign in lieu of a ground sign as described in subsection (2)d, (3)e, or (4)e of this section. Any such sign shall not exceed nine square feet of sign area and shall be mounted no more than nine feet high. 
(Code 1992, § 3.1007; Ord. No. 18-009, § 29-7, 11-3-2008)  
Sec. 29-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 22-022, adopted Aug. 20, 2012, repealed § 29-8, which pertained to required address signs and derived from Ord. No. 22-010, adopted April 14, 2012.  
Chapter 32 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Solid Waste Disposal Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 361.001 et seq.; local regulation of sanitation, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.001 et seq.; municipal solid waste, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 363.001 et seq.; municipal solid waste, 30 Tex. Admin. Code § 330.1 et seq.; approved containers, 30 Tex. Admin. Code § 330.23. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 32-1. - Definition of terms. 
Alley. Shall mean a public right-of-way with a 20-foot wide or more clearance and that has a 14-foot height clearance and is used for a secondary access to individual properties which have their primary access from an adjacent public street. 
Automated garbage collection. Shall mean the use of the approved garbage collection by mechanical means, where a waste transport vehicle's mechanical arm is used for the disposal of garbage from the bulk garbage containers, described in this section. 
Brush. Wherever the word "brush" is used in this article, it shall mean, but not be limited to, tree trimmings, large hedge trimmings, bushes, shrubs, and trees. 
Bulk garbage container. Whenever the word "bulk garbage container" is used in this article it shall mean any of the following three containers used, approved, and issued by the City of Fredericksburg, for the automated garbage collection. 
(1)  Thirty-two-gallon bulk garbage container with a maximum capacity of 112 lbs./50.8 kg. 
(2)  Sixty-four-gallon bulk garbage container with a maximum capacity of 224 lbs./101.6 kg. 
(3)  Ninety-six-gallon bulk garbage container with a maximum capacity of 335 lbs./151.9 kg. 
Dumpster. Shall mean a metal container that has a secure lid and that is collected by mechanical means and is commonly used in multifamily residential, commercial, industrial, and public locations. 
Garbage. Wherever the word "garbage" is used in this article, it shall mean rubbish, trash, food waste, vegetable matter, paper, food containers, kitchen and household waste, cold ashes, and discarded food containers all in proper containers and properly placed for collection. 
(Ord. No. 8-065, § 6.201, 7-20-1998)  
Sec. 32-2. - Garbage collection rates. 
(a)  Owners or occupants of residences within the city limits shall be charged a fee for garbage pick-up service and owners or occupants of residences outside the corporation limits of the city receiving city garbage pickup service shall be charged a fee for such service as set forth from time to time by ordinance or as found in the fee schedule found in appendix A to this Code. 
(b)  Garbage pickup service charges shall be added to the utility bill of such owner or occupant and such funds shall be deposited to the credit of the solid waste fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 8-065, § 6.202, 7-20-1998)  
Sec. 32-3. - Burning certain material and garbage in container prohibited. 
The burning of garbage in any form, or petroleum products, or automobiles or other motor vehicles, or any part of a motor vehicle for wrecking or salvage purposes in or on any lot or other premises within the city limits is hereby prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 8-065, § 6.203, 7-20-1998)  
Sec. 32-4. - Burning, dumping or disposing of trash, etc. 
No person, firm or corporation shall burn, dump or otherwise dispose of garbage, trash, limbs, leaves, clippings, offal or rubbish within the city limits of the City of Fredericksburg except through city-approved collection services. 
(Ord. No. 8-065, § 6.204, 7-20-1998)  
Sec. 32-5. - Hauling of trash. 
(a)  No garbage, trash, offal or rubbish shall be hauled within the City of Fredericksburg by any commercial hauler in any type of conveyance other than a truck, wagon, or similar conveyance having a completely enclosed bed. 
(b)  Nothing shall be construed as prohibiting the hauling of trash, garbage or offal by any person, firm or corporation accumulating in or about the premises of such person, firm or corporation, provided only that such person, firm or corporation hauling his/her or its own garbage, trash, offal or rubbish, shall haul same in a truck, wagon or similar conveyance having a bed so enclosed as to prevent the loss of any such garbage, trash, offal or rubbish while being conveyed to the city dump grounds of the City of Fredericksburg, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 8-065, § 6.205, 7-20-1998)  
Sec. 32-6. - Bulk garbage container requirement. 
(a)  Residences utilizing the automated garbage collection, shall use only those bulk garbage containers specified in this section or those bulk garbage containers specified by the City of Fredericksburg, director of public works. 
(b)  Each owner or occupant of each residence within the city limits making use of automated garbage collection of the city, shall be allowed to use the combination of any of the three different bulk garbage containers provided. 
(c)  Brush, limbs and leaves shall not be picked up as part of the City's regular curbside garbage disposal service. 
(d)  Grass clippings and weeds shall not be picked up as part of the city's regular garbage disposal service. 
(e)  Heavy accumulation such as bricks, broken concrete, lumber, hot ashes, cinders, dirt and plaster, sand and gravel, building materials, dead trees, and other bulky material shall not be a part of the city's regular garbage collection, but shall be disposed of by the owner or occupant of the property upon which accumulation occurs. 
(f)  Dead animals shall not be part of the regular garbage collection, but shall be placed in a proper container for collection and disposal by the city animal control officer, as prescribed by City of Fredericksburg policy. 
(g)  Every bulk garbage container required by this article shall be maintained in as sanitary and safe condition as possible. 
(h)  No person shall use or cause to be used or place or cause to be placed for collection by city collectors any bulk garbage container that is so overloaded that the lid will not fit securely thereon, as to prevent spillage or airborne loss of its contents and the entry of animals, vectors or elements of nature, nor shall any person use, cause to be used, or place or cause to be placed for collection by city collectors any bulk garbage container that is so deteriorated to the extent of endangering collectors or to the extent that the lid will not fit securely or the contents are otherwise not effectively contained therein. 
(i)  The following loading limitations shall apply to bulk garbage containers placed for regularly scheduled collection services by city collectors. The combined weight of the garbage, rubbish and container shall not exceed the following: 
(1)  Thirty-two-gallon bulk garbage container maximum capacity shall not exceed a load rating of 112 lbs./50.8 kg. 
(2)  Sixty-four-gallon bulk garbage container maximum capacity shall not exceed a load rating of 224 lbs./101.6 kg. 
(3)  Ninety-six-gallon bulk garbage container maximum capacity shall not exceed a load rating of 335 lbs./151.9 kg. 
(j)  No person, or persons, other than the resident where the automated garbage collection is being utilized shall place any garbage, other than that garbage from the residence where the accumulation occurs, for collection in any of the allowed bulk garbage containers. 
(k)  Each bulk garbage container that is placed on the street curb or edge of the street pavement for garbage collection shall be placed there no later than 7:00 a.m. the morning of collection, and shall not be allowed to remain at curbside for an unreasonable length of time, not to exceed 24 hours. 
(l)  Each bulk garbage container being placed on the street curb or edge of the street pavement for garbage collection shall have a three-foot radius of clearance from any obstruction. Residences utilizing multiple bulk garbage containers shall place containers at least three feet apart. 
(m)  In lieu of collection at the street curb or edge of street pavement, the director of public works or his designee may authorize collection service from the right-of-way line of an alley, if the alley meets the following criteria with respect to the portion of the alley that will be used by department equipment: 
(1)  The alley must have a 20-foot width; 
(2)  The alley must have no overhang or projection lower than 14 feet above the ground; 
(3)  The alley must have no obstruction that would prevent, hinder or impede the free passage of department equipment for collection service. 
(n)  It shall be the policy of the City of Fredericksburg to authorize special services, for the placement of bulk garbage containers for garbage collection, to those residents participating in the automated garbage collection, who have physical handicaps and who have obtained in writing from an attending physician a request for such services. Authorization for such services will be granted in the sole discretion of the director of public works or his designee. 
(o)  Notice of Violation. A person that is in violation of this Section 32-6 shall be given notice of the violation in writing, served upon such person by posting the notice on the bulk garbage container to which the violation relates. Said notice shall describe the violation and notify the person that the violation must be removed or abated within five calendar days from the date of posting of the notice. If the person does not remove or abate the violation within the time period provided in the notice, the City may prosecute the person in Municipal Court for a violation of this Section 32-6. If the same person commits a subsequent violation of this Section 32-6 after a notice of violation has been posted under this subsection, the City may prosecute the person in Municipal Court for each subsequent violation of this Section 32-6 without any further notice of violation under this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 8-065, § 6.206, 7-20-1998; Ord. No. 25-025, 9-21-2015; Ord. No. 2018-25, § 1, 11-19-2018)  
Sec. 32-7. - Prohibited dumping of garbage. 
No person or persons, firm or corporation, shall place or cause to be placed any garbage in any bulk garbage container, dumpster, or any waste disposal receptacle, belonging to the City of Fredericksburg, without first paying the fees specified in appendix A, article 14.000, Garbage and Trash Fees. 
(Ord. No. 8-065, § 6.207, 7-20-1998)  
Sec. 32-8. - Disturbing or removing container and its contents. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to remove or recklessly handle, scavenge from, deface, and/or mark on any bulk container or dumpster; or to disturb or remove any contents of any bulk container or dumpster that is placed for collection at the designated location for pickup by city garbage collectors. 
(Ord. No. 8-065, § 6.208, 7-20-1998)  
Sec. 32-9. - Brush chipping, leaf collection, drop-off and special yard-waste removal services. 
(a)  The following requirements apply to brush chipping, leaf collection, drop-off and special plant and tree pick-up services (the "services") provided by the City of Fredericksburg: 
1.  The City will collect the material specified for each service below. Any material placed for collection which does not meet any of the specifications of this Section 32-9 will be considered non-compliant. 
2.  Brush chipping, leaf collection, drop-off and special yard-waste removal services shall not be used by, and are not available to any person who, or entity which, is not a residential garbage customer of the City of Fredericksburg in good standing. The following residential uses are also excluded: Apartments and bed and breakfast locations with more than two units. 
3.  No material generated at a location other than the residence from which it is collected shall be placed in any place or pile for pick up or disposal or be dropped-off. 
4.  No material generated by a hired, commercial, or contracted person or service shall be placed in any place or pile for pick up or disposal or dropped-off. 
5.  No, thorny limbs, cacti, posts, boards, lumber, other building materials or their fragments or other foreign material shall be placed in any place or pile for pick up or disposal or dropped-off. 
6.  All persons and entities utilizing the services must: 
A.  Place only non-contaminated, non-comingled material in the place specified on or adjacent to his or her property (or the property managed, rented or occupied by him or her) only. 
B.  Avoid the parking of vehicles near the piles, and 
C.  Avoid overhead obstructions, utility facilities, fences and other personal property, trees or other vegetation. 
D.  Place no bags in or near the collection piles or on the collection site. 
E.  Place no items in an alley except as may be allowable for the City's regular garbage disposal service. 
7.  The term Director means the City of Fredericksburg's Director of Public Works and Utilities or his or her designee. 
8.  Non-compliant vegetative materials may be collected at the discretion of the Director, however, the garbage collection utility customer in front of or adjacent to the premises of which the materials are placed will be charged a collection fee as set forth in Appendix A. 
(b)  Brush chipping: The following additional requirements apply to the brush chipping service: 
1.  The City will collect tree branches, woody vines, shrubs and other herbaceous and woody plants less than eight feet in length and less than eight inches in diameter. All limbs greater than one inch in diameter must be cut off from the main branch. No vines, shrubs with root systems, stumps or roots shall be placed in a chipping pile or place. 
2.  Brush for chipping shall be placed on the property of the garbage utility customer from which the material is generated adjacent to the curb or alley of the City's in a pile no larger than four feet high by eight feet wide, stacked reasonably untangled with cut ends toward the street or alley. 
3.  Brush will normally be collected on the regular trash collection day for the respective customers, and for no additional charge. However, compliant piles will be allowed to remain until picked up. 
(c)  Leaf pick up: The following additional requirements apply to the leaf pick-service: 
1.  The City will collect leaves which shall not contain rocks, brush, limbs, sticks or grass clippings. 
2.  Leaves for pick-up shall be placed adjacent to the property of the garbage utility customer from which the leaves are generated in the street or alley of the City's approximately 12 inches from the curb (or edge of alley) in a pile no longer than the width of the lot from which the leaves were generated. 
3.  Leaves will be collected for no additional charge during times designated by the City's Director. The Director shall post times designated for leaf collection, as well as the earliest date leaves may be placed for collection, on the City's official website. Other advertising may occur, however, the official dates are those that appear on the City's official website. 
4.  Leaves which are placed for collection other than during the times designated by the Director, or which remain more than ten days after the times designated by the Director for collection shall be considered non-compliant. 
(d)  Drop-off: The following additional requirements apply to the yard waste drop-off service: 
1.  The City will permit the dumping of leaves and grass clippings which shall not contain rocks, brush, limbs or sticks. 
2.  Leaves and grass clippings may be deposited for no additional charge any time of the day or night at the location designated by the City's Director on the City's official website. Other advertising may occur, however, the official location is that which appears on the City's official website. 
3.  Notwithstanding Section 32-9(a)2., any resident of the City of Fredericksburg or Gillespie County may utilize the drop-off service, however the other provisions of said Section 32-9(a) will still apply to this service. 
(e)  Special plant and tree pick-up service: The following additional requirements apply to the special plant and tree pick-up service: 
1.  Plant and tree material pick-up is available by prior arrangement with the City's Public Works Department for trees, limbs, brush, leaves or grass clippings during times of non-collection or which do not meet the specifications of the no-cost services described above (such as stumps, roots and the like). 
2.  Such service shall be at the City's discretion as to time and ability of manpower and machinery to handle the particular request. No material shall be placed for collection without prior consent and arrangement with the City's Public Works Department. 
3.  The cost for such service is set forth in Appendix A of this Code of Ordinances. 
(f)  Enforcement. 
1.  No person shall violate the terms of this Section and enforcement may be taken against any person who violates the terms of this section. 
2.  Additionally, failure to comply with the terms of this Section shall be deemed to be a public nuisance. 
3.  Any materials placed out for collection shall be presumed to belong to and be the responsibility of the utility customer, owner, manager, tenant or occupant of any dwelling, building or premises in front of which, or adjacent to which, the materials are placed. 
4.  The penalties set forth in the General Provisions of this Code of Ordinances apply to any violation of this Article. 
5.  In addition to any other remedy, the Director may, but is not required to: 
A.  Place a door-hanger on the property where the violation occurs which gives the utility customer, owner, manager, tenant or occupant of the property a deadline for compliance. 
B.  If there is no compliance by the deadline, the Director may have the City remove the debris, pile or other material or violation and charge the utility customer or property owner for the cost of such removal in accordance with the fees set forth in Appendix A. Such charge will be added to the garbage collection fee. 
C.  Any person may appeal the imposition of a fee to the Director, who may waive or adjust the fee in cases of hardship. Any appeal must be presented to the Director no later than 30 days following the day the monthly billing which includes the charge is sent to the customer. The appeal must be in writing and must clearly state the reasons for the appeal and hardship. The Director will rule on the appeal within 30 days following receipt of the written appeal, and will notify the appellant of his or her decision. The Director may require reasonable proof of any facts in making his or her decision. Such charge will not be considered delinquent until it is not paid within the billing cycle following the Director's determination. 
(Ord. No. 25-025, 9-21-2015)  
Secs. 32-10—32-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SANITARY LANDFILL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal solid waste, 30 Tex. Admin. Code § 330.1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 32-30. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Garbage. Rubbish, trash, kitchen or household waste, ashes, paper, food containers, small hedge and lawn trimmings, building construction materials and any other waste allowed by the state department of health's "municipal solid waste management requirements for a Class I municipal solid waste facility". 
Junk. All worthless, worn out and discarded material, in general including, but not limited to, odds and ends, old iron or other metal, glass, paper, cordage or other waste or discarded materials. 
Refuse. Garbage, rubbish and all other decayable and non-decayable wastes except sewage from all public and private establishments and all residences. 
Rubbish. All nondecayable wastes, except ashes, from all public and private establishments and all residences. 
(Code 1992, § 11.401)  
Sec. 32-31. - Specified locations for dumping. 
No refuse, garbage, rubbish or junk shall be deposited on any grounds operated by the city as a dumping ground except at the location designated by signs on such grounds or pointed out therefor by the attendant in charge of such grounds. 
(Code 1992, § 11.402)  
Sec. 32-32. - Public dumping grounds hours of use. 
No garbage shall be deposited on any grounds operated by said city as a dumping ground except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on weekdays and 8:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. on Saturdays. Said dumping grounds shall be closed on Sundays and legal holidays. 
(Code 1992, § 11.403)  
Sec. 32-33. - Certain material not to be dumped on public grounds. 
At no time shall any hazardous waste, carcasses of large animals, junk vehicles, rolls of wire, brush, limbs, leaves or grass clippings and weeds or more than four tires per load be deposited on the public dumping grounds. This section shall not prohibit the selective deposit or acceptance of certain yard waste by the city as part of the landfill operation or of any city owned composting operation in accordance with regulations established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1992, § 11.404)  
Sec. 32-34. - Vacuum trucks. 
No vacuum trucks will be allowed without first obtaining a permit from the city. 
(Code 1992, § 11.405)  
Sec. 32-35. - All matter on public dumping grounds property of city. 
All refuse and other material of the dumping grounds is the property of the city, and no person shall separate and collect, carry off or dispose of the same except under the direction of the attendant in charge. 
(Code 1992, § 11.406)  
Sec. 32-36. - Public dumping grounds charges. 
Each individual, corporation or member of a partnership using the public dumping grounds belonging to the city shall be assessed and shall pay to the attendant at such public dumping grounds, for the privilege of dumping or depositing garbage or other material at the said public dumping grounds, charges or fees for each load as set forth in the fee schedule found in appendix A to this code. 
(Code 1992, § 11.407)  
Sec. 32-37. - Charge for uncovered loads. 
Any vehicle entering the City of Fredericksburg sanitary landfill, wherever it may be located, without a cover affixed to such vehicle in such manner as to prevent the contents thereof from falling or blowing out of such vehicle shall pay a charge of $10.00 in addition to other fees charged for use of such landfill. Such charge shall be payable prior to use of the landfill. A vehicle which is covered, but which nevertheless has any of the contents discharged either on the public roads approaching the landfill site or while in the landfill site shall be subject to the charge. 
(Ord. No. 8-068, § 11.408, 7-20-1998)  
Chapter 35 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— General authority of home-rule municipalities concerning highways, streets and alleys, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 311.001; general authority of home-rule municipality regarding sidewalks, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 311.004. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 35-1. - Damage to streets and sidewalks. 
Any person who shall injure or tear up any sidewalk, pavement, curb, culvert, crosswalk, drain, or any part thereof of any street, pavement, or sidewalk without having received a permit from the city secretary, or who shall obstruct or in any manner interfere with the construction of any pavement, sidewalk, crossing or drain, or repair of same which has been ordered by the city council, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1992, art. 7.300)  
Secs. 35-2—35-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTIES 
 
Sec. 35-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building official shall mean the building official of the City of Fredericksburg or his or her designee or designees which may also be the code enforcement officer for the city. 
Decorative items are non permanent-type items which are not otherwise specifically prohibited or provided for under other definitions of this article or any other ordinance of the City of Fredericksburg and do not advertise or otherwise attract attention to any specific business, and which are items of general and seasonal decoration and for beautification of the area. 
District shall mean the area within the City of Fredericksburg bounded by Elk Street on the east through Milam Street on the west, and Austin Street on the north through San Antonio Street on the south inclusive of the public ways on both sides of said streets. 
Merchandise shall mean any tangible or intangible property offered for display or sale and shall include but not be limited to food, beverages, goods, wares, tickets, publications, services or examples of goods or wares, or likenesses of items offered for sale within the adjoining businesses. 
Non profit organizations are organizations which have official, current taxation exemptions under the internal revenue code of the United States. Such organizations shall be required to prove IRS compliance at the time of application for a permit as hereinafter described. 
Permanent improvements shall mean any structure, such as posts, canopies, porches, steps, in-ground planting, such as large shrubs or trees, landscape materials or any other fixture or permanent addition to the right-of-way area but shall not include flowers, small shrubs, or other small in-ground plantings which shall be allowed to be placed in any area outside the unobstructed pedestrian area. 
Potted plants and benches means potted plants and benches which shall be placed only as hereinafter set out; and the same shall be placed for public convenience and decoration and shall not contain advertising or represent an example of merchandise for sale within the district. These items may be anchored so as to deter theft or vandalism, but must remain removable with minimal damage, which is easily repairable, to the sidewalk or right of way. Pots must be planted, and all plants (alive or artificial) must be non-hazardous, trimmed and maintained. 
Public way shall mean all areas held or controlled by the city or other public entity legally open to public use such as public streets, sidewalks, and all areas in public right-of-way, roadways, highways, parkways, alleys, parks as well as the interior and areas surrounding public buildings. 
Special event shall mean any occasion including but not limited to fairs, shows, exhibitions, city wide celebrations, festivals, and the like within a specifically defined area of the city for a time period not to exceed the period of the event. 
Unobstructed pedestrian area shall mean the area between the street right of way, property line and six feet toward the roadway (or curb), or the distance to the canopy post, if existing, and less than six feet, or the actual width of the paved sidewalk, whichever is less, and the projection of such area to the height of the canopy or for 20 feet whichever is less. Signs permitted under the sign ordinance of the City of Fredericksburg are excepted from these height provisions. Alternatively, unobstructed pedestrian area may be measured from the curb six feet toward the building provided such area is completely unobstructed, even with posts, and includes a sidewalk area, with the same heights applicable as stated above. The property owner shall be the person or entity which determines the method of calculating the unobstructed pedestrian area for the area adjacent to his/her/its property, and the same must be consistent for the entire length of the property in order to minimize "zig-zagging" of the unobstructed pedestrian area. 
Unobstructed pedestrian area shall also include areas between the parking spaces (or curb) and the sidewalk area for one foot on either side of the painted stripe indicating the boundaries of the parking spaces as projected toward the sidewalk. The building official may permit exceptions (when applied for as under section 35-24 below) to the one foot requirement if in his or her sole discretion proper access is provided without meeting this technical requirement. Each reference to six feet of unobstructed pedestrian area shall apply only to the public way along both sides of Main Street. The same shall be five feet along all streets other than Main Street within the district. unobstructed pedestrian area shall include, in addition to the areas defined above, all areas included in the "islands" which are the brick paved projections of sidewalk areas along Main Street installed by the State of Texas. 
Vendor shall mean any individual, including an employee or agent of a group of individuals, partnership or corporation who sells or offers to sell any service, food, beverage, good, or merchandise, or who solicits donations on any public way. 
(Ord. No. 10-002, art. 4.1000, 2-7-2000; Ord. No. 11-012, art. 4.1000, 6-4-2001)  
Sec. 35-22. - Use of public way. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit any merchandise within the public way in the district, except for display of merchandise and/or decorative items within 18 inches from the building facade of the building in which business is conducted by the person or entity displaying the merchandise. No merchandise may be sold from the right of way and may be displayed in said 18 inch area only if there is a full unobstructed pedestrian way remaining, unobstructed by benches, potted plants, decorative items, posts and all other architectural features, state highway signage and any other impediments to pedestrian passage. The 18 inch area shall apply along both sides of Main Street within the district, and shall be three feet along all streets other than Main Street. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any vendor to sell, display, or offer for sale any merchandise or services within the public way within the district. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit donations within the public way within the district, except non profit organizations (as defined above) which may solicit within the public way within the district, outside of the unobstructed pedestrian area, and not within the paved street right of way upon issuance of a permit from the City of Fredericksburg. 
(1)  Such permit shall be issued by the building inspection department and/or code enforcement department of the city of Fredericksburg free of charge, shall be issued for no longer than 15 days per year per organization, and for no more than six persons to solicit at any one time. Applicants shall obtain permits during weekday city business hours and shall describe on the application the locations requested, the tables and equipment to be used and the maximum number of persons who will be soliciting or selling at any one time. Informal organizations such as a school club or church group shall be permitted under the name of their "parent" organization such as the school district, the church itself or the like. 
(2)  Solicitations shall occur in any area of the public way excluding the paved street areas and excluding the unobstructed pedestrian area unless prohibited by the terms of the permit. The issuing department shall review the applications and may alter the location requested or the number of people in the event the issuing person determines that a hazard to the public or the persons engaged in the solicitation or sale exists. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to perform, play music or entertain from any location within the public way in the district. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place any property, improvements, or any other thing in the public way without a permit obtained under section 35-24 below except for merchandise if outside the district, and plants, benches, tables and chairs and decorative items as allowed hereby. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place any property within the public way or to sell, display, or offer for sale any merchandise within the public way outside the district within the city limits of the City of Fredericksburg without full compliance with the state department of highways and public transportation (or its successor) rules and regulations for use of its rights-of-way, as may be amended from time to time, which are incorporated herein as though fully set out. 
(g)  In all areas of this city, use of the public way as it relates to the placement of merchandise, vending, displays and the like, shall be governed by all rules, regulations and requirements of the zoning district in which such property is situated, as set out in the City of Fredericksburg zoning ordinance. 
(h)  It is a defense to prosecution under this article to the application of the foregoing prohibitions if a person: 
(1)  Is a participant in a special event, and is vending on the premises designated for the special event; 
(2)  Is an individual personally selling or giving newspapers, magazines or the like; 
(3)  Has placed newspaper vending machines (i.e. coin operated periodical machines) provided that the same are not placed in the unobstructed pedestrian area; 
(4)  Is vending in connection with the transaction of official government business; or 
(5)  Is the grantee of a contract with the city to operate a concession on designated areas of public property. 
(Ord. No. 10-002, art. 4.1001, 2-7-2000; Ord. No. 11-012, art. 4.1001, 6-4-2001)  
Sec. 35-23. - Permit not required. 
(a)  The placement of potted plants, benches and other decorative items in the public way may occur without the necessity of obtaining a permit under section 35-24 below, provided that the same may be placed only outside the unobstructed pedestrian area provided that the same, in total, shall not obstruct the sidewalk, create a hazard, or impede access from any on-street parking space to the unobstructed pedestrian area, and provided that decorative items shall be placed only directly in front of the premises of the person or entity placing the same. 
(b)  Potted plants and benches and other decorative items or improvements, which are placed within the public way as of the effective date of this article, are not "grandfathered." 
(c)  Potted plants, benches and decorative items must be maintained in good condition. 
(d)  Existing potted plants, benches, and decorative items or any of them which may be placed after the effective date of this article may be removed by the building official of the City of Fredericksburg, the code enforcement officer of the City of Fredericksburg or his or their designee, if in the discretion of such official, the placement creates a hazard to pedestrians or in the event the same are not maintained. Any person placing the same shall have no action against the city or its employees or agents arising out of removal of the same, and shall not be reimbursed for the cost of the item(s) removed. 
(e)  The placement of United States of America flags and State of Texas flags by the veterans of foreign wars in the locations currently used shall not require a permit; spirit flags such as high school flags may be placed without a permit in the same locations on homecoming or other special occasions as permitted by the building official. Other flags shall be allowed as provided by the sign ordinance of the City of Fredericksburg provided they do not intrude into the unobstructed pedestrian area, other than at a height more than ten feet from the ground. 
(f)  Tables and chairs on sidewalks shall be permitted outside of the unobstructed pedestrian area, except along either side of Main Street, provided: 
(1)  A permit is obtained from the building official for the same, which may be denied if in the building official's determination the following criteria are not met. 
(2)  A diagram of the size and placement of the table and chairs is submitted. 
(3)  That placement be only immediately in front of the business placing the tables and chairs. 
(4)  That the tables and chairs be of sturdy, non rusty and non splintering construction and appropriate in color and style to the area in which they are placed. 
(5)  That the tables and chairs not be for exclusive use of customers of the business of the person(s) placing them. 
(6)  That no food service be provided to the tables and chairs (take out only). 
(Ord. No. 10-002, art. 4.1002, 2-7-2000; Ord. No. 11-012, art. 4.1002, 6-4-2001)  
Sec. 35-24. - Permits for placement in public way. 
(a)  The building official for the City of Fredericksburg, or his designee may issue a permit allowing the placement of property or improvements in the public way in the district, provided that no permit shall be issued for merchandise or for furniture other than benches and tables and chairs as permitted in section 35-23 above. It is the intent of this article to permit the placement of permanent improvements which may be needed in connection with the use of the adjacent property and/or which are desirable to encourage restoration retention, or reestablishment of historic structures or features of buildings. A permit under this section shall be required for items not otherwise requiring a permit under the building codes of the City of Fredericksburg. 
(b)  An application for a permit shall be filed with the building permit department of the City of Fredericksburg and shall contain all information relevant to determine the exact nature, size, look and placement of the improvement for which a permit is sought as well as the name, address and phone number of the applicant and owners of adjacent property (the building official may require proof of ownership). The building official shall provide copies of the application to the owners of the adjacent property at least five days prior to approval. 
(c)  An application shall not be considered complete or submitted unless accompanied by an application fee of $25.00. 
(d)  Not later than 30 days after a completed application is filed, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the decision of the issuance or denial of the permit. The building official may place such reasonable conditions on such permit as will promote public safety. Improvements, except as described below, or objects in the public way as of the effective date of this article are not "grandfathered," and must be removed by order of the building official if he or she determines that the same would not have been approved under the terms of this article, or an official of the State of Texas, as applicable, if in state right of way. Canopies and posts to support the same, which are existing as of August 1, 1999, shall be permitted to remain without the necessity of obtaining a permit. Any alteration (i.e. other than ordinary maintenance) of the same shall require a permit as set out above. 
(e)  In the event of changed circumstances, such as a change in use of adjoining property, changes in streets, sidewalks or utilities, overgrowth of landscape material or other change that would render an item or improvement unsafe or blocking of access or the like, any items or improvements within the public way may be required to be removed by the building official of the City of Fredericksburg or his or her designee, and any permit concerning the same may be revoked. In the event of revocation, the permittee, or the adjoining property owner (if the placement existed at the effective date hereof) shall remove the item or improvement designated within five days of the date of the notice at his or her cost. If the same is not done, the city may remove such item and charge its cost of removal of same to the property owner, owner of the item, or the person who placed such item. Reimbursement to the city shall be made within 30 days of demand therefor. The city shall not be responsible to any party for the value of the item removed. 
(f)  Within six months following the effective date hereof, the building official, or his or her designee, shall survey the public way in the district and shall automatically permit, with no permit cost, all improvements existing as of the effective date hereof which in his or her opinion are acceptable under the terms hereof. 
(g)  In the event the building official denies the issuance of a permit to place property or improvements as described in this section, or revokes a permit, an applicant may appeal such denial to the board of adjustment of the City of Fredericksburg. Such appeal must be written and delivered to the city secretary of the City of Fredericksburg within ten days of the date of notification of the denial. The date of notification of the denial shall be deemed to be the date the applicant is personally notified of the decision of the building official or the date upon which the building official mails (certified mail) a written copy of his/her decision to the address noted upon the application. The grounds for appeal, and the standard of review to be applied by the board of adjustment is that the action of the building official was arbitrary and capricious and not based upon existing or anticipated conditions for the area for which an improvement is requested. 
(Ord. No. 10-002, art. 4.1003, 2-7-2000; Ord. No. 11-012, art. 4.1003, 6-4-2001)  
Secs. 35-25—35-51. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - NEWSRACK REGULATION 
 
Sec. 35-52. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Abandoned newsrack means any newsrack which remains empty of publications or unserviced for 30 consecutive days. 
Business days are Mondays through Fridays, excluding any legal holidays observed by the city. 
City means the City of Fredericksburg, Texas. 
Director means the city's director of development services, or his/her designated representative. 
Historical district means the area legally recognized and known as the historic overlay district defined in the zoning ordinance of the City of Fredericksburg, as the same may be amended from time to time, including all adjoining streets and alleys. 
Manned vending means the sale, display or distribution, with or without charge, of newspapers, news periodicals, news publications or other printed matter, or subscriptions thereto, using individual sellers or distributors. 
Newsrack means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the unmanned vending, display and sale, or distribution with or without charge, of newspapers, news periodicals, news publications or other printed news material. 
Right-of-way means the entirety of any public street area, including the public roadway and adjacent pedestrianways. 
(Ord. No. 14-004, § 4.1101, 3-1-2004)  
Sec. 35-53. - Newsrack identification. 
Each newsrack shall have permanently affixed to it, in a location and manner that is readily visible, identification which shall include the name, address and telephone number of the distributor and/or representative of the newspaper. Identification information shall be kept current at all times. 
(Ord. No. 14-004, § 4.1102, 3-1-2004)  
Sec. 35-54. - Newsrack location. 
(a)  No newsrack shall be placed, used or maintained which in whole or in part rests upon any portion of any street or other right-of-way on which motor vehicles are lawfully permitted. 
(b)  No newsrack shall be placed, used or maintained which in whole or in part rests upon any portion of any street, sidewalk or other right-of-way, when such placement, use or maintenance; endangers the safety of persons or property; unreasonably interferes with public utility purposes, public transportation, or other governmental use; or unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or the ingress into or egress from any residence or place of business, or any legally parked or stopped vehicle, or the use of traffic signs or signals, police or fire call boxes, transit shelters, sidewalks, elevators, mailboxes, or other objects located at or near said location, or access to or use of delivery areas or loading zones. 
(c)  No newsrack shall be placed, used or maintained within three feet of any fire hydrant, marked pedestrian crosswalk, designated handicapped parking or handicapped ramp facility or in any location where such newsrack leaves less than five feet of clear space for pedestrian passage. 
(d)  Newsracks installed next to a property line shall be placed within 12 inches of the property line. Newsracks installed next to a curb line shall not be placed within 18 inches of the curb line. 
(e)  Newsracks shall be no taller than 43 inches in height nor wider than 20 inches in width, and 16 inches deep and may be modular units containing more than one publication. All newsracks must be constructed and installed in a safe manner and must be able to withstand strong winds. All newsracks must be maintained. 
(f)  Newsracks located in the historic district must also comply with the provisions of section 35-58 below. 
(Ord. No. 14-004, § 4.1103, 3-1-2004)  
Sec. 35-55. - Installation; maintenance. 
(a)  Newsracks permanently mounted, attached or secured in the right-of-way shall be in conformance with accepted procedures and shall utilize bolts and/or fasteners specifically designed for such purpose. 
(b)  No method of permanently mounting, attaching or securing in the right-of-way shall be used that will in any manner damage the right-of-way or create a hazard for pedestrians or obstruction to handicap accessibility. Newsracks shall not be secured to fire hydrants, call boxes, sprinkler inlets, standpipes, public signs, handrails, planters, benches, trees or light poles. 
(c)  The distributor and/or representative of any such permanently mounted, attached or secured newsrack shall be responsible for repairs of any damage to the right-of-way caused by the installation or the maintenance of the newsrack. Upon removal of any such newsrack, all bolts or fasteners shall be made flush with or completely removed from the right-of-way and the right-of-way shall be restored as nearly to its original condition as practicable. 
(d)  Each newsrack shall be maintained in good appearance and working order by its distributor and/or representative. Any newsrack not in good repair and working order shall be repaired, replaced or removed within 15 business days after written notice of such defective condition. 
(Ord. No. 14-004, § 4.1104, 3-1-2004)  
Sec. 35-56. - Seizure, removal of newsracks in violation; right to hearing. 
(a)  Any newsrack installed or maintained in violation of this chapter may be seized and removed by the director of development services, the code enforcement section or by a member of the police department of the city. Before any newsrack is seized, the distributor and/or representative shall be notified and given 15 business days in which to remedy the violation or to request a hearing to contest the removal. Notice to the distributor and/or representative shall be in writing, sent by first class mail, return receipt requested, to the address indicated on the newsrack and an additional notice tag shall be a fixed to the newsrack on the date of notice. If no identification is shown on the newsrack, only the notice tag affixed to the newsrack shall be required. Every notice shall indicate the name and address of the person to contact to contest the seizure and/or request a hearing. 
(b)  The distributor and/or representative of any newsrack alleged to be in violation of this chapter may request a hearing before the board of adjustment of the City of Fredericksburg. The hearing shall be informal, but oral and written evidence may be presented by either the distributor and/or representative or the city. Any action by the city with respect to the alleged violation shall be stayed pending the board's decision, except pursuant to subsection (d). The board shall give oral notice of the decision immediately after the hearing, and shall give written notice of the decision within five business days after the hearing. 
(c)  The above authorized persons may seize and remove a newsrack which remains in violation of this chapter: 
(1)  Fifteen consecutive business days following the notice of violation, if the distributor and/or representative has not requested a hearing before the board of adjustment; or 
(2)  Ten business days after the distributor and/or representative receives the written decision of the board of adjustment that the newsrack is in violation of this chapter. Seized newsracks shall be retained by the city for a period of at least 30 days following the seizure, and may be recovered by the distributor and/or representative at any time while in the city's possession following the payment of all fines imposed and an impoundment fee which shall be set by the director of development services of the City of Fredericksburg based on the cost to the city of the removal and storage but which shall not be less than $50.00 or other applicable fees. 
(d)  If a newsrack is installed or maintained in such a place or manner as to pose an immediate and serious danger to persons or property, anyone authorized by subsection (a) above will first make a reasonable attempt to contact the distributor and/or representative of the newsrack and request immediate relocation or removal. If the distributor and/or representative is unable to be contacted or does not respond to appropriate notification, the enforcement officer may seize such newsrack without further notice to the distributor and/or representative. Seizure and removal of a newsrack pursuant to this subsection shall take place only if it is impractical for the city to remedy the violation by moving the newsrack to another location on the street, sidewalk, or other right-of-way without mechanical assistance. If the newsrack is seized pursuant to this subsection, the enforcement officer shall attempt to notify the distributor and/or representative in writing of the seizure. 
(e)  Abandoned newsracks may be removed by any person authorized by subsection (a) above and shall be disposed of by the city if not claimed by the distributor and/or representative within 30 days after removal. The above notwithstanding, at least 15 business days before any newsrack is removed under this subsection, the distributor and/or representative shall be given written notice that such newsrack is suspected of being abandoned, and upon removal of any abandoned newsrack the enforcement officer shall notify in writing the distributor and/or representative of the removal. The distributor and/or representative may request a hearing before the board of adjustment within ten business days of the removal to contest the removal. Such newsrack shall not be removed if, before removal, the registrant informs the director of development services that the newsrack has not been abandoned and promptly stocks and maintains such newsrack in compliance with the terms of this chapter within three days of notification of the director. 
(Ord. No. 14-004, § 4.1105, 3-1-2004)  
Sec. 35-57. - Manned vending. 
(a)  No individual may engage in manned vending upon any portion of any street or other right-of-way on which motor vehicles are lawfully permitted to operate. 
(b)  No individual under the age of 16 may engage in manned vending in the right-of-way. 
(c)  Any individual engaged in manned vending upon any authorized portion of the right-of-way shall have within his/her possession an identification certificate with a current photograph of the individual vendor; the name, address, telephone number and authorized signature of the entity by whom the individual vendor is employed or authorized; and an identification number that is unique to such individual vendor. 
(d)  There shall be no limitation on or permit, license, or fee charged for manned vending except as expressly provided herein. Each individual vendor engaging in manned vending shall be deemed to be a newsrack location for purposes of insurance and indemnification as set out below, and the terms "newsrack" and "manned vendor" shall be interchangeable in such parts. 
(Ord. No. 14-004, § 4.1106, 3-1-2004)  
Sec. 35-58. - Historical district. 
(a)  Newsracks installed and maintained in the historical district shall be painted in solid colors in a shade approved by the director, and be on an acceptable industry newsrack pedestal or freestanding design and configuration. The selection of the guidelines for "acceptable" newsracks shall be determined by the director of development services. 
(b)  Newsracks located in the public right of way shall be located linearly side by side next to a building or property line as described below. Newsracks a shall be placed parallel to the street, in the following locations and with the following number limitations: 
(1)  Location 1. At 323 East Main Street, commonly known as the Auslander Restaurant area, against the north wall (facing Main Street) of the building; five spots available 
(2)  Location 2. At 225 West Main Street, commonly known as the Old German Bakery area, against the North wall (facing Main Street) of the building; five spots available 
(3)  Location 3. Against the West wall of the building located at 201 East Main Street, commonly known as the Cornerstone Market Area, along South Llano Street on the east side of the street; five spots available 
(4)  Location 4. Against the West wall of the building located at 101 East Main Street, commonly known as the Back Porch Area, along South Adams Street, on the east side of the street; five spots available 
(c)  Newsracks installed and maintained in the historic district shall each have a City of Fredericksburg registration number attached to the unit to be issued as follows: 
(1)  Within 90 days after the effective date of this article, each publication, person, or other entity desiring to keep existing newsracks, place and maintain one or more new newsracks in the historic district shall file an application with the director of development services, indicating those Locations at which it desires to have newsracks, The application shall be on a form established by said director. 
(2)  In order to be considered complete, an application must include or be accompanied by: evidence that the insurance requirements of this chapter will be met for each newsrack to be assigned to the applicant and a listing of the publications to be displayed in each newsrack. 
(d)  The director of development services shall assign locations and spots and issue registration numbers for each as follows: 
(1)  Newsracks which are existing as of January 1, 2004, and which are in compliance with the requirements of this article (other than having an approved location or registration number) or which are brought into compliance within 30 days after the effective date of this article codified in this chapter, shall be allowed to be relocated into an approved location and remain until abandoned or removed voluntarily or in accordance with this chapter. 
(2)  For each of the locations identified in subsection (b) above for which additional spots are available after the 90-day period described above, the director of development services shall assign any remaining spots. For any location for which the number of applications no not exceed the available spots, the assignment of spots shall be according to the order in which the applications were filed and deemed complete. 
(3)  For any locations for which more applications are received than there are available spots, the director shall assign the remaining spots by random drawing, which shall be open to the public. No publication shall be entitled to more than two locations within the historic district if all publications for which applications are filed cannot be accommodated. 
(4)  Publications existing at any location and spot shall be permitted to remain from year to year. In the event the number of publications requesting space becomes too many to be reasonably accommodated, the director may decrease the number of spots allocated to one per publication or conduct a drawing for all the spots. In which case procedure for assigning locations shall be repeated annually, but only with respect to those locations for which competing applications have been filed. The drawing shall be conducted on the first business day of February of each year. The director of development services shall establish submittal and deadline rules as may be necessary to accomplish the purposes of this chapter. 
(5)  Newsracks located on private property shall not be subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 14-004, § 4.1107, 3-1-2004)  
Sec. 35-59. - Insurance. 
Each distributor and/or representative or other person or entity responsible for the newsracks or manned vending shall maintain in force public liability and property damage insurance, naming the city as an additional insured, in an amount not less than $100,000.00 minimum liability combined single limit (bodily injury and property damage) per person and per occurrence. The insurance shall include a statement by the insurance carrier that such carrier will give the director of development services of the City of Fredericksburg 30 days' notice before canceling such insurance. Failure to carry the required insurance at all times shall, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, authorize the removal of the relevant newsracks by any authorized enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 14-004, § 4.1108, 3-1-2004)  
Sec. 35-60. - Indemnification of city. 
Any distributor and/or representative installing or maintaining a newsrack under this chapter agrees, by the placement of the newsrack, to indemnify and to hold harmless the city and its representatives from all claims, demands and liability arising out of or encountered in connection with the installation or maintenance by or on behalf on such distributor and/or representative or other responsible person or entity of any newsrack on public property, except for only such injury or harm as may be caused solely by the negligence of the city or its authorized representatives. 
(Ord. No. 14-004, § 4.1109, 3-1-2004)  
Sec. 35-61. - General administration. 
The director of development services of the City of Fredericksburg is hereby authorized to adopt administrative rules and regulations for implementation and administration of this article. 
(Ord. No. 14-004, § 4.1110, 3-1-2004)  
Sec. 35-62. - Compliance required. 
All newsracks located within the city shall be brought into compliance with the terms of this article within six months following the date of its passage by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 14-004, § 4.1111, 3-1-2004)  
Secs. 35-63—35-82. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIRS OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS 
 
Sec. 35-83. - Definitions. 
Whenever in this article the following terms or pronouns in place of them are used, the intent and meaning shall be interpreted as follows: 
City. City of Fredericksburg, Texas. 
Street. In addition to the definition set out in section 1-3 of this Code, street shall mean, for the purposes of this article, sidewalks, driveways and curbcuts. 
Superintendent. Street superintendent for the City of Fredericksburg, Texas. 
(Code 1992, § 3.801)  
Sec. 35-84. - Superintendent to be supervisor of all paving, excavations, etc. 
The superintendent is hereby charged with the general supervision of all excavations, cuts, repairs, or paving work done in the city. 
(Code 1992, § 3.802)  
Sec. 35-85. - Work to satisfy superintendent. 
All work done on the city streets shall be done to the satisfaction of the superintendent, and in accordance with the specifications set out in chapter 5, article XII. 
(Code 1992, § 3.803)  
Sec. 35-86. - Laws and regulations applicable. 
Any person seeking a permit to work on the city streets or sidewalks shall make himself/herself familiar with, and at all times shall observe and comply with all federal, state and local laws, ordinances and regulations which in any manner affect the conduct of the work. 
(Code 1992, § 3.804)  
Sec. 35-87. - Permits. 
(a)  Streets. No person shall do any form of excavating, cutting, repairing, or paving work on any street within the city limits until he/she has made written application therefor to the city secretary, on blanks to be furnished, and has received a permit to do the same. Said application shall describe the character of the work or repairing proposed to be done, together with the exact location of same, and shall be signed by the person applying for same. The permit to proceed with the work shall be issued by the city clerk in duplicate, the original to be handed to the party applying therefor, and the duplicate together with the application to be filed in the city office as a permanent record. 
(b)  Sidewalks. In addition to complying with all the provisions set out above for work on streets, a permit fee, as set forth in the fee schedule found in appendix A to this Code, shall be paid before such a permit shall be granted for repairs of sidewalks, driveways, etc. 
(Code 1992, § 3.805)  
Sec. 35-88. - Bond requirements. 
All persons (except the city and those with a valid and current franchise agreement with the city) desiring to do any work in connection with the city streets and sidewalks, shall file a petition in the city office giving the name of every person connected with such business, asking to be registered as a paving contractor; and shall execute and deliver to the city a bond in the sum of $1,000.00, payable to the city, with two or more good and sufficient sureties thereon, or a bond regularly issued by an approved surety company, which bond shall be conditioned as follows: 
(1)  Said bond shall be conditioned that all work done upon any street within the corporate limits shall be done in a good and workmanlike manner, and in accordance with this article; and that the city shall be fully indemnified and held whole and harmless from any and all costs, expense and/or damage including workmen's compensation claims, whether real or asserted, on account of any injury done to any person or property in the prosecution of work or consequence of doing such work, or that may arise out of, or be occasioned by the performance of such work. In the event that any cuts, excavations, repair or paving is not done in accordance with the specifications herein set forth, the superintendent shall give notice to such individual, firm, partnership or corporation to that effect, and in case of failure or default in the curing of the defect so pointed out after such notice, and after the expiration of a reasonable time, 15 days time shall be deemed reasonable time for the beginning of any such work, the superintendent shall report such fact to the governing body of the city and the governing body may, thereupon, order the restoration of said street at the cost to such person making such excavation, cut, repair or paving; and the statement of the cost, as furnished by the superintendent shall be prima facie evidence against such person making such excavation, cut, repair or doing any such paving. 
(2)  Said bond shall be deemed a continuous obligation against the principal and sureties thereon, until the entire amount therein provided for shall be decreased in amount on account of any of the conditions of the same whereupon the governing body shall require, upon notice to the principal by the superintendent, of such facts, an additional bond to be given by any such person doing any such street work, conditioned in accordance with this article, and in an amount sufficient, when added to the unexhausted amount of the original bond, to equal at all times the original sum provided in this section. In no case shall any individual, firm or corporation engage in any work pertaining to the city streets without having on file, and accepted by the city, a bond in the amount herein fixed. 
(3)  Said bond shall run for a period of one year, and shall be renewed on or before its expiration date. No street work shall be done by, and no permits issued to any person, firm or corporation, unless his/her or its bond is in full force and effect. 
(Code 1992, § 3.806)  
Sec. 35-89. - Barricades and warning devices to be used at closed streets. 
When any section of the street or sidewalk is closed to traffic, the person doing such work shall furnish and maintain at each end of the closed section and at all intersecting roads within the section, barricades, adequate warning and directing signs, lights and red flags. 
(Code 1992, § 3.807)  
Sec. 35-90. - Maintenance of detours. 
Any individual, firm or corporation doing any work on the city streets or sidewalks shall do such work as may be necessary to provide and maintain detours and facilities for public travel, to include pedestrian detours when work on sidewalks is in progress, at his/her or its expense. The safety and convenience of the public are deemed to be of first importance. 
(Code 1992, § 3.808)  
Sec. 35-91. - Notification to utilities of pending work. 
It shall be the duty of any person setting out to do any work on the streets or sidewalks to notify in writing the water, sewer, gas and light companies of the exact nature and location of such work. Such notice must be made at least five days prior to the commencement of such work. Any repairs, connection, etc. required to be made to utility lines shall be made under the supervision of the utility concerned. 
(Code 1992, § 3.809)  
Sec. 35-92. - Breaks in utility lines; notice; liability. 
(a)  During the progress of such work, all utility lines shall remain connected and in proper working order whenever practicable. Whenever it shall be necessary to disconnect utility lines, all persons being served by such utility lines shall be notified at least four hours prior to such disconnection, by the person doing such work. 
(b)  When breaks are made in utility lines by accident, the person conducting the work (unless it be the city) shall be liable for resulting damage under the rules of ordinary liability. 
(Code 1992, § 3.810)  
Sec. 35-93. - Specifications. 
(a)  Backfilling. As soon as practicable, all spaces excavated shall be backfilled. Backfill material shall be free from large or frozen lumps, wood, or other extraneous material. The portion of backfill which will not support any portion of the completed roadbed or embankment shall be placed in layers not more than ten inches in depth (loose measurement) and shall be compacted to a density comparable with the adjacent, undisturbed material. That portion of the backfill which will support any portion or the roadbed or embankment shall be placed in uniform layers not to exceed six inches depth (loose measurement) and each layer compacted to a density comparable with the adjacent undisturbed material. Each layer of backfill material, if dry, shall be wetted uniformly to the moisture content required to obtain the specified density, and shall be compacted to the required density by means of mechanical tamps or rammers, except that the use of rolling equipment of the type generally used in compacting embankments will be permitted on those portions which are accessible to such equipment. These provisions shall be construed to require the mechanical compaction, by means of either rolling equipment or mechanical tamps or rammers, of all backfill and embankment. No backfill shall be done except in the presence of the street superintendent or one of his/her authorized employees. 
(b)  Flexible base. In addition to backfilling any excavation as herein provided, there shall be placed immediately below the surface of any street to be paved a foundation course for surface course consisting of caliches and stone material. The material shall be obtained from approved sources. It shall consist of argillaceous limestone, calcareous clay particles, with or without stone, conglomerate, gravel, sand or other granular materials. The material shall be approved by the superintendent at the source. This material shall be placed to a depth of at least eight inches and shall be compacted as hereinabove set forth. 
(c)  Grades. All grades must conform with the requirements established by the city. 
(d)  Street topping. In addition to the backfilling and flexible base herein provided for, any person doing any work upon any street within the city limits shall place a minimum of one inch hot mix cold lay asphaltic concrete (preferably type DD) in any and all openings made upon the asphalt surfacings of any such street. 
(Code 1992, § 3.811)  
Sec. 35-94. - Requirement to clean up. 
Upon completion of the work, such person shall clean, remove rubbish and temporary structure from the streets, restore in an acceptable manner all property, both public and private, which has been damaged during the prosecution of the work, and leave the site of the work in a neat and presentable condition throughout. 
(Code 1992, § 3.812)  
Sec. 35-95. - Superintendent not to be held liable. 
In carrying out the provisions contained herein, there shall be no liability upon the street superintendent or his/her authorized assistants, either personally or otherwise. 
(Code 1992, § 3.813)  
Secs. 35-96—35-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT  
DIVISION 1. - PURPOSE, SCOPE, DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 35-121. - General purpose. 
The purpose of this Ordinance is to: 
(1)  Assist in the management of Facilities placed in, on, over, under, or above the Public Rights-of-Way in order to minimize the congestion, inconvenience, deterioration, visual impact and other adverse effects, and the costs to the citizens resulting from the placement of Facilities within the Public Rights-of-Way; 
(2)  Govern the use and occupancy of the Public Rights-of-way; 
(3)  Assist the City in its efforts to protect the public health, safety and welfare; 
(4)  Conserve the limited physical capacity of the Public Rights-of-way held in public trust by the City; 
(5)  Preserve the physical integrity of the streets and highways; 
(6)  Control the orderly flow of vehicles and pedestrians; 
(7)  Keep track of the different entities using the Public Rights-of-Way to prevent interference between them; 
(8)  Assist in scheduling common trenching and street cuts; and 
(9)  Protect the safety, security, appearance, and condition of the Public Rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 1.1, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-122. - Scope and authority. 
This Ordinance applies to all Persons that place Facilities in any manner, in, on, over, or above a Public Right-of-Way. Compensation for use of the Public Rights-of-way shall be paid in accordance with all applicable law, including, but not limited to, cable providers, in accordance with the Federal Cable Act, 47 USC § 541, et seq.; certificated telecommunication providers, in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code chs. 283 and 284; distributors of natural gas in accordance with V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 182.025, or applicable franchise ordinance or agreement; investor-owned electric utilities in accordance with V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 33.008, or applicable franchise ordinance or agreement; and/or in accordance with Tex. Civil Statute Ann., Art. 1175(1), all as applicable to any Person using in any manner the City's Public Rights-of-way. Provided, however, that if a Person is subject to a valid franchise agreement or ordinance approved or adopted by the City, the terms of that franchise agreement or ordinance, if in conflict with the provisions hereof, shall govern the franchisee's rights and obligations with regard to use and placement of Facilities in, on, over, under, or above the City's Public Rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 1.2, 9-2-2014; Ord. No. 27-011, § 2, 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 35-123. - Conformance with all laws. 
This ordinance is passed subject to applicable provisions of the Constitution and Laws of the United States and the State of Texas and the Charter and the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fredericksburg. This Ordinance shall in no way affect or impair the City's rights, obligations, or remedies under the Public Utility Regulatory Act of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 1.3, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-124. - Use of city's rights-of-way only. 
This Ordinance addresses only use of the City's Public Rights-of-Way. This Ordinance does not authorize any Person, including any Permittee to install or maintain attachments in or on other City property and facilities, including without limitation conduits, buildings, poles, and towers. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 1.4, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-125. - Reservation of right. 
The City reserves the right to lay, and permit to be laid, sewer, water, and other pipe lines, wires, cables, and conduits, and to do and permit to be done any underground or aboveground work that may be necessary or proper in, across, along, over, under, or above a street, alley, highway, public place, or other Public Right-of-way. The City also reserves the right to change any curb, sidewalk, or grade of a street. In permitting this work to be done, the City shall not be liable to a Permittee, or any Person using the City's Public Rights-of-way, for any resulting damage, but nothing herein shall relieve any other person or entity from responsibility for damages to Permittee's or such Person's Facilities. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 1.5, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-126. - Private easements. 
Nothing in this Ordinance and no action by City shall be construed to offer, grant or approve any right or license to use a private easement in any manner, or to affix any Facility within such easement without the consent of the owner of the property to which the easement is appurtenant, unless otherwise allowed by law. City has no obligation to expand or obtain rights in such easement on Permittee's behalf. It is the sole obligation of Permittee to obtain the necessary consent or additional easement rights, if any, at Permittee's own expense; provided, however poles may not be erected in areas prohibited by City design standards or in areas where other Person's Facilities are underground. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 1.6, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-127. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandon and its derivatives mean the facilities have been left in an unused or non-functioning condition for more than 90 consecutive days. 
Antenna means communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services. 
Applicable codes mean the most current building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing and fire codes codified in Chapter 7 of the City's Development Code and amended therein. 
Cable service is defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 522(6). 
Cable service provider means a person who provides cable service and has been issued a state-issued certificate of franchise authority from the Public Utility Commission of Texas or its successor under V.T.C.A., Utilities Code ch. 66. 
Certificated Telecommunications Provider has the meaning as set forth in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 283.002(2), for which the PUC has issued a certificate of operating authority or service provider certificate of operating authority to provide local exchange telephone service or voice service. 
City means the City of Fredericksburg, Texas and the City's officers and employees. 
Collocate and collocation mean the installation, mounting, maintenance, modification, operation, or replacement of network nodes in a public right-of-way on or adjacent to a pole. 
Decorative pole means a streetlight pole specially designed and placed for aesthetic purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments, other than temporary holiday or special event attachments, have been placed or are permitted to be placed pursuant to this article. 
Design Manual means the Design Manual for Siting and Criteria for the Installation of Wireless Micro Network Nodes, Network Nodes, Node Support Poles and Related Ground Equipment Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. 
Director means the City of Fredericksburg's Director of Public Works and Utilities and his or her designee. 
Facilities means a pole, conduit, pipeline, line, wire, cable, fiber, duct spaces, manholes, poles, conduits, underground and overhead passageways, equipment, antenna, structures, or facility plant and appurtenances of any kind whatsoever, and includes Utility Poles, Transport Facilities, Micro Network Nodes, Network Nodes, Node Support Poles, and related ground equipment. 
Historic district means an area that is zoned or otherwise designated as a historic district under City ordinance or state or federal law to include the historic shopping district overlay and the area within 1,000 feet of the property boundary line of a property which is designated as a Historic landmark under the City's historic zoning ordinance(s). 
Historic landmark means a site or structure recognized by the City, state or federal government. 
Law means common law or a federal, state, or local law, statute, code, rule, regulation, order, or ordinance. 
Macro tower means a guyed or self-supported pole or monopole that supports or is capable of supporting antennas and does not exceed the height parameters prescribed by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.003. 
Micro network node means a network node that is not larger in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height, and that has an exterior antenna, if any, not longer than 11 inches. 
Municipal Park means an area that is zoned or otherwise designated by municipal code as a public park for the purpose of recreational activity. 
Municipally owned utility pole means a utility pole owned or operated by a municipally owned utility, as defined by V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 11.003, and located in a public right-of-way. 
Network node means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term includes: 
(1)  Equipment associated with wireless communications; 
(2)  A radio transceiver, an antenna, a battery-only backup power supply, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration; and 
(3)  Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is immediately adjacent to and directly associated with a particular collocation. 
The term does not include an electric generator, pole or macro tower. 
Network provider means a: 
(1)  Wireless service provider; or 
(2)  Person that does not provide wireless services and that is not an electric utility but builds or installs on behalf of a wireless service provider network nodes or node support poles or any other structure that supports or is capable of supporting a network node. 
Node support pole means a pole installed by a network provider for the primary purpose of supporting a network node. 
Park means an area that is zoned or otherwise designated by the City as a public park for the purpose of recreational activity. 
Permit means a written authorization for the use of the public right-of-way or collocation on a service pole (as to network providers) before a user of the public right-of-way may perform an action or initiate, continue or complete a project. A "permit" includes all permits required by this article and applicable codes adopted by the City. 
Pole means a service pole, municipally owned utility pole, node support pole, or utility pole. 
Private easement means an easement or other real property right that is only for the benefit of the grantor and grantee and their successors and assigns. 
Public property means public rights-of-way, bridges, tunnels, and similar property in which the City holds any property interest or exercises any rights of management or control. 
Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the municipality has an interest. The term does not include: 
(1)  A private easement; or 
(2)  The airwaves above a public right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications. 
Service pole means a pole owned or operated by the City and located in the public right-of-way, including a: 
(1)  Pole that supports traffic control functions; 
(2)  Structure for signage; 
(3)  Pole that supports lighting, other than a decorative pole; and 
(4)  Pole or similar structure owned or operated by the City and supporting only network nodes. 
Sidewalk means that portion of a public right-of-way improved and designated for or ordinarily used for pedestrian travel or pedestrian and bicycle travel. 
Street means that portion of a public right-of-way improved and designated for or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
Substantially similar means that the: 
(1)  New or upgraded network node, including the antenna or other equipment element, will not be more than ten percent larger than the existing network node, provided that the increase may not result in the network need exceeding the size limitation provided by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.003; and 
(2)  New or upgraded pole will not be more than ten percent higher than the existing pole, provided that the increase may not result in the pole exceeding the height limitations provided by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.203. 
Traffic Signal means any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
Transport facility means each transmission path physically within a public right-of-way, extending with a physical line from a network node directly to the network, for the purpose of providing backhaul for network nodes. 
Underground Utility means an area where poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead or above ground structures have been removed and buried or have been approved for burial underground. 
Utility pole means a pole that provides: 
(1)  Electric distribution with a voltage rating of not more than 34.5 kilovolts; or 
(2)  Services of a telecommunications provider, as defined by V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 51.002. 
Video Service has the meaning as set forth in V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 66.002(10). 
Video service provider has the meaning as set forth in V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 66.002(11), for which the PUC has issued a state-issued certificate of franchise authority to provide video service. 
Voice service has the meaning as set forth in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 283.002. 
Wireless service means any service, using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of Wi-Fi, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using a network node. 
Wireless service provider means a person that provides wireless service to the public. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 1.7, 9-2-2014; Ord. No. 27-011, § 2, 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 35-128. - Decorative Poles. 
(a)  Appurtenances and attachments. No appurtenances or attachments, other than temporary holiday or special event attachments, subject to the provisions of the City's sign ordinance, are permitted to be placed on decorative poles. 
(Ord. No. 27-011, § 2, 8-7-2017)  
Secs. 35-129—35-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 35-141. - Prohibition. 
No Person shall construct any Facilities in City's Public Rights-of-Way except as authorized by this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 2.1, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-142. - Use of existing and future poles. 
To the extent utility poles owned by any utility are present in the particular section of a Public Right-of-way, and regardless of the side of the street the same are on, a Permittee that intends to place its Facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way shall use such existing poles unless it establishes that use of existing poles creates a safety hazard and it obtains written approval from City to install new poles, such approval not to be unreasonably withheld. Applicant shall obtain all requisite permits and enter all necessary pole use agreements for use of such existing utility poles whether owned by City or a third party. All excavations and other construction in the Public Rights-of-Way shall be conducted so as to minimize interference with the use of public and private property. Any Facilities placed within the Public Rights-of-Way that are suspended in any manner above ground shall either be placed on existing poles or equipment or be suspended at a height not less than 22 feet above ground level, unless otherwise approved by the Director, but in no event less than 15 feet, except to the extent state law controls. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 2.2, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-143. - Use of above ground facilities and poles by third party. 
In the event a third party or City desires to install above-ground Facilities in the same Public Right-of-way in which Facilities are installed or placed, the owner of the same shall allow such third party or City to use such Facilities, and shall offer a reasonable agreement for the use of the same and provided such third party or City enters into said use agreement. This Ordinance does not convey any right to any Person to attach any Facilities to any utility pole owned or controlled by the City without a separate pole use agreement. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 2.3, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-144. - Service pole requirements. 
(a)  Public safety and adherence to all applicable engineering standards shall be considered paramount in the design and installation of all poles, guys, and other overhead conductors, cables, light guides, and equipment placed with Public Rights-of-Way. 
(b)  The Director shall be the final arbiter of adequate design and installation, and any Person seeking to attach Facilities to the City's utility poles shall provide the City upon demand all necessary engineering documentation and calculations to demonstrate the adequacy of those designs. 
(c)  No poles, guys, equipment, conductors, cables, light guides or other above ground equipment shall be allowed to deteriorate to a point where it no longer meets design strength, lacks structural integrity, lacks clearance under current surrounding land-use conditions, or presents a likelihood of failure. 
(d)  No poles, guys, messenger strands, conductors, cables, light guides or equipment shall remain in place when no longer in use, except where plans demonstrate to the City that such equipment will be used within 12 months from the date on which such equipment is no longer being used. Where such use does not materialize within such time frame, the unused Facilities shall be removed within 30 days from the end of the twelve-month period. 
(e)  No longer than at ten-year intervals, at the expense of the Permittee all wooden poles owned by Permittee shall be examined by an independent third party specializing in the long-term maintenance of utility poles and where design strength is determined to no longer be adequate, replaced within 90 days. Proof of same shall be provided to Director. 
(f)  Poles that are replaced by the City due to lack of maintenance, shall become the property of the City. 
(g)  All poles, except those explicitly marked as being owned and maintained by another Person shall be the property of the City. 
(h)  No Person shall attach messenger strands, guys, conductors, or other equipment to any pole owned by the City that creates a net unbalanced force on the pole. 
(i)  Persons with poles, conductors, cables, light guides, guys, or other Facilities in the City's Public Rights-of-Way shall respond within 24 hours after notification of damaged or downed facilities. 
(j)  Persons with poles, conductors, cables, light guides, guys, or other Facilities in the City's Rights-of-Way shall be responsible for costs incurred by the City in taking corrective measures with regard to damaged or downed Facilities. 
(k)  Persons with poles, conductors, cables, light guides, guys, or other Facilities in the City's Rights-of-Way or attached to poles owned by the City shall be responsible to transfer, relocate, or modify such Facilities due to pole maintenance, relocation, repairs, or replacement within 30 days from notice by the City of the need to maintain, relocate, repair, or replace the Person's Facilities. 
(l)  Multiple parallel pole lines on one side of a Public Right-of-way are prohibited, even in circumstances where the original pole line is installed off the Public Right-of-way in an adjacent easement. 
(m)  The installation of new poles, or the use of poles abandoned by the City within pole lines owned by the City is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 2.4, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-145. - Underground facilities. 
The City may withhold its permission to install new poles and require underground placement in any area in which its Facilities, or those of other providers are placed or are to be placed underground, unless the Applicant makes a compelling demonstration that, in any specific instance, such requirement is not reasonable or feasible. The cost of underground installation or the time required to negotiate a joint use agreement shall not be considered a compelling reason. 
(1)  Facilities shall be installed underground where other entities' existing Facilities are already underground. A Person seeking to install Facilities in the Public Right-of-Way shall make a reasonable determination as to whether space is available to accommodate the Person's new Facilities. A negative determination shall not relieve the Person of the responsibility to underground its Facilities in underground utility areas to the degree reasonably feasible. Previously installed aerial Facilities shall be placed underground in concert, and on a cost-sharing basis, with other entities utilizing the Public Right-of-way when such other entities convert from aerial to underground construction. 
(2)  Underground conduits and ducts shall be installed in the Public Rights-of-Way between the adjacent property line and the curb line unless otherwise directed by the City. 
(3)  Conduits and ducts shall be installed parallel with the curb line and shall cross the Public Rights-of-Way perpendicular to the Public Rights-of-Way centerline unless otherwise directed by the City. 
(4)  Conduits and ducts shall be installed by trenchless excavation or directional boring when placing these facilities under paved Public Rights-of-Way or driveway crossings to avoid motor vehicle interruptions, unless otherwise directed by the City. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 2.5, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-146. - Relocation and removal of facilities. 
(a)  Within 60 days following written notice from the City, any person owning facilities located in the public right-of-way, must, as directed by the City, and at the person's sole cost, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any of their facilities that are in the public right-of-way whenever the City determines that the removal, relocation, change or alteration is necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, installation, completion, relocations, or widening of any City improvement, facilities, or equipment, in or upon the public right-of-way. Relocation of a Micro Network Node, Network Node, Node Support Pole, and related ground equipment must comply with the provisions of this article regarding spacing and other limitations. 
(b)  If a person does not remove or relocate its facilities as required by subsection (a) of this section, the City may remove the facilities at the person's sole cost and expense, without further notice to the person and within 30 days following receipt of an invoice from the City, the person shall reimburse the City for its reasonable expenses incurred in the removal or relocation of the facilities. 
(c)  If the Director determines that there is imminent danger to the public health, safety and welfare, the Director may immediately disconnect, remove or relocate a person's facilities in the public right-of-way at the person's sole cost. The person shall reimburse the City for its reasonable expenses incurred in the removal or relocation of the facilities within 30 days following receipt of an invoice from the City. 
(d)  If a person owning a facility in the public right-of-way removes or relocates the facility at its discretion, the person shall notify the City in writing not less than ten business days prior to the removal or relocation. A relocation must comply with the provisions of this article. The person shall obtain all permits required for the removal or relocation of the person's facilities prior to the removal or relocation. 
(e)  If a person does not remove or relocate its facilities as required by subsections (a) and (b) of this [section], the City may remove the facilities at the person's sole cost and expense, without further notice to the person and within 30 days following issuance of an invoice from the City, the person shall reimburse the City for its reasonable expenses incurred in the removal or relocation of the facilities. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 2.6, 9-2-2014; Ord. No. 27-011, § 2, 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 35-147. - Street widening, straightening, or changes in grade. 
Whenever, by reason of street widening, straightening, or changes in the grade or contours of a street, alley, or other public way, it is deemed that Permittee's Facilities located in the City's Public Rights-of-Way, or the Facilities of any Person using the City's Public Rights-of-Way, are in conflict with such activity, and for such reason it is deemed necessary to remove, alter, change, adapt, or conform the Facilities to accommodate such activity, Permittee, or any Person using the City's Public Rights-of-Way, shall make the alterations or changes as soon as practical but no later than 90 days following the request from the City, unless the Director extends such period. Permittee, or any Person using the City's Public Rights-of-Way, shall undertake such action without claim for reimbursement from or damages against the City. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 2.7, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-148. - Excavations. 
A Person excavating in the City's Public Rights-of-Way shall perform excavations and other construction in the Public Rights-of-Way in accordance with all applicable City requirements, including the obligation to use trenchless technology whenever commercially economical and practical and consistent with obligations on other similar users of the Public Right-of-Way. The City may waive the requirement of trenchless technology if it determines that, based upon information provided to the City by the Person seeking to excavate, the particular field conditions warrant a waiver. A Person shall follow all reasonable construction directions given by the City in order to minimize any such interference. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 2.8, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-149. - Time to close excavations. 
All holes, trenches, and excavations for repairs shall be covered at least with asphalt as soon as possible, not to exceed an opening and closing period of 48 hours in high traffic areas. Temporary repairs are acceptable within the 48 hours, and then the permanent repairs, including repairs for non-high traffic areas shall be performed within 14 days. High traffic areas shall be defined as any state highway, farm to market road, ranch road, or any collector or arterial road as designated on the City's Transportation Plan. City may designate additional areas as high-traffic from time to time. Permittee, or any Person using the City's Public Rights-of-Way, shall promptly restore to its previous condition and to the reasonable satisfaction of the City, a street, alley, or public right-of-way excavated by it. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 2.9, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-150. - Coordination of trenching and excavation. 
A Person shall use its best efforts to coordinate joint trenching with any other Persons whose Facilities are in and along the same Public Rights-of-Way where construction may be performed in a time frame reasonably similar to the other Person's construction timetable. The Director may mandate such coordination to the fullest extent allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 2.10, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-151. - Removal of dangerous facilities. 
The City may require Permittee, or any Person using the City's Public Rights-of-Way, to repair, remove, or abate any Facilities or other structure or equipment that are no longer being used, or for which Permittee, or any Person using the City's Public Rights-of-Way, has no reasonable plans for future uses, or are unnecessarily dangerous to life or property, and in case Permittee, or any Person using the City's Public Rights-of-Way, after notice, fails or refuses to act within a reasonable time, the City may remove or abate the same at the expense of Permittee or such Person, without compensation or liability for damages to Permittee or such Person. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 2.11, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-152. - Plans for ongoing work. 
To the extent made, plans for ongoing repair, maintenance, and improvements which involve cutting into paved City roads or streets shall be submitted to the Director on an annual basis, no later than April 1 of each year, and updated based upon any changes. This does not require the public disclosure of proprietary information, such as equipment or customer specific information. Such information may be designated confidential, and to the extent allowed by law, will be kept confidential by the City. Alternatively, a Person may meet with the appropriate representative of Public Works each calendar quarter to provide such plans to the extent made. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 2.12, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-153. - Notice that permittee is ready to proceed. 
Once a permit is issued, Permittee shall notify the Director at least 24 hours in advance that construction in the Public Rights-of-Way is ready to proceed by a person or its representative. Information signs in conformity with the Texas Department of Transportation Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices—Notices stating the identity of the person doing the work and their telephone number shall be placed at the location where construction is to occur 48 hours prior to the beginning of work in the Public Rights-of-Way and shall continue to be posted at the location during the entire time the work is occurring and/or until permanent repairs are completed. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 2.13, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-154. - Erosion control measures and warning signs. 
Erosion control measures and advance warning signs, markers, cones, and barricades must be in place before work begins. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 2.14, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-155. - Closure of lanes in major thoroughfares. 
Lane closures on major thoroughfares will be limited to between 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. unless the Director grants prior approval. Arrow boards will be required on lane closures with all barricades, advance warning signs, and 36-inch reflector cones placed according to the specifications of the City. Working hours in the Public Rights-of-Way are limited to the hours between 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday. Work to be performed at other times or on Saturday must be approved by the Director in advance. Directional boring is permitted only Monday through Friday 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. No work in the Public Rights-of-Way shall be performed except for emergencies, on Sunday's or on holidays. The Director may condition his or her approval or work times other than stated upon payment by Permittee of the City's overtime costs if any. 
(1)  Within 14 days of completion of excavation, construction, installation, expansion, reconstruction, relocation, alteration, removal, maintenance or repair of Facilities, or other work in the Public Rights-of-Way, a Permittee shall temporarily restore and repair the Public Rights-of-Way in accordance with the City Code. 
(2)  Within 30 calendar days after completion of work in the Public Rights-of-Way, the Permittee shall permanently restore, replace, relay and/or repair the surface, base, curbs, drainage systems, irrigation systems, landscape treatment or other City Facilities and infrastructure located on, in, over, under, or above any Public Rights-of-Way that has been excavated, altered or damaged by reason of the excavation, construction, installation, expansion, reconstruction, relocation, alteration, removal, maintenance or repair of the Permittee's Facilities in accordance with existing standards of the City in effect at the time of the work. 
(3)  Whenever a Permittee disturbs or destroys any right-of-way markers or monuments, it shall restore the same within thirty-days after construction has ceased. A Permittee shall furnish three sets of drawings, blueline or blackline, detailing the restored monumentation. State Plane Coordinates shall be shown for all monumentation (existing or restored). The drawings shall be signed (original signature), sealed and certified, by a Registered Professional Land Surveyor, and delivered to the Director for approval no later than 30 days after construction has ceased. 
(4)  Upon a showing of good cause, the City may at its sole discretion extend the time for restoration and repair of the Public Rights-of-Way under this subsection. 
(5)  Unless the Permittee provides a recently dated photograph or a video of the Public Rights-of-Way before the construction, the condition of the Public Rights-of-Way before construction is presumed in good condition, and shall be restored to good condition. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 2.15, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-156. - Failure to repair. 
Upon failure of a Permittee to perform any such repair or replacement work after five days written notice has been given by the City to the Permittee, and in the event repairs have not been initiated during such five-day period, the City may repair such portion of the Public Rights-of-Way as may have been disturbed by the Person, its contractors or agents. Upon receipt of an invoice from the City, the Permittee shall reimburse the City for the costs so incurred within 30 calendar days from the date of the City invoice. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 2.16, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-157. - Repairs after twelve months. 
Should the Director reasonably determine, within one year from the date of the completion of the repair work, that the surface, base, curbs, drainage systems, irrigation systems, landscape treatment or other City Facilities and infrastructure located on, in, over, under, or above any Public Rights-of-Way requires additional restoration, replacement or repair work to meet existing standards of the City, a Permittee shall perform such additional restoration, replacement or repair work to the satisfaction of the City, subject to all City remedies as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 2.17, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-158. - Repairs by city. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the Director determines that the failure of a Permittee to properly repair or restore the Public Rights-of-Way constitutes a safety hazard to the public, the City may undertake emergency repairs and restoration efforts to Permittee's Facilities, after emergency notice has been provided, to the extent reasonable under the circumstances, and the Permittee has failed to respond within a reasonable time specified by the City. Upon receipt of an invoice from the City, a Permittee shall promptly reimburse the City for all costs incurred by the City within 30 calendar days from the date of the City invoice. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 2.18, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-159. - Emergency repairs. 
If the Director declares an emergency with regard to the health and safety of the citizens and requests by written notice the removal or abatement of Facilities, a Permittee shall remove or abate the Permittee's Facilities by the deadline provided in the Director's request. The Permittee and the City shall cooperate to the extent possible to assure continuity of service. If the Permittee, after notice, fails or refuses to act, the City may remove or abate the Facility, at the sole cost and expense of the Permittee, without paying compensation to the Permittee and without the City incurring liability for damages to Permittee's Facilities or due to Losses by Permittee or its customers. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 2.19, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-160. - Emergency conditions. 
Except in the case of customer service interruptions and imminent harm to property or Persons ("Emergency Conditions"), a Person may not excavate the pavement of a street or Public Rights-of-Way without first complying with City requirements. The Director shall be notified as promptly as possible regarding work performed under such Emergency Conditions, and the Permittee shall comply with the requirements of City standards and of this Ordinance for the restoration, replacement or repair of the Public Rights-of-Way, and shall supply all information required by an initial application within 14 days following the emergency work. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 2.20, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-161. - Termination of use. 
If Permittee, or any Person using the City's Public Rights-of-Way, ceases providing services over its Facilities, Permittee shall promptly begin the process of removing all Facilities from City's Public Rights-of-Way. All such Facilities shall be removed within 60 days after the date of cessation of services over the Facilities, or within such time as City may approve in writing. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 2.21, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-162. - Violations. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly construct, place, maintain, or operate any line, wire, pipe, conduit, equipment, antenna, pole, structure, or facility in a public right-of-way or other public property for the purpose of providing water, wastewater, electrical, natural gas, or other unauthorized service to any person, without first receiving the consent of the City. The City may, as a condition of its giving its consent, require the person requesting such use to enter into a written agreement with the City containing the conditions under which the use of the public right-of-way will be permitted. 
(b)  Except in cases of emergency, it is unlawful for any person to knowingly dig up, break, cut, excavate, drill or tunnel in or on any public right-of-way without first obtaining a right-of-way work permit from the City. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly install or place any facilities in a public right-of-way or make use of the public right-of-way for any purpose not authorized by state law or the City, as applicable, in accordance with City ordinances. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person doing work under a permit to violate a provision of the permit. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any person to continue work under a permit after receiving a stop work order or receiving notice that a stop work order has been issued or to resume the work or activity until the Director withdraws the stop work order. 
(f)  Each unauthorized use of the public right-of-way or other public property is a separate offense. And each day a violation continues is a separate offense and is subject to the Penalty provisions in Section 1-6, and other applicable penalty provisions in the City of Fredericksburg Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 27-011, § 2, 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 35-163. - Effect on other Utilities and Providers. 
(a)  Gas and Electric Franchises. To the extent of a conflict between this article and a gas or electric franchise existing on the date of this ordinance, the gas or electric franchise ordinance shall control. 
(b)  Other utilities and telecommunications providers. In accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.252, the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284 do not apply to the attachment of network nodes on poles or other structures owned by investor-owned electric utilities (V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 31.002), electric cooperatives (V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 11.003) telephone cooperatives (V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 162.003) or telecommunications providers (V.T.C.A., Utilities Code § 51.002) and does not confer any new city authority over those utilities, cooperatives or providers. 
(c)  Cable service or video service providers. In accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.253, approval for the installation, placement, maintenance of operation of a network node or transport facility does not authorize: 
(1)  Cable services or video service to be provided without compliance with V.T.C.A., Utilities Code ch. 66; or 
(2)  Information service as defined by 47 U.S.C. Section 153(24) to be provided in the public right-of-way; or 
(3)  Telecommunications service as defined by 47 U.S.C. Section 153(53) to be provided in the public right-of-way. 
(d)  Wireless service providers. A wireless service provider, or its affiliate, that holds a cable or video franchise under V.T.C.A., Utilities Code ch. 66 is not required to obtain additional authorization or to pay any fees based on the provider's provision of wireless service over its network nodes. (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.253(b)) 
(Ord. No. 27-011, § 2, 8-7-2017)  
DIVISION 2.5. - WIRELESS MICRO NETWORK NODES, NETWORK NODES, NODE SUPPORT POLES AND RELATED GROUND EQUIPMENT IN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
 
Sec. 35-164. - Right of Access. 
Subject to the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284, this Article, the Design Manual, and other applicable ordinances, a network provider may use the public rights-of-way to: 
(1)  Construct, modify, maintain, operate, relocate and remove a network node or node support pole; 
(2)  Modify or replace a utility pole or node support pole; and 
(3)  Collocate on a pole. 
(Ord. No. 27-011, § 2, 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 35-165. - Prohibited or restricted areas. 
(a)  Prohibited areas. 
(1)  A network provider may not install a node support pole in a public right-of-way without the City's discretionary, nondiscriminatory, and written consent, if the public right-of-way is adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is: 
a.  Not more than 50 feet wide; and 
b.  Adjacent to a single-family residential lot or other multifamily residences or undeveloped land that is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions. (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 284.104(a), (b)) 
(2)  A network provider may not install a node support pole in a public right-of-way in a park, without the City's discretionary, nondiscriminatory, and written consent. (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 284.104(a), (b)) 
(b)  Historic districts and Historic landmark areas. A network provider must obtain a certificate of appropriateness under the administrative provisions of the City's historic zoning ordinance(s) from the City's Historic Preservation Officer before collocating network nodes or installing node support poles in historic districts. As a condition for approval, the network providers must provide design or concealment measures for the new network node or node support pole, as provided in the design manual. The network provider should explore the feasibility of using camouflage measures to improve the aesthetics of the network node, node support pole, or related ground equipment or any portion of the network node, node support pole or ground equipment to minimize the impact to the aesthetics in the historic district. Nothing in this subsection limits the City's authority to enforce historic preservation zoning regulations consistent with the preservation of local zoning authority under 47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7), the requirements for facility modifications under 47 U.S.C. Section 1455(a), or the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 (16. U.S.C. Section 470 et seq.) and the regulations adopted to implement these laws. (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.105) 
(c)  Undergrounding areas. A network provider, in relation to installation for which the City has approved a permit application, must comply with undergrounding requirements, including the City's ordinances, zoning regulations, state law, private deed restrictions, and other public or private restrictions that prohibit installing above-ground structures in a public right-of-way without first obtaining zoning or land use approval. Areas of the City may be designated from time to time by the City as underground areas in accordance with filed plats, or conversions of overhead to underground areas, as may be allowed by law. This subsection does not prohibit a network provider from replacing an existing structure. (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.107) 
(Ord. No. 27-011, § 2, 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 35-166. - Design Manual. 
(a)  Adoption of design manual. The City Council adopts the Design Manual for Siting and Criteria for the Installation of Wireless Micro Network Nodes, Network Nodes, Node Support Poles and Related Ground Equipment Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284. A copy of the Design Manual is attached to the City of Fredericksburg Code of Ordinances as Appendix C. 
(b)  Revisions to design manual. The Director may from time-to-time add to, delete from, or revise the Design Manual without Council action if the revision: 
(1)  Does not conflict with a provision of state law or this Article; 
(2)  Is for the purpose of providing detailed or technical specifications, requirements, or procedures applicable to the matters regulated under this article, but does not implement new substantive regulations or requirements not addressed in this article; 
(3)  Is adopted in compliance with written procedures, as approved by the City Manager, that provide for public notice, an opportunity for public comment, and consideration of any public comments prior to adoption; and 
(4)  Is approved by the City Manager. 
(c)  Compliance with Design Manual. A network provider must comply with any applicable provisions of the Design Manual as a condition of approval of any application, permit, or other approval required under this article or the Design Manual. 
(Ord. No. 27-011, § 2, 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 35-167. - Transport Facilities. 
(a)  A network provider that wants to connect a network node to the network using the public right-of-way may: 
(1)  Install its own transport facilities if it obtains a permit under this article and pays the public right-of-way rates in sections 5.505, 5.506, 5.507 and 5.508 in Appendix A; or 
(2)  Obtain transport service from a person that is paying municipal fees to occupy the public right-of-way that are the equivalent of not less than $28.00 per node per month. (Section 5.508, Appendix A; V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.055) 
(Ord. No. 27-011, § 2, 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 35-168. - Fees. 
(a)  Fees. The network provider must pay the Right-of-Way Construction Permit Application Fee and the Application Fee for Network Providers as provided in Sections 5.505 and 5.506 of Appendix A and any other applicable fees set forth in the City of Fredericksburg Code of Ordinances, to include other fees and rates established in Sections 5.507, and 5.508 in Appendix A. 
(b)  Notice of annual increase in public right-of-way rate. The City will provide written notice to the network provider of a new annual public right-of-way rate, adjusted as provided Section 5.507 in Appendix A, which shall apply to the first payment due to the City on or after 60 days following the notice. 
(Ord. No. 27-011, § 2, 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 35-169. - Permits. 
(a)  Permits required by applicable codes. In addition to the Right-of-Way Construction Permit Application Fee and Application Fee for Network Providers, set forth in Sections 5.505 and 5.506 of Appendix A, the network provider must obtain all other applicable permit application fees set forth in the City of Fredericksburg Code of Ordinances, this Article, and Appendix A. 
(b)  Consolidated permits. A network provider that wants to install or collocate multiple network nodes inside the territorial jurisdiction of the City is entitled to file a consolidated permit application with the City for not more than 30 network nodes and receive permits for the installation or colocation of those network nodes. Each network node permit issued in a consolidated permit application is subject to a separate permit fee as set forth in the fee schedule in section 5.506 of Appendix A. (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.152) 
(c)  Issuance of permits. The permit(s) will be issued if the application complies with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284, this article, applicable codes and the design manual. 
(Ord. No. 27-011, § 2, 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 35-170. - Review process for applications. 
(a)  The review process for a permit application for installation of transport facilities, micro network node, network node, node support pole, and related ground equipment shall conform to the following, as required by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.154. 
(1)  The City will determine whether an application for a network node or node support pole is complete, specifically identify the missing information and notify the applicant of that determination within 30 days after receiving the application. 
(2)  The City will determine whether an application for a transport facility is complete within ten days after receiving the application, specifically identify the missing information, and notify the applicant of that determination within ten days after receiving the application. 
(3)  An application for a permit is deemed approved if the City does not approve or deny the application for: 
a.  A node support pole within 150 days after the date the City receives a complete application. 
b.  A network node within 60 days after the date the City receives a complete application. 
c.  A transport facility within 21 days after the date the City receives a completed application. 
(4)  An application may not be denied unless the work to be performed under the permit does not comply with applicable codes. 
(5)  If an application is denied, the City will document the basis for the denial, including the specific applicable code provision on which the denial is based. Documentation of the denial will be sent to the applicant by electronic mail on or before the date the City denies the application. 
(6)  Within 30 days after the date the City denies the application, the applicant may cure the deficiencies identified in the denial documentation and resubmit the application without paying an additional application fee, other than a fee for actual costs incurred by the City. 
(7)  The City will approve or deny a revised completed application after a denial within 90 days after the date the City receives the completed revised application. The City's review will be limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial documentation. 
(Ord. No. 27-011, § 2, 8-7-2017)  
Secs. 35-171—35-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT/CONSTRUCTION IN RIGHT-OF-WAY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 27-001, § 2, adopted Aug. 7, 2017, changed the title of Div. 3 from "Permit" to read as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 35-181. - Registration required. 
Any Person using the City's Public Rights-of-Way in any manner shall register with the Director to notify the City of such Person's presence in the Public Rights-of-Way. Such registration shall include the Person's legal name, the name, address, telephone number, and e-mail address of a point of contact to which the City may send any required notices regarding use of the City's Public Rights-of-Way. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 3.1, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-182. - Construction permit to work in public right-of-way required and exceptions. 
(a)  Required. Except in cases of emergency, a construction permit to work on a public right-of-way must be obtained from the City before performing any work in the public right-of-way that requires digging up, breaking up, cutting, excavating, drilling, or tunneling in or upon any public right-of-way. If emergency work in the public right-of-way that would require a permit is necessary and the City permit office is closed, the person doing the work must apply for a right-of-work permit the next business day after the emergency work. 
(b)  Exceptions to permit requirement. The permit requirements of this section do not apply to: 
(1)  The repair, replacement, or maintenance of an existing telephone line, natural gas line, electric line, cable television or telecommunications line, irrigation line, or other existing pipe, cable, or facility lawfully located in the public right-of-way, if the repair, replacement, or maintenance does not require the digging up, breaking up, cutting, excavation, drilling or tunneling under or the removal, modification, or excavation of a public street, sidewalk, water or sewer line, or other City-owned improvement. This subsection does not apply to routine maintenance of network providers; 
(2)  A network provider's routine maintenance of micro network nodes, network nodes, node support poles and related ground equipment that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalk or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way; 
(3)  Replacing or upgrading a network node or pole with a node or pole that is substantially similar in size or smaller that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way, but only if: 
a.  The replacement or upgrade does not include replacement of an existing node support pole; and 
b.  The replacement or upgrade does not defeat existing concealment elements of a node support pole. 
(4)  The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro network nodes that are strung on cables between existing poles or node support poles, in compliance with the National Electric Safety Code. 
(5)  The repair, replacement, or maintenance of existing trees, shrubs, flowers, grass, vegetation, berms, decorative landscaping, or watering systems that are lawfully located in the public-right-way, if the repair, replacement, or maintenance does not require the digging up, breaking up, cutting, excavation, drilling or tunneling under, or the removal, modification, or excavation, of a public street, sidewalk, water or sewer line, or other City-owned improvement. 
(6)  The repair, replacement, or maintenance of signs, or other ornamental features or materials denoting the entrance to a neighborhood or subdivision that are lawfully located in a public right-of-way, if the repair, replacement, or maintenance does not require the digging up, breaking up, cutting, excavation, drilling or tunneling under, or the removal, modification, or excavation of, a public street, sidewalk, water or sewer line, or other City-owned improvement; 
(7)  Any work performed for the City under a contract with the City; 
(8)  Any work required to install a sign on a public right-of-way if the applicant has received a sign permit from the City and has complied with the requirements of this article; or 
(9)  The placement or maintenance of trees, shrubs, irrigation systems, or other landscaping materials or equipment placed in the right-of-way of a residential lot at the direction of the owner or person in control of the lot. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 3.2, 9-2-2014; Ord. No. 27-011, § 2, 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 35-183. - Application and issuance of permits. 
(a)  Any Applicant seeking to place Facilities on, in, over, under, or above the Public Rights-of-Way, shall pay a construction permit application fee as set forth in Section 5.505 of Appendix A of the City of Fredericksburg Code of Ordinances (except Certified Telecommunications Providers and their contractors to the extent exempted by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 283) and shall file an application for such construction permit with the Director and shall abide by the terms and provisions of this Ordinance pertaining to use of Public Rights-of-Way. 
(b)  A completed application for a permit must be submitted to the Director on a City form, accompanied by the applicable fee. If there are additional direct costs to the City in processing the applications, the City may recover those from the Applicant prior to the issuance of the permit. 
(c)  In addition to other requirements in this article, the application for transport facilities, micro network node, network node, node support pole, and related ground equipment must include: 
(1)  Construction and engineering drawings and information to confirm that the network provider will comply with the Design Manual and applicable codes; 
(2)  A certification that the proposed network node will be placed into active commercial service by or for the network provider not later than 60 days after the date the construction and final testing of the network is completed; 
(3)  A certification that the network node complies with applicable regulations of the Federal Communications Commission; 
(4)  Information related to the network providers' use of the public right-of-way to ensure compliance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284, applicable codes, this article, and the Design Manual; and 
(5)  Concealment measures for collocations of Network Nodes or installations of Node Support Poles in a historic district, historic shopping district overlay, historic landmark area or on a decorative pole with the City's Preservation Officer's advanced written administrative approval for such collocation or installation. 
(d)  Applications must include construction and engineering drawings and information that the Director determines is reasonably necessary to administer this article and to protect the public and public property, to the extent not inconsistent with law ("Design Documents"); 
(e)  The permit applications must contain the name, address, and telephone number of the person performing the work, the location of the work, and any other information designated by the Director. The permit, other than permits for network nodes, node support poles, and related equipment, may also contain special conditions the Director determines are necessary to ensure compliance with this article, applicable codes, or to protect the public and public property. 
(f)  The permit holder must keep the permit posted at a visible place at the work site and make it available for inspection upon the request of any City employee. 
(g)  A permit issued under this article is valid for the time period specified by the Director, based on the estimated time to complete the work. Upon the written request of the permit holder, the Director may grant additional time to complete the work under the permit. 
(h)  A network provider must begin the installation for which a permit is issued within six months after the date of issuance of the permit and diligently pursue the installation to completion. The city may grant a longer time to complete the installation or grant reasonable extensions of time as requested by the network provider. (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.155) 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 3.3, 9-2-2014; Ord. No. 27-011, § 2, 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 35-184. - Compliance with design documents. 
Applicant's proposed work with respect to use of the City's Public Rights-of-Way shall comply with the approved Design Documents. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to obligate City to grant Applicant a permit to construct any Facilities in, on, under, over, or above the City's Public Rights-of-Way where Applicant has failed to fulfill the requirements of this Ordinance, or if the application to do so is denied based on the criteria described in this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 3.4, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-185. - No property rights. 
All City's Public Rights-of-Way shall remain the property of City and no consideration provided by Applicant shall create or vest in Applicant or Permittee any ownership right, title, or interest in any of the City's Public Rights-of-Way and Permittee's interest shall remain a bare license. The existence of any permit granted under this Ordinance shall not in any way alter or affect City's right to use, change, operate, maintain, or abandon its Public Rights-of-Way. The City shall not be liable to any Person for alterations to or abandonment of any Right-of-way nor shall it be responsible for providing alternate placement for any Facilities. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 3.5, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-186. - Permit not exclusive. 
The City has allowed, and may allow in the future, similar or other uses of City's Public Rights-of-Way by third parties, including Permittee's competitors. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to limit or in any way affect City's right or ability to enter into or honor other agreements, or to grant any rights, licenses, or access concerning any of City's Public Rights-of-Way, irrespective of the character or degree of economic competition or loss caused to Permittee and subject to the applicable provisions in V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.110. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 3.6, 9-2-2014; Ord. No. 27-011, § 2, 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 35-187. - Discretion of city final. 
City reserves the right to deny any Application pursuant to the terms and conditions of this Ordinance, or pursuant to other City ordinances, or for legal, safety, mechanical, structural, engineering, environmental, reliability, quality-of-service reasons, or to protect the public's general welfare. Determination of these issues shall at all times remain within the reasonable discretion of City, subject in all respects to the terms and conditions of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 3.7, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-188. - Compliance with existing franchise ordinance or agreement. 
Any Person, except a Certificated Telecommunications Provider, prior to placing, reconstructing, or altering Facilities in, on or over the Public Rights-of-Way, must obtain separate municipal authorization from the City, such as a license agreement or franchise, as may be applicable. For use of the Public Rights-of-Way, all users of the Public Rights-of-Way shall compensate the City on the value of the Rights-of-Way used, being typically either on a gross receipts basis or on a linear foot basis, to the fullest extent allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 3.8, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-189. - Compensation. 
Permittee, or any Person using the City's Public Rights-of-Way, shall compensate City for use of City's Public Rights-of-Way to the extent allowed by law. Failure by the City to demand compensation shall not constitute a waiver of its right to pursue compensation if it determines it may be due. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 3.9, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-190. - Application process. 
Applicant must submit an Application with its Design Documents on the then-approved City form or format to the Director. The content of the Application form, and all required supporting documentation and other procedures, are within the reasonable discretion of City and may change from time to time without prior notice as determined by the Director or his or her designee, provided such changes are not inconsistent with the terms and conditions of this Ordinance. Applications shall identify with sufficient specificity the location at which Applicant seeks to install or place its Facilities, and shall include all engineering drawings and installation details. City may reject entirely an incomplete Application, or it may request additional information to support the Application, in which event the requested information shall be promptly furnished and the Application shall not be deemed filed until it is complete. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 3.10, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-191. - [Plans relating to stormwater management and erosion control.] 
A Person using or intending to use the City's Public Rights-of-Way may be required to show proof of engineered plans relating to storm water management and erosion control when applicable or a letter stating a person is not required to obtain such plans. A Person shall be responsible for storm water management erosion control that complies with city, state and federal guidelines, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 3.11, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-192. - Warranties and proof of compliance. 
As part of Applicant's Application, Applicant shall represent and warrant that: 
(1)  Applicant is providing no services for which it owes the City compensation under the provisions of Chapter 283 of the Local Government Code; 
(2)  In its Application, Applicant shall provide to the City a complete report on the nature of the services provided with its Facilities; and 
(3)  To the extent services to be provided over the Facilities for which a construction permit is sought are not being provided to end-use customers, Applicant shall provide adequate proof that the provider of services to whom Applicant's proposed Facilities connect and provides services to the end-use customer within the City will remit the requisite fees for use of the City's Public Right-of-Way pursuant to Local Government Code § 283.055(i) and (k). 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 3.12, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-193. - Notices. 
Application hereunder shall contain the name, address, telephone numbers, facsimile numbers, and email addresses of the point of contact for all notices required or to be provided to Applicant under this Ordinance. Such point of contact shall be an individual with authority to bind the Applicant and/or the owner of the Facilities for which a construction permit is sought to conform the use of the Public Right-of-way to the requirements of this Ordinance. Permittee, or any Person using the City's Public Rights-of-Way, shall supply and maintain a 24-hour emergency telephone number for contact to report damage to Facilities or other situations requiring immediate communications. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 3.13, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-194. - Construction permit acceptance. 
Each Construction Permit Application for activity in, on, over, under, or above the Public Rights-of-Way shall contain, or have attached, the following: 
By this application for a construction permit to use the Public Rights-of-Way, I affirm that I am an authorized representative of Applicant and of Permittee and as the lawful representative, I hereby agree to use the City's Rights-of-Way under the terms and conditions approved by the City of Fredericksburg by City Public Rights-of-Way Management Ordinance (Ordinance No. _______). 
___________ 
Name 
Title 
Date 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 3.14, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-195. - Requirements. 
Any person performing any construction or other work in the public right-of-way, whether under a permit issued under this article or otherwise, must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Engineering. Applicant shall submit documentation of its engineering and field evaluation using a City-approved professional engineer licensed in the State of Texas as a professional engineer. A City-approved engineer may include engineering employees of Applicant. The City shall not unreasonably withhold, condition, or delay grant of approval of a licensed professional engineer, licensed in the State of Texas and employed or engaged by Applicant to undertake such engineering and field evaluation. City shall accept and rely on such documentation, but reserves the right to perform, or have a firm retained by City perform its own engineering and field evaluation. City's engineering requirements and determinations shall be within its reasonable discretion. 
(2)  As-built drawings. Within ten days following completion of installation of any Facilities or any relocation or enlargement of the same, Permittee, or any Person using in any way the City's Public Rights-of-Way, shall provide "as built" drawings and specifications to the City of the Facilities placed in, on, over, under, or above the City's Public Rights-of-Way. 
(3)  Specifications. All excavations, alterations, backfill, repairs, and other work must be made in conformance with any written specifications or requirements adopted by the City. The Director may allow modifications of a specification if unusual circumstances are present, the modifications would comply with the spirit and intent of the specification, and the modification would not adversely affect the public safety or interest. 
(4)  Boring and encasing. If the Director determines it is impractical to excavate within a street, all pipelines, conduits, or other crossings must be bored, tunneled, or drilled under the paved section, and, if required by the Director, the crossings must be encased in a manner approved by the Director. 
(5)  Damage to City streets. Any type of ditching equipment used on City streets must be equipped with street pads. All damage done to public right-of-way and other public property during the work must be repaired by the permit holder to City specifications. If the permit holder fails to make the repairs, the Director may make the repairs and charge the cost to the permit holder. 
(6)  Correction of defects. If a permit holder fails to properly restore the surface of the public right-of-way or other public property, abandons the work, or fails to correct a hazardous condition after notice to do so, the Director may take any action necessary to restore the right-of-way, complete the work, or correct the hazardous condition at the permit holder's expense. 
(7)  Bonds. For good cause, and if necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, the Director may require as a condition to the issuance of a right-of-way work permit or before work begins under the permit, that the applicant or permit holder post a bond to insure the repair of streets or the completion of the proposed work or to ensure compliance with any other requirement of this article. 
(8)  Debris on public rights-of-way. During the work, the public right-of-way must be kept clean of excessive rubbish, earth, mud, rock, and other debris, to the satisfaction of the Director. 
(9)  Traffic safety. All work in a public right-of-way or adjacent to a street must be done with barricades, traffic cones, lights, flares, signs, flagmen, and other traffic control devices as specified in the latest edition of the Manual for Uniform Traffic Control Devices of the Texas Department of Transportation. Where the Director believes it necessary to avoid traffic congestion or for public safety, he may require work be done only at certain hours during the day or night. Any excavation in the public right-of-way that is a potential danger to the public must be secured against entry in the manner specified by the Director. 
(Ord. No. 27-011, § 2, 8-7-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 27-011, § 2, adopted Aug. 7, 2017, amended § 35-195 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former § 35-195 pertained to engineering and derived from Ord No. 24-109, § 3.15, 9-2-2014.  
Sec. 35-196. - Approval/denial. 
City retains sole and complete discretion to deny or modify any Application or Design Documents so as to preserve the safety, reliability, integrity, and to otherwise protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. City will approve, modify, or deny an Application within 30 days of submission. Applicant may request City to reconsider a denial or modification of an Application. City may approve an Application as submitted, approve it on a modified or conditional basis, or may deny the Application in accordance with the policies adopted by City. The Director may deny an application if: 
(1)  the Applicant fails to submit a complete Application including Design Documents; 
(2)  the Applicant fails to supplement its Application with additional information or otherwise cooperate with the City as requested in the evaluation of the Application; 
(3)  installation or placement of Applicant's proposed Facilities are of excessive size or would otherwise be incompatible with the City's ordinances, policies, or practices with regard to use of its Public Rights-of-Way; 
(4)  approval would jeopardize the reliability or integrity of the City's electric system or of individual units of the City's utility infrastructure, including its water and wastewater system; 
(5)  approval would present a safety hazard to a City employee, the public or utility services provided to those in the City Limits by third parties or Franchisees of the City; 
(6)  approval would impair the City's ability to operate or maintain its utility infrastructure, including its water and wastewater system; 
(7)  approval would require an unacceptable change, upgrade, or addition to the City's utility infrastructure, including its water and wastewater system; or 
(8)  approval would expose the City, its utilities, its ratepayers, or other users to increased liability or financial risk. 
(9)  approval would cause interference with any other entity, including a utility that has a franchise agreement with the City or any other utility providing services to the residents and businesses within the City. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 3.16, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-197. - Stop work orders; revocation and appeals. 
(a)  If a person violates a provision of this article, the Director may issue a written stop work order to the violator directing any work or activity authorized to be done under a permit to cease until the violation is corrected. Upon receiving a stop work order, the permit holder must immediately cause all work authorized under the permit to stop, but may take steps necessary to secure the site. (Chapter 35, Article V, section 35-224.) 
(b)  The Director may revoke a permit for a violation of this article. To revoke a permit, the Director must send or deliver written notice of a violation to the permit holder ordering the violation to be corrected within a specified time. If the permit holder fails to correct the violation as directed, the Director may revoke the permit by giving notice to the permit holder in writing. 
(c)  Any person may appeal the denial or revocation of a permit, the interpretation or application of a requirement of this article, the issuance of a stop work order or notice of violation, or other requirement or action imposed under this article by the Director or other City official. The appeal must be submitted in writing to the City manager or the City manager's designee within 72 hours of the action being appealed. The City manager or his or her designee will promptly review the facts and issue a written determination. 
(d)  The revocation and appeal provisions in this section govern over any other conflicting provision in this code. 
(Ord. No. 27-011, § 2, 8-7-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 27-011, § 2, adopted Aug. 7, 2017, amended § 35-197 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former § 35-197 pertained to as-built drawings and derived from Ord. No. 24-109, § 3.17, 9-2-2014.  
Sec. 35-198. - Modification of city's utility infrastructure. 
In the event that City intends to deny an Application and the City's utility infrastructure may be modified to resolve the basis for denial of the Application, City shall approve the Application provided that (i) the Applicant agrees to pay City's costs to so modify or replace its utility infrastructure; and (ii) the Application is otherwise acceptable and grantable pursuant to the terms and conditions of this Ordinance and applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 3.18, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-199. - Insurance. 
(a)  Required. Permittee, or any Person using the City's Public Rights-of-Way, shall at all times carry insurance issued by companies duly licensed and authorized to provide insurance in the State of Texas rated at least A VIII under the A. M. Best rating system, and approved by City (which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld) to protect Permittee or such Person, and the City of Fredericksburg from and against any and all claims, demands, actions, judgments, costs, expenses, or liabilities of every kind that may arise, directly or indirectly, from or by reason of losses, injuries, or damages described in this Ordinance. 
(b)  Minimum coverages. Permittee, or any Person using the City's Public Rights-of-Way, shall carry and maintain insurance policies and shall furnish the City Manager Certificates of Insurance on the most current State of Texas Department of Insurance-approved certificate form as evidence thereof in amounts established from time to time by the City's City Manager or the City Manager's designee. 
(c)  City as additional insured. All policies, except for Workers' Compensation policies, shall list the City and all associated, affiliated, allied and subsidiary entities of City, now existing or hereafter created, and their respective officers, boards, commissions, councils, employees, volunteers, agents, attorneys and contractors, as their respective interests may appear, as Additional Insureds (City and such other persons and entities being collectively referred to herein as "Additional Insureds") and shall include cross-liability coverage. Policies shall not be non-renewed, canceled, terminated or reduced in limits of liability without 30 days' written notice having been given to the City's City Manager. The "other insurance" clause shall not apply to the City; it being the intention of the parties that the above policies covering Permittee and the Additional Insureds shall be considered primary coverage. Each policy shall contain a waiver of all rights of recovery or subrogation against City, its officers, agents, employees, volunteers and elected officials. 
(d)  Contractors. Any Contractor or Subcontractor retained by Permittee, or any Person using the City's Public Rights-of-Way, to perform work or services for Permittee under this Ordinance shall be required to insure against liability to the same extent as provided above, including Additional Insured endorsements, as a condition of being granted access to the City's Public Rights-of-Way. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 3.19, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-200. - Assignments. 
(a)  Permissible assignments. Permittee may not assign or otherwise transfer its rights and obligations under any permit granted under this Ordinance without City's prior written consent. Permittee's rights and obligations hereunder shall pass to such successor only upon receipt by City of written notice of such transfer or assignment, together with true copies of the documents specified in (b) below. 
(b)  Information to city. In the event of a transfer or assignment Permittee shall provide City with true and complete copies of the transfer or assignment documents; documents showing the ownership of the assignee and its relationship to Permittee, if any; a copy of the assignee's most current audited annual financial statement (or unaudited financial statement if an audited annual financial statement has not been prepared); and such other information as City may reasonably request. 
(c)  Other assignments void. A purported assignment or transfer made in violation of the provisions of this Section shall not be binding upon City and shall be deemed to be a material violation of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 3.20, 9-2-2014)  
Secs. 35-201—35-220. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - OTHER ORDINANCES AND REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 35-221. - Laws. 
To the extent that a Permittee must have a valid franchise before engaging in a particular act, Permittee must comply with such requirement before beginning construction or installing Facilities. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed as waiving other City requirements. Use of the City's Public Rights-of-Way shall conform to local, state, or federal law. Permittee's use of any Public Rights-of-Way shall at all times conform to the requirements of the City Ordinances, right-of-way usage and construction regulations, and the published policies promulgated by the City. City may reasonably change its ordinances, policies, and regulations in accordance with applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 4.1, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-222. - Work site safety. 
In performing any work on or near the City's or any other Person's utility poles supporting energized electric lines any Person or Permittee, and its Contractors, agents, and employees, shall comply with Chapter 752 of the Texas Health and Safety Code and all federal, state and local laws, rules and regulations governing work in proximity to energized electric lines, including without limitation, those promulgated by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 4.2, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-223. - Electrical code. 
All Person, including Permittee, and their Contractors, agents and employees, and all work, Contacts, and Facilities in the City's Public Rights-of-Way shall at all times comply with the-then current Electrical Code. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 4.3, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-224. - City oversight. 
City shall have the right to conduct on-site field oversight and inspections of Facilities, work, and operations in the City's Public Rights-of-Way. City shall at all times have unrestricted access to all field work sites within the City's Public Rights-of-Way. Both City and City's representative at any site shall have complete and final authority to order the immediate suspension of construction or installation activities if City or City's representative, in its sole discretion and judgment, deems such action necessary for reasons of safety, engineering, electrical service reliability, property owner complaint or due to non-compliance with a permit. In the event of an oral suspension order, City shall send written notice to Permittee, or to the Person that owns or controls the Facilities or to the Person performing the work in the Public Right-of-way, within three days after such suspension, identifying the alleged violation. Such suspension shall be in effect until such time as the violation is cured, at the Permittee's and/or Person's sole cost. In no event shall City be responsible for any damages, losses, or costs incurred by Permittee as a result of such work stoppage. Permittee's failure to obey a suspension order issued in accordance with this Ordinance shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 4.4, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-225. - Other permits. 
Permittee shall apply for and obtain all licenses, permits or other authorizations, including street cutting permits if needed, required to provide its service or to use, operate or maintain its Facilities. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 4.5, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-226. - Maintenance. 
All work performed in City's Public Rights-of-Way by or on behalf of Permittee, or by or on behalf of any Person using the City's Public Rights-of-Way, shall be done in a good and workmanlike manner and in conformance with approved documents. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 4.6, 9-2-2014)  
Secs. 35-227—35-240. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - ENFORCEMENT/LIABILITY/INDEMNIFICATION 
 
Sec. 35-241. - Unauthorized use of city's rights-of-way. 
If one or more unauthorized Facilities are discovered, Permittee, or any Person using the City's Public Rights-of-Way, shall comply with the requirements hereof or City may, but shall not be required to, remove the unauthorized use at Permittee's or such Person's sole cost and without City incurring any liability to Permittee if an Application for each such unauthorized use is not received by City within 15 days of notice of the unauthorized use. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 5.1, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-242. - Violations. 
Violations hereof shall be subject to the fines and penalties set forth in Chapter 1 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fredericksburg. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 5.2, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-243. - Remedies cumulative. 
The remedies afforded City under this Ordinance are in addition to any civil or criminal penalties otherwise provided or available to the City including, without limitation, the right to suspend or terminate Permittee's or such Person's permit or rights to install or operate its Facilities within the City's Public Rights-of-Way and to seek specific performance of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 5.3, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-244. - Ratification. 
No act or failure to act by City with respect to an unauthorized use shall be considered to be ratification, licensing, or permitting of the unauthorized use, irrespective of any otherwise applicable doctrine of waiver or laches. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 5.4, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-245. - Termination of permit. 
The permit granted Permittee under this Ordinance shall be suspended or shall terminate upon any of the following events or conditions: 
(1)  Permittee has not completed all necessary work and installation of its Facilities within 120 days of approval of Permittee's Application (or such longer period as the City may approve in writing); 
(2)  Permittee removes its Facilities other than in the course of routine maintenance or replacement; 
(3)  Permittee ceases to offer services, or provides services unlawfully, through its Facilities; 
(4)  Permittee fails to comply with this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 5.5, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-246. - Failure to remove attachments. 
If Permittee, or any Person using the City's Public Rights-of-Way, has not removed all its Facilities within the period of time specified in the preceding paragraph, or such additional period of time granted by City in writing, then City may remove Permittee's or such Person's Facilities at Permittee's or such Person's sole cost and risk. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 5.6, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-247. - Contractors and subcontractors. 
Without affecting the legal relationship between Permittee and its contractors, a Permittee is responsible for the workmanship and any damages by a contractor or subcontractor. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 5.7, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-248. - Right of suspension. 
If Permittee, or any Person using the City's Public Rights-of-Way, fails to timely perform any material obligation under this Ordinance, and such default continues for 30 days after the date the performance is due, then, in addition to any other available right or remedy, City may, upon written notice to Permittee or such Person, immediately suspend Permittee's or such Person's rights under this Ordinance until such time as the default is cured. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 5.8, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-249. - No warranties by city. 
Permittee, or any Person using the City's Public Rights-of-Way, is expected to inspect the City's Public Rights-of-Way in which its Facilities will be placed and shall rely solely on such inspection to determine the suitability of the Public Rights-of-Way for Permittee's or any Person's purposes. City does not make, and hereby expressly disclaims, any express or implied warranties concerning any facilities, including without limitation the warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. Permittee accepts the use of all rights-of-way as is-where is, and with all faults, except as may be otherwise provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 5.9, 9-2-2014)  
Sec. 35-250. - Indemnification. 
(a)  As to certificated telecommunications providers: The indemnity provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 283.057(a) and (b), apply to certificated telecommunications providers. "Municipality" shall mean the "City". "Parties" shall mean the City and the certificate telecommunications provider. 
(b)  As to cable service providers and video service providers: The indemnity provisions of V.T.C.A., Utilities Code §§ 66.012(a) and (b), apply to cable service providers and video service providers. "Municipality" shall mean the "City". "Holder of state-issued certificate of franchise authority" shall mean a cable service provider or a video service provider. "Parties" shall mean and refer to the City and cable service provider or cable video service provider, as applicable. 
(c)  As to network providers: Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.302, the indemnification provisions of V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 283.057(a) and (b), apply. "Municipality" shall mean the "City". "Certificated telecommunications provider" shall be revised to mean a "network provider". "Parties" shall mean the City and the network provider. 
(d)  As to electric and gas franchises existing on the effective date of this ordinance: The indemnity provisions of the franchise ordinance applicable to each apply. 
(e)  As to other permittees: Permittee shall, at its sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless City, its officers, boards, commissions, councils, employees, volunteers, agents, attorneys, contractors, and subcontractors, (City and such other persons and entities being collectively referred to herein as "indemnitees"), from and against: 
(1)  Any and all liabilities, obligations, damages, penalties, claims, liens, costs, charges, losses and expenses (including, without limitation, reasonable fees and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses and consultants), which may be imposed upon, incurred by or be asserted against the indemnitees by reason of any act or omission of permittee, its personnel, employees, agents, contractors, subcontractors or affiliates, resulting in economic harm, personal injury, bodily injury, sickness, disease or death to any person or damage to, loss of or destruction of tangible or intangible property, libel, slander, invasion of privacy and unauthorized use of any trademark, trade name, copyright, patent, service mark or any other right of any person, firm or corporation, which may arise out of or be in any way connected with the construction, reconstruction, installation, operation, maintenance or condition of permittee's facilities or other property of permittee or its affiliates and any other facilities authorized by or permitted under this ordinance; or the failure to comply with any federal, state or local statute, law, code, ordinance or regulation. 
(2)  Any and all liabilities, obligations, damages, penalties, claims, liens, costs, charges, losses and expenses (including, without limitation, reasonable fees and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses and other consultants), which are imposed upon, incurred by or asserted against the indemnitees by reason of any claim or lien arising out of work, labor, materials or supplies provided or supplied to permittee, its contractors or subcontractors, for the installation, construction, reconstruction, operation or maintenance of permittee's facilities (and any other facilities authorized by or permitted under this ordinance) or provision of communications services or other services authorized by or permitted under this ordinance, and, upon the written request of City, permittee shall cause such claim or lien covering City's property to be discharged or bonded within 30 days following such request. 
(3)  Any and all liabilities, obligations, damages, penalties, claims, liens, costs, charges, losses and expenses (including, without limitation, reasonable fees and expenses of attorneys, expert witnesses and consultants), which may be imposed upon, incurred by or be asserted against the indemnitees by reason of any financing or securities offering by permittee or its affiliates for violations of the common law or any laws, statutes, or regulations of the state of Texas or the United States, including those of the federal securities and exchange commission, whether by permittee or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 5.10, 9-2-2014; Ord. No. 27-011, § 2, 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 35-251. - City fault. 
It is the express intent of the parties that the foregoing indemnity is to protect and indemnify City against the consequences of its own fault where the City's fault is a concurrent cause of the indemnified liability. 
(Ord. No. 24-109, § 5.11, 9-2-2014)  
Chapter 36 - SPECIAL EVENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-26, § 1, adopted Aug. 3, 2019, amended Ch. 36 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 36, §§ 36-1—36-12, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 24-008, adopted June 15, 2014. 
Editor's note— Section 6 of Ord. No. 2019-26, adopted Aug. 3, 2019, provides an effective date of Jan. 1, 2020. 
 
Sec. 36-1. - Definitions. 
Applicant means a person or entity who intends to hold a Special Event. An agent of an Applicant may prepare and submit the documentation required hereunder with proper authority submitted along with the Special Event Application. The Applicant, along with and in addition to anyone else who violated the provisions hereof, shall be a responsible party under the provisions hereof, and will be subject to fines and punishment for violations and/or for violations of the terms of this Chapter. 
Application or Special Event Application means a written submission to the City, on forms promulgated by the City, containing information about a proposed Special Event. 
City means the City of Fredericksburg, Texas, acting through its City Manager. 
City Manager means the City Manager of the City of Fredericksburg or his or her designee which may include one or more persons or a committee. 
City Owned Property means any property in the City designated as a park, playground, recreational facility, swimming pool or hike and bike path, or other City-owned property, including streets, and shall include buildings, parking lots and driveways in such areas. 
First Amendment Activity means all expressive and associative activity on public streets that is protected by the United States and Texas Constitutions, including speech, press, assembly and the right to petition. 
First Amendment Event means an event where the sole or principal object is First Amendment Activity. 
Parade means any assembly, march, demonstration or procession upon public streets within the City including persons, animals, or vehicles that is reasonably likely to interfere with the normal flow or regulation of traffic. 
Seasonal Special Event means an event that occurs in a specific season and is scheduled throughout the season on non-sequential days, and may use a single Special Event Permit. 
Special Event means a temporary event, gathering or activity, including but not limited to parades, bike races, marathons, walk-a-thons, fireworks displays, concerts, carnivals other types of races and festivals, First Amendment Events, and Seasonal Special Events which involve one or more of the following activities: 
(1)  Closing or partial closing of a public street; 
(2)  Blocking or restricting City-owned property; 
(3)  An event, gathering, or activity held on City-Owned property, that is open or advertised to the general public; 
(4)  Sale of merchandise, food or beverages on City-owned property; 
(5)  Erection of a tent equal to or greater than 200 square feet in area on City-owned property; 
(6)  Installation of a stage, band-shell, trailer, van, grandstand, bleachers or other portable building or structure on City-owned property; 
(7)  Placement of portable toilets on City-owned property; 
(8)  Private event, gathering, or activity held on City-Owned property, reasonably expected to have attendance of 300 or more people, per day; 
(9)  Placement of temporary no-parking signs in a public right-of-way or on City-owned property; or 
(10)  Placement of pedestrian boundary markers on City-owned property. 
Special Event Permit means written authorization from the City Manager to hold a Special Event. 
Special Event Rules and Regulations means the guidelines, rules, regulations, policies and procedures developed pursuant to this Chapter 36. Special Event Rules and Regulations may include, but are not limited to, the following: processes; procedures; cost recovery for City provided services; safety regulations; resource requirements; and surety and insurance requirements. Special Events must additionally adhere to the Special Events Planning Guide adopted by the City, and all other relevant City Ordinances and local, state, or Federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2019-26, § 1, 9-3-2019)  
Sec. 36-2. - Application required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to hold a Special Event, sponsor a Special Event, or cause a Special Event to be held, without first having submitted an Application. 
(b)  An Application is not required for: 
(1)  events conducted entirely on the property of a religious institution, educational institution, college, or university campus. City, State or Federal streets or parking lots for multi-tenant buildings, regardless of location, shall not be considered part of a religious institution, educational institution, or college or university campus; 
(2)  events on property owned or controlled by the City subject to a contract, lease or management/operating agreement with a person or entity where the agreement addresses events on the property or the event is included within the permitted uses in the agreement; 
(3)  processions of vehicles operated in compliance with traffic laws or a procession of pedestrians excluding organized walks, runs, parades and the like, in compliance with traffic laws along or upon public sidewalks, public parks, or private property; 
(4)  events held for National Night Out; 
(5)  funerals and funeral processions; 
(6)  First Amendment Activity conducted entirely on sidewalks, in public parks or on private property in compliance with traffic laws and any other applicable City Ordinances (for example, handbills, placing property in rights-of-way, health laws etc.); 
(7)  events conducted under the supervision of or with the permission of a governmental entity on property owned, leased, or operated by a governmental entity other than the City; or 
(8)  Private events, gatherings, or activities with anticipated attendance of less than 300 people, per day. 
(Ord. No. 2019-26, § 1, 9-3-2019)  
Sec. 36-3. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to hold a Special Event, sponsor a Special Event, or cause a Special Event to be held, without first having obtained a Special Event Permit from the City. 
(b)  No Special Event Permit shall be denied nor shall the Applicant be given less favorable consideration as to time, manner, or place based upon: 
(1)  race, color, creed, religion, gender, domestic relationship status, parental status, sexual orientation, transgender, gender identity or gender expression, national origin, political affiliation or any other prohibited characteristic of the Applicant and/or the participants of the Special Event; or 
(2)  the message of the Special Event, or the identity or associational relationships of the Applicant and/or participants; or 
(3)  any assumption or predictions as to the amount of hostility which may be aroused in the public by the content of speech or message conveyed by the Special Event, provided that reasonable accommodation as to time, manner, and place may be required in order for the City to provide the resources necessary for police, fire and emergency services to preserve and protect public health, safety and welfare. 
(c)  A permit will be issued by the city manager based upon the information submitted in the application. The city manager may reasonably interpret the information in the application, and may consider past experience with the type of event and inaccuracies or omissions in the application. 
(Ord. No. 2019-26, § 1, 9-3-2019)  
Sec. 36-4. - Contents of Special Event Application. 
(a)  An Applicant shall file a Special Event Application with the City upon forms promulgated by the City. 
(b)  The Special Event Application shall set forth as a minimum the following information, and shall additionally be supplemented at the request of the City, with any information which cannot be known at the time of initial submission of the Application or which is determined by City to be incomplete: 
(1)  the name of the Special Event; 
(2)  the name, address and telephone numbers of the Applicant and the Sponsor or Promoter if different from Applicant along with proper authority if applicable; 
(3)  the proposed location(s) and address(es) for the Special Event; 
(4)  a description of the activities of the Special Event; 
(5)  the date(s) and time(s) the Special Event will start and terminate; 
(6)  the time at which on-site activities in preparation for the Special Event will begin; 
(7)  any transportation plan, traffic plan, parking plan, or street closure requested for the Special Event; 
(8)  whether access to any City property will be blocked; 
(9)  whether merchandise, food or beverages will be sold, and details regarding food service including planning cooking; 
(10)  details regarding alcohol sales or serving, if any; 
(11)  the location and sizes of tents, awnings, canopies, food service booths, or other temporary structures shall be shown on a map, if any; 
(12)  general description of any temporary structures, toilets, signs, trailers or boundary markers to be placed, if any; 
(13)  details for planned amusement rides, including proof of general liability insurance with the City named as an additional insured; 
(14)  estimated number of persons who are expected to attend, per day, for the duration of Special Event; 
(15)  the number and types of animals and vehicles that are part of the Special Event. The Applicant is responsible for updating this information prior to the event, and the City requirements may be amended as a result of an increase or decrease in the number of animals and/or vehicles expected to attend. The minimum will be the number of advance registrations; 
(16)  details of all signs that are part of the Special Event, if any, including the location shown on a map and sizes of signs; 
(17)  the location and orientation of loud speakers and any other amplification devices shall be shown on a map; 
(18)  map(s) showing streets and pedestrian ways that are impacted as well as site setup showing ingress and egress for pedestrians and vehicles and all equipment and barriers that will be used in connection with the Special Event; 
(19)  for parades, races, rides and runs: a route map, approximate number of participants and type of participants (example for parades: animals, floats, etc.), and proof that all property owners adjacent to the route have been notified of the route, date and duration, or the date property owners will be notified. Such notice to property owners shall not be given earlier than one month prior to Special Event, or later than two weeks prior to Special Event; 
(20)  insurance certificate for the Special Event showing the City as a certificate holder and as an additional insured in the amounts set forth in the Special Events Planning Guide as promulgated by the City Manager; 
(21)  the date and time when clean-up of the property utilized by the Special Event will be complete; and 
(22)  any other information which the City Manager finds is reasonably necessary for the issuance of a Special Event Permit. 
(c)  The Applicant is responsible for updating the Special Event Application information prior to the event as necessary, and the City requirements may be amended as a result of an increase or decrease in the number of persons expected to attend or other change in circumstances. The minimum attendance will be determined by the number of advance sales or registrations for the event. 
(d)  Within 30 days following the submission of the Special Event Application, the City Manager shall notify the Applicant of any supplemental information requested, using the contact information on the Application. 
(Ord. No. 2019-26, § 1, 9-3-2019)  
Sec. 36-5. - Complete Application for permit required. 
A Special Event Permit shall not be issued until a completed Special Event Application, together with any additional information requested, proof of insurance, and payments of all applicable fees, if any, are received by the City. 
The Special Event Application must demonstrate compliance with this ordinance, the Special Event Rules and Regulations, the Special Events Planning Guide, and all other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 2019-26, § 1, 9-3-2019)  
Sec. 36-6. - Fees and costs. 
(a)  The fee for a Special Events Permit will be found in Appendix A of this Code of Ordinances in the event the same are enacted. 
(b)  Applicant shall pay all required fees, including site rental, with the Special Event Permit Application, and Applicant shall at the same time be required to pay all fees and costs required by other City ordinances to conduct specific activities in conjunction with or as part of a Special Event. 
(c)  If the City determines that a Special Event may require the special attention and involvement of City personnel or City facilities, the City shall notify the Applicant. Prior to issuance of a Special Event Permit: 
(1)  Applicant and City shall agree upon the additional costs the City will incur as a result of the Special Event and Applicant shall pay those costs to the City; and 
(2)  Applicant shall agree in writing to pay any additional costs to the City incurred as a result of the Special Event within five days of the date upon which the City informs the Applicant of the amount of such additional costs, but in no event less than seven business days prior to the event. 
(d)  No Special Event Permit Fee shall be charged for a First Amendment Event. An Applicant for a Special Event Permit shall pay fees for street closures to conduct specific activities in conjunction with or as part of a First Amendment Event, but the amount of the fees shall not be in excess of the City's cost to close the street(s) for traffic control. 
(e)  Special Event Permits may be canceled by the Applicant, in writing. The first day rental fee for all events which reserve an entire park or Marktplatz will not be refunded if the City receives written notice of cancelation less than 30 days prior to the event. Subject to the foregoing sentence, if an event does not occur, fees paid in advance for City services which have not already been performed by City shall be refunded. No refund of security deposits, reservation fees, pavilion fees, or other fees will be granted due to inclement weather, unless the cancellation is a decision made by the City. 
(Ord. No. 2019-26, § 1, 9-3-2019)  
Sec. 36-7. - Timeframes and deadlines. 
(a)  A Special Event Application must be filed no earlier than 365 calendar days before the commencement of the proposed Special Event, and no later than 60 calendar days before the commencement of the proposed Special Event. The City Manager may consider an Application that is filed less than 60 calendar days before the commencement of the proposed Special Event, if the Applicant could not have met the deadline because the event had not been planned for more than 60 days, the event will not place an undue burden on the City staff or resources, and all applicable expedited application fees are paid. 
(b)  The City may issue a Special Event Permit for a First Amendment Event when the Special Event Application is filed less than 60 calendar days before the commencement of the First Amendment Event, if the event had not been planned for more than 60 calendar days, and provided there is adequate time for the City to process the Application and to assure that there are adequate traffic measures in place for the orderly movement of the First Amendment Event participants and traffic. The City and the Applicant shall communicate with the police department and fire department prior to the First Amendment Event. 
(c)  When a timeframe or deadline established in this Chapter 36 results in an Application or other information being due on a weekend or a day the City is closed for business, the Application or other information shall be due on the first business day immediately following said weekend or day the City is closed for business. 
(Ord. No. 2019-26, § 1, 9-3-2019)  
Sec. 36-8. - Application process and review. 
The Special Event Permit Application will be processed and reviewed pursuant to the Special Events Rules and Regulations and the Special Events Planning Guide, which shall be promulgated by the City Manager based on health and safety concerns, the reasonable availability of City resources which may be required, and on other applicable City Ordinances or Code provisions. 
(Ord. No. 2019-26, § 1, 9-3-2019)  
Sec. 36-9. - Standards/requirements for issuance of special event permit. 
(a)  A Special Event Permit will be issued only if the City Manager finds that the following requirements, as applicable to the Special Event, have been met or that adequate provision therefor will be made: 
(1)  requirements of City Ordinances/Code provisions and of the State and Federal Governments are met; 
(2)  the Special Event will not unnecessarily interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic near its location or route; 
(3)  the Special Event will not require the diversion of a number of police officers to properly police the Special Event locale or movement of a procession or parade along the route and the adjacent areas which will significantly impair adequate police protection for the City as a whole; 
(4)  the concentration of people, animals, and vehicles at assembly points will not significantly impair proper fire and police protection or ambulance service to areas at or near such assembly points or the City or County as a whole; 
(5)  a Parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination without unreasonable delays in route; 
(6)  all licenses and permits, restrictions, regulations, fees for the City services, if any, safeguards or conditions as set forth in any Special Event Rules and Regulations as promulgated by the City Manager have been submitted, and approved; and 
(7)  successful completion of all required pre-event inspections. 
(b)  The City Manager is authorized to interpret the requirements in Section 36-9(a), and has the authority to modify the same, to fit individual circumstances where the standard cannot be strictly met, is inapplicable to the specific Special Event, or if additional modifications are deemed necessary by individual City departments for the safe and orderly conduct of a Special Event. The City Manager is further authorized to require an Applicant to institute other safeguards or activities to protect the safety of the public from circumstances which may arise from a specific Special Event. 
(c)  It is understood that no Applicant is assured the ability to close a street. All street closures are subject to approval by, and authorization from, the City Council or the Chief of Police, as set forth in the City's Code of Ordinances and applicable City policy. 
(Ord. No. 2019-26, § 1, 9-3-2019)  
Sec. 36-10. - Denial or revocation of a permit. 
(a)  The City Manager shall deny issuance of a Special Event Permit if: 
(1)  The Special Event will conflict in time or location with another Special Event or event for which an Application has been submitted or approved prior to the one subsequently requested; 
(2)  The Special Event, if held, would violate the Special Event Rules and Regulations, the Special Event Planning Guide, any City ordinance or any other applicable law; 
(3)  The City manager determines that there is a false or misleading statement or omission of material fact on a Special Event Application, and the same is not corrected within the time for submission of an application; 
(4)  The Applicant has violated this ordinance or has had a Special Event Permit revoked within the preceding 12 months; 
(5)  The Applicant fails to provide proof of a license or permit required by any City ordinance or other applicable law for the Special Event; 
(6)  The Applicant fails to provide proof that the insurance requirements for the Special Event have been met; or 
(7)  The Special Event would significantly impair the delivery of normal or emergency public services or constitutes a public health or safety threat. 
(b)  If the City Manager determines that the Special Event Permit shall be denied, the City Manager shall consider alternatives to the time, place or manner of the Special Event that would allow the Special Event to occur. 
(c)  Revocation of a Special Event Permit: 
(1)  If the Police Chief, Fire Marshal, Emergency Services Director, Health Department Director or Sanitarian, Building Official, Code Enforcement Officer, or Director of Parks and Recreation (known collectively as "City Official"), or their designee, finds that any of the provisions of this ordinance, another City ordinance, Special Event Rule or Regulation, Special Event Planning Guide, or other applicable law is being violated, he or she shall immediately notify the City Manager and based on that information, the City Manager shall attempt to solve the issue at hand and if it cannot be resolved, the City Manager will determine whether the Special Event Permit shall be revoked. Notice and an opportunity to be heard by the City Manager shall be given to the Applicant prior to revocation if reasonably possible and if the cause for revocation does not involve an imminent threat to the health and safety of any individual or property. If revoked, the Special Event shall immediately terminate and cease activity upon notification to the Applicant. Failure to terminate the activity following revocation of said permit shall constitute a separate offense. 
(2)  When, in the judgment of any of the above designated City Official, a violation exists which requires immediate abatement, and the Applicant does not abate the violation immediately upon notice from said City Official, the City Official shall have authority to revoke a Special Event Permit in the absence or unavailability of the City Manager. If revoked, the Special Event shall immediately terminate and cease activity upon notification to the Applicant. 
(3)  The City Manager, or other City Official in the absence of the City Manager as described above, may revoke a permit wherein a material false or misleading statement or omission of material fact on a Special Event Application is discovered after the Special Event Permit was issued, so that the terms of the permit would require significant revision or if the scope of the Special Event has so changed that the terms of the original permit require significant revision which presents an unreasonable burden on the City resources. 
(Ord. No. 2019-26, § 1, 9-3-2019)  
Sec. 36-11. - Appeal. 
(a)  If the City Manager denies the issuance of a Special Event Permit, or revokes an issued Special Event Permit, the Applicant shall promptly be notified in writing. Such written notice shall include the reasons for the decision to deny or revoke the Special Event Permit. The Applicant may appeal the denial or revocation to the City Council which shall make a ruling on the appeal, if time permits prior to the event. The City Council shall not be required to call a special meeting to accommodate an appeal. 
(b)  If a City Official other than the City Manager revokes an issued Special Events Permit, the Applicant shall promptly be notified in writing. Such written notice shall include the reasons for the decision to deny or revoke the Special Event Permit. The Applicant may appeal the denial or revocation to the City Manager which shall make a ruling on the appeal and attempt to resolve the issue if time permits prior to the event. If no resolution can be made, the Applicant may appeal the revocation to the City Council which shall make a ruling on the appeal if time permits prior to the event. The City Council shall not be required to call a special meeting to accommodate an appeal. 
(c)  If a Special Event Permit is revoked the event shall cease. No fees, whether they are application fees, or fees paid for City services shall be refunded if a Special Event Permit is revoked. The City shall not be liable for any costs or damages associated with denial of or revocation of a Special Events Permit. 
(Ord. No. 2019-26, § 1, 9-3-2019)  
Chapter 38 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Subdivision Ordinance, as adopted by the city council in Ord. No. 24-001, on March 3, 2014. See Code Comparative Table for detailed inclusion of said provisions. Amendments to the Subdivision Ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The ordinance has been set out in this Code as adopted, except that obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Municipal regulation of subdivision and property development, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.001 et seq.; minimum requirements for subdivisions, 31 Tex. Admin. Code § 364.91. 
 
Section 1. - General Provisions 
 
1.01. - Title 
This Ordinance and subsequent regulations of the city of Fredericksburg, Texas shall be known as, and may be cited and referred to as, the "Subdivision Ordinance".  
1.02. - Authority 
This Subdivision Ordinance and subdivision regulations are adopted pursuant to the authority granted by the U.S. Constitution, the Texas Constitution, and the laws of the State of Texas, specifically including Chapter 212 of the Texas Local Government Code.  
1.03. - Purpose 
These regulations shall be administered so as to achieve the following specific purposes: 
A.  Specific Purposes of the Subdivision Regulations 
1.  Promote the health, safety and general welfare of the community within the city limits and Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ); 
2.  Establish orderly policies and procedures to guide development of the City and ETJ; 
3.  Provide for the establishment of minimum specifications for construction and engineering design criteria for public infrastructure reduce inconveniences to residents of the area, and to reduce related unnecessary costs to the City for correction of inadequate facilities that are designed to serve the public; 
4.  Ensure that development of land and subdivisions shall be of such nature, shape and location that utilization will not impair the general welfare; 
5.  Protect against the dangers of fires, floods, erosion, landslides, or other such menaces; 
6.  Coordinate new development realistically and harmoniously with existing development; 
7.  Protect and conserve the value of land throughout the City; 
8.  Provide the most beneficial circulation of vehicle and pedestrian traffic throughout the City, and to provide for the proper location and width of streets; 
9.  Establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for the development and redevelopment, provide for the orderly layout and use of land; 
10.  Ensure proper legal descriptions and documentation of subdivided land; 
11.  Ensure public facilities with sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision are available for every building site, and to provide public facilities for future development; 
12.  Ensure the adequacy of drainage facilities; and encourage the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the City in order to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the community; 
13.  Preserve the topography of the City and ensure appropriate development with regard to natural features; 
14.  Ensure that new development adequately and fairly participates in the dedication and construction of Public Improvements and infrastructure that are necessitated by or attributable to the development; and 
15.  Address other needs necessary for ensuring the creation and continuance of a healthy, attractive, safe and efficient community that provides for the conservation, enhancement and protection of its human and natural resources.  
1.04. - Applicability 
A.  General 
1.  It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City to consider the subdivision and development of land as subject to the control of the City in order to carry out the purpose of the Comprehensive Plan, and to promote the orderly, planned, efficient and economical development of the City. 
2.  All property not subdivided into lots, blocks, and streets, or property to be re-subdivided, or where a Development Plat is required shall hereafter be laid out subject to the approval of the City as outlined within this Subdivision Ordinance, and no other subdivision will be recognized by the City. 
B.  Subdivision and Development of Land Policies 
1.  Land shall not be subdivided or developed until proper provision has been made for drainage, water, wastewater, transportation and other facilities required by these regulations. 
2.  All public and private facilities and improvements shall be of at least the capacity necessary to adequately serve the development and shall conform to and be properly related to the Comprehensive Plan and the Standard Details and Specification for Public Infrastructure Construction Manual (Standard Details Manual). 
3.  These regulations shall supplement, and facilitate the enforcement of, provisions and standards contained in the Zoning Regulations and building codes adopted by the City where applicable. 
C.  Requirement to Plat 
Platting is required for the following purposes: 
1.  To create a building site on a single lot or tract; 
2.  To construct or enlarge any exterior dimension of any building, structure, or improvement on land without an existing Plat, in association with a City building permit Application. 
3.  To subdivide land to divide a lot or tract into two or more parcels; 
4.  To combine lots or tracts; 
5.  To amend a Plat; or 
6.  To correct errors on an approved and recorded Plat. 
D.  Plat Required 
1.  Subdivision Plats Required under LGC 212 Subchapter A (i.e., All plats except Development Plats) 
a.  In accordance with Texas Local Government Code (LGC) Section 212.004, the owner of a tract of land located within the city limits or in the Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) who divides the tract in two (2) or more parts to lay out a subdivision of the tract, including an addition to a municipality, to lay out suburban, building, or other lots, or to lay out streets, alleys, squares, parks, or other parts of the tract intended to be dedicated to public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent to the streets, alleys, squares, parks, or other parts must have a Plat of the subdivision prepared. 
b.  A division of a tract under this subsection includes a division regardless of whether it is made by using a metes and bounds description in a deed of conveyance or in a contract for a deed, by using a contract of sale or other executory contract to convey, or by using any other method. 
c.  A division of land under this subsection does not include a division of land into parts greater than five (5) acres, where each part has access to a public road or Right-of-Way and no Public Improvement is required. 
2.  Development Plats Required under LGC 212 Subchapter B (i.e., Development Plats only) 
a.  Any person who proposes the development (i.e., any new construction or the enlargement of any exterior dimension of any building, structure, or improvement) of a tract of land located within the limits of the City shall have a Development Plat of the tract prepared in accordance with LGC 212 Subchapter B and this Subdivision Ordinance. (See Section 4.10 Development Plat of this Ordinance for requirements for Development Plats.) 
b.  Whenever a property owner proposes to divide land within the City or its Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) into two (2) or more tracts, and claims exemption from LGC 212 Subchapter A for purposes of development, that results in parcels or lots all greater than five (5) acres in size, a Development Plat shall be required. 
c.  In the event that development of any tract of land is intended, and where no Public Improvement is required, the Applicant shall first obtain approval of a Development Plat. 
d.  No Development Plat is required, when the land has an approved Final Plat, Minor Plat, Replat, or Amending Plat. 
E.  Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) 
1.  Subdivision Regulations Extend into the ETJ 
Subdivision Regulations as they now exist or may hereafter be amended, are hereby extended to all of the area lying within the Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) of the City and the rules and regulations within said Subdivision Regulations governing Plats and Subdivision of land shall be applicable to such area within said ETJ from and after the date of final passage of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
2.  Subdividing 
No person shall subdivide or plat any tract of land within the ETJ of the City except in conformance with the provisions of these Subdivision Regulations. 
F.  Exemptions to the Requirement to Plat 
The following are exemptions to the platting requirements in 1.04.C: 
1.  Use of existing cemeteries complying with all State and local laws and regulations; and 
2.  Dedication of an easement or Right-of-Way by a separate document recordable in the county records if approved by the City.  
1.05. - Documents Comprising Subdivision Rules 
The provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance, the standards governing constructed facilities applicable to Plats in other portions of the City's Code of Ordinances, and the technical standards contained in the Standard Details and Specification for Public Infrastructure Construction Manual constitute the subdivision rules of the City, which apply to Applications for Plat approval.  
1.06. - Compliance Required with City Plans and Ordinances 
Compliance with all City ordinances pertaining to the subdivision and development of land, and the Comprehensive Plan (where applicable), shall be required prior to approval of any Application pursuant to this Subdivision Ordinance. All such ordinances and the Comprehensive Plan shall be construed to mean those documents as they exist or may be amended. It is the property owner's responsibility to be familiar with, and to comply with, City ordinances, the Comprehensive Plan, and the provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
A.  Applicable City Codes, Ordinances, and Plans 
Applicable City codes, ordinances, and plans with which all Applications must comply include, but are not limited to, the following. 
1.  Comprehensive Plan (including all associated maps and plans); 
2.  Zoning Ordinance; 
3.  Parks or Trails Master Plans or Ordinances; 
4.  Building Codes; 
5.  Drainage System Design Requirements; 
6.  International Fire Code; 
7.  Engineering Documents including the Standard Details and Specification for Public Infrastructure Construction Manual and other development-related engineering standards; 
8.  Storm Water Quality and Land Disturbance Requirements; 
9.  Other Applicable portions of the City's Code of Ordinances; and 
10.  Federal, State, and local environmental regulations, provided however that the City shall not be liable for the non-enforcement of the same.  
1.07. - Public Improvements Required 
A.  Subdivider's Responsibility 
1.  The subdivider shall furnish, install and/or construct the Public Improvements (water and wastewater systems and the street and drainage facilities) necessary for the proper development of the subdivision. 
2.  All such facilities shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the City's Standard Details and Specification for Public Infrastructure Construction Manual, and any other standards, specifications, and drawings as may be hereafter adopted, approved by the City Council and placed on file in the office of the City Secretary. 
B.  Facilities Sizing 
1.  Where considered necessary by the Director of Public Works and Utilities, and/or as recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission or shown on the Comprehensive Plan, the facilities shall be sized in excess of that dictated by this Subdivision Ordinance or the Standard Details and Specification for Public Infrastructure Construction Manual to provide for future growth and expansion. 
2.  The City Council shall establish policies whereby the City may participate in the difference in cost of the facility as sized in the Comprehensive Plan and the cost of the facility as sized per the requirements of this Subdivision Ordinance or the Standard Details and Specification for Public Infrastructure Construction Manual. 
C.  Performance Agreement 
1.  Cases that Require a Performance Agreement 
a.  The Subdivider shall be required to enter into a Performance Agreement with the City that shall govern the Subdivision if there are any public improvements, pro rata payments, escrow deposits or other future considerations, or variances are granted to this Subdivision Ordinance, or if the City participates in the cost of any public improvements, or if there are nonstandard development regulations. 
b.  This Performance Agreement shall be based upon the requirements of this Subdivision Ordinance, and shall provide the City with specific authority to complete the improvements required in the Performance Agreement in the event of failure by the developer, and to recover the full costs of such measures. 
2.  The Performance Agreement shall be a legally binding agreement between the City and the Subdivider and shall specify the individual and joint responsibilities of both the City and the Subdivider. 
3.  The Performance Agreement shall contain: 
a.  As appropriate, provisions for pro rata payments, City participation in community facilities, escrow deposits or other payments for future facilities, variances granted to this chapter, and other particular aspects of the proposed Subdivision; 
b.  Authority for the City to withhold building permits, put a hold on construction and inspections in the event of breach by the Subdivider; 
c.  For financial security; 
i.  Insurance requirements in accordance with the City's requirements for public works projects; and 
ii.  An indemnification clause by which the Subdivider shall agree to hold the City harmless against any claim arising out of the proposed Subdivision or any actions taken therein. 
4.  The Director of Public Works and Utilities may recommend Performance Agreements that the City Council may approve or the City Manager may approve on behalf of the City Council, as authorized by the City Council. In the event of a disagreement between the City staff and the Subdivider concerning stipulations of the Performance Agreement, the Subdivider may request City Council approval of alternative provisions.  
1.08. - General Plat Requirements 
A.  Development Application 
The City shall have the authority to prepare standard Development Applications that outline specific submission requirements. All submittals shall conform to the requirements within the appropriate Development Application. 
B.  Application Fees 
All Application fees shall be paid according to the Fee Schedule. 
C.  Zoning Regulations Requirements 
All requirements pertaining to lot size, yard size, dwelling size, lot coverage, height, parking, loading and screening contained in the current Zoning Regulations of the City shall be adhered to for development under this Subdivision Ordinance within the city limits. 
D.  Phased Development 
1.  The City may establish size limits and requirements for phased development. 
2.  Phased Developments shall coordinate with the surrounding land use plan and existing developments. 
3.  Each phase shall submit a Preliminary Plat and Final Plat. 
E.  Drainage 
If provisions are necessary for drainage facilities on the unplatted future phases of the development, then the Plat shall include separate instruments for (easements) off-site drainage needs and shall include appropriate notes and descriptions providing the City the appropriate permissions and approvals needed for access and for maintaining and improving the drainage system.  
1.09. - Special Provisions, Enforcement, and Violations 
A.  Provisions 
1.  Plat Filing Requirement 
a.  A Subdivision Plat shall not be filed or recorded until it has been approved by the City and all Public Improvements have been accepted by the City or otherwise provided for by a Performance Agreement, and any such actual recording shall be void unless such approval shall be endorsed on the face of the Plat as hereinafter provided. 
b.  The above paragraph 1.09.A.1.a shall not apply to a Minor Plat or an Amending Plat. 
2.  Wastewater (Sanitary Sewer) Collection System Requirement (Septic Tanks/OSSFs) 
a.  Applicability 
i.  Areas within the City Limits 
Septic tanks/On-Site Sewage Facilities (OSSFs) are not permitted in platted subdivisions within the city limits. All lots within the city limits must be connected to the city's wastewater collection system. 
ii.  Areas within the ETJ 
(a)  Any lot within 200' of existing or proposed wastewater lines shall connect to the City's facilities. 
(b)  Beyond 200' of existing or proposed wastewater lines, septic tanks may be used subject to the approval of a permit for a septic tank by Gillespie County. 
(c)  No septic system shall be installed upon any lots in said subdivision located within the ETJ of the City without first having obtained a permit from Gillespie County. 
b.  County Authorized to Review and Approve Septic Tanks in the ETJ 
i.  Approval 
The County of Gillespie is authorized to be the city's agent for design, installation and approval of septic systems within the ETJ. 
ii.  Variances to Septic Tank Standards 
Variances in the ETJ for septic systems are to be approved by the Gillespie County Commissioners Court and/or the Hill Country Underground Water Conservation District. 
c.  Septic Tanks Standards 
In order for a septic tank to be approved, the septic tank must comply with the Texas Administrative Code, (Title 30, Part 1, Chapter 285), On-Site Sewage Facilities and the current Gillespie County rules and regulations regarding private sewage facilities. 
d.  Review of subdivision or development plans (per Texas Administrative Code 285.4.(c)) 
Persons proposing residential subdivisions, manufactured housing communities, multi-unit residential developments, business parks, or other similar structures that use OSSFs for sewage disposal shall submit planning materials for these developments to the County and receive approval prior to submitting a Plat application. 
i.  The planning materials must be prepared by a professional engineer or professional sanitarian and must include: 
(a)  an overall site plan; 
(b)  a topographic map; 
(c)  a 100-year floodplain map; 
(d)  a soil survey; 
(e)  the locations of water wells; 
(f)  the locations of easements, as identified in Texas Administrative Code §285.91(10) (relating to tables); 
(g)  a comprehensive drainage plan; 
(h)  a complete report detailing the types of OSSFs to be considered and their compatibility with area-wide drainage and groundwater; and 
(i)  other requirements, including Edwards Aquifer requirements that are pertinent to the proposed OSSF. 
ii.  If the proposed development includes restaurants or buildings with food service establishments, the planning materials must show adequate land area for doubling the land needed for the treatment units. The designer may consider increasing the amount of land area for the treatment units beyond doubling the minimum required area. 
iii.  The permitting authority will either approve or deny the planning materials, in writing, within 45 days of receipt. 
e.  Lot Sizes Related to the use of Septic Tanks 
i.  The use of septic tanks in a subdivision has a bearing on the ultimate lot size. In determining the minimum lot size for platting purposes, size will be determined by the suitability of the soil to function without creating a nuisance or health hazard. The lot must address any standards adopted by the Hill Country Underground Water District and the Gillespie County Commissioners Court, or as may be amended. 
ii.  The minimum lot size is to be based on water availability as determined by the Hill Country Underground Water Conservation District (HCUWCD). 
3.  Final Plat or Development Plat Required for Building Permits or Certificates of Occupancy 
No building permit or certificates of occupancy shall be issued by the City for any structure on a lot in a Subdivision for which a Final Plat or Development Plat has not been approved and filed for record, nor for any structure on a lot within a Subdivision that the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. 
4.  Compliance with Standards Required 
The City shall not authorize any other person nor shall the City itself be required to repair, maintain, install or provide any streets or public utility services in any Subdivision for which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. 
5.  Dedications 
a.  Refusal or denial of a Plat by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be deemed a refusal by the City to accept the offered dedications shown thereon. 
b.  Approval of a Plat shall not impose any duty upon the City concerning the maintenance or improvement of any such dedicated parts until the proper authorities of the City have actually appropriated the same by final acceptance. 
c.  Any such dedication, before or after actual appropriation may be vacated by the Council in any manner provided by law. 
6.  Services Prohibited to Subdivision 
No person or entity including the City itself sell or supply any utility service such as water, gas, electricity, telephone, cable, communication or wastewater service within a Subdivision for which a Final Plat has not been approved or filed for record, nor in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. 
B.  Enforcement 
1.  Action in a Court 
On behalf of the City, the City Attorney may institute appropriate action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance or the standards referred to herein with respect to any violation thereof that occurs within any area subject to all or a part of the provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
2.  Abutting Owner or Lessee Action 
In addition thereto, any abutting owner or lessee or other person prejudicially affected by the violation of the terms of this Subdivision Ordinance may resort to any court of competent jurisdiction for any writ or writs, or to obtain such relief, either in law or equity, as may be deemed advisable in these premises, provided that the City shall not be a party to such actions. 
C.  Violations and Fines 
Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of the Subdivision Ordinance shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense, and any action seeking fines may allege a time span of violations and shall not be required to file a separate cause of action for each day of the same violation.  
1.10. - Summary of the General Subdivision Procedure 
Any owner or Developer of any lot, tract, or parcel of land located within the corporate limits of the City or within its Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) who wishes to subdivide such land shall conform to the following general procedures. Figure 1: Subdivision Procedure Summary details the general process of land subdivision. 
 
A.  General Procedures 
1.  Pre-Application Conference (Voluntary) 
2.  Preliminary Plat 
3.  Construction Plans 
4.  Construction of improvements 
5.  City acceptance of improvements (Letter of Final Acceptance) 
6.  Final Plat 
B.  Detailed Steps 
The detailed steps with each phase of the Subdivision development procedure are covered in this subsection, Section 4, Section 5, and Section 6.  
Section 2. - Development Review Bodies 
 
2.01. - City Council 
A.  Establishment 
The City's Code of Ordinances establishes the standards governing the City Council within the charter. 
B.  Responsibilities 
Table 1 is a summary of the City Council's responsibilities within the Subdivision Ordinance. 
Table 1: City Council Responsibilities 
4.04.J.4.b 	Consider an Appeal of the Commission's Decision on a Preliminary Plat Extension 
4.09.E 	Approving a Plat Vacation 
6.15.C 	Approving a Park Land Dedication 
7.01.C.1.b 	Approving an Appeal of a Minor Subdivision Waiver Decision 
7.01.C.2 	Approving a Major Subdivision Waiver 
7.02.C.3 	Approving a Subdivision Proportionality Appeal 
7.03.F.4 	Approving a Decision by City Council on a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition 
7.03.F.5 	Approving an Appeal to the Council of a Decision on Subdivision Vested Rights Petition 
  
2.02. - Planning and Zoning Commission 
A.  Establishment 
The City's Code of Ordinances establishes the standards governing the Planning and Zoning Commission within Article IX of the charter and Appendix B. 
B.  Responsibilities 
Table 2 is a summary of the Planning and Zoning Commission's responsibilities within the Subdivision Ordinance. 
Table 2: Planning and Zoning Commission Responsibilities 
4.04.J.4.a 	Consider an Appeal of the Director of Development Services' Decision on a Preliminary Plat Extension 
4.04.F 	Approving a Preliminary Plat 
4.05.H 	Approving a Final Plat 
4.06.H.1. 	Approving a Deferral to the Commission of a Minor Plat Decision 
4.07.G 	Approving a Replat 
4.10.I 	Approving a Development Plat 
4.07.G.2.b.i 	Approving a Deferral to the Commission of a Minor Replat Decision 
4.08.H.1 	Approving a Deferral to the Commission of an Amending Plat Decision 
7.01.C.1.b 	Recommending an Appeal of a Minor Subdivision Waiver Decision 
7.01.C.2.a 	Recommending a Major Subdivision Waiver 
7.03.F.3 	Approving a Decision by Commission on a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition 
  
2.03. - Director of Development Services 
A.  Responsibilities 
Table 3 is a summary of the Director of Development Services' responsibilities within the Subdivision Ordinance. 
Table 3: Director of Development Services Responsibilities 
Subdivision Related Responsibilities 
4.04.E 	Reviewing a Preliminary Plat 
4.05.G 	Reviewing a Final Plat 
4.06.G 	Approving a Minor Plat 
4.07.G 	Reviewing a Replat 
4.07.G.2.b 	Approving a Minor Replat 
4.08.G 	Approving an Amending Plat 
4.09.D 	Recommending a Plat Vacation 
4.10.I 	Reviewing a Development Plat 
6.15.C 	Reviewing a Park Land Dedication 
7.01.C.1 	Approving a Minor Subdivision Waiver (as applicable) 
7.03.F.2 	Approving a Decision by the Responsible Official on a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition 
  
2.04. -  Director of Public Works and Utilities 
A.  Responsibilities 
Table 4 is a summary of the Director of Public Works and Utilities' responsibilities within the Subdivision Ordinance. 
Table 4: Director of Public Works and Utilities Responsibilities 
Subdivision Related Responsibilities 
5.01 	Approving Construction Plans 
5.01 	Approving an Extension of Construction Plans beyond Expiration Date 
5.02 	Conducting a Pre-Construction Meeting 
5.03 	Approving a Construction Release 
5.05.C 	Approving Performance Agreements and Security for Completion 
5.06.A 	Approving Inspection of Public Improvements 
6.17.A.2 	Determining the Approved Means of Wastewater Collection and Treatment 
7.01.C.1 	Approving a Minor Subdivision Waiver (as applicable) 
7.02.C 	Recommending a Subdivision Proportionality Appeal 
7.03.F.2 	Approving a Decision by the Responsible Official on a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition 
  
2.05. - Development Review Committee 
A.  Establishment 
There is hereby created within and for the City a Development Review Committee (DRC) with the responsibilities as hereinafter set forth. 
B.  Purpose 
1.  The purpose of the DRC is to utilize the expertise of various City departments to review Plats to ensure that City regulations are met and to provide a recommendation for either approval or denial in a written report to the Director of Development Services. 
2.  At the discretion of the Director of Development Services, the DRC shall review Plats to ensure that City regulations are met and provide a recommendation for either approval or denial in a written report, on an as-needed basis. 
C.  Membership 
The DRC members may consist of at least one representative from the following City departments, as appointed by the City Manager. 
1.  Development Services Department 
2.  Public Works and Engineering Department 
3.  Fire Department 
4.  Parks and Recreation Department 
5.  Police Department 
6.  Any other department per the City Manager's discretion. 
D.  Term 
Members shall serve at the discretion of the City Manager. 
E.  Responsibilities 
The Director of Development Services shall be responsible for establishing meeting times, determining when the DRC has finished review of a Plat, and coordinating the DRC's written report. 
Table 5: Development Review Committee Responsibilities 
Subdivision Related Responsibilities 
4.04.E.2 	At the discretion of the Director of Development Services, review a Preliminary Plat 
4.05.G.2 	At the discretion of the Director of Development Services, review a Final Plat 
4.06.F.2 	At the discretion of the Director of Development Services, review a Minor Plat 
4.07.G.1 	At the discretion of the Director of Development Services, review a Replat 
4.07.G.2.b 	At the discretion of the Director of Development Services, review a Minor Replat 
4.08.F.2 	At the discretion of the Director of Development Services, review an Amending Plat 
4.09.D.2 	At the discretion of the Director of Development Services, review a Plat Vacation 
4.10.I 	At the discretion of the Director of Development Services, review a Development Plat 
  
2.06. - Summary of Approval Authority of Fundamental Applications 
Table 6: Summary of Approval Authority of Fundamental Applications 
Application Type 	City Council 	Planning and Zoning Commission 	Director of Development Services 	Director of Public Works and Utilities 	Development Review Committee 
Preliminary Plat 		Approve 	Review 		Review* 
Final Plat 		Approve 	Review 		Review* 
Minor Plat 			Approve 		Review* 
Deferral to the Commission of a Minor Plat Decision 		Approve 			
Replat 		Approve 	Review 		Review* 
Minor Replat 			Approve 		Review* 
Deferral to the Commission of a Minor Replat Decision 		Approve 			
Amending Plat 			Approve 		Review* 
Deferral to the Commission of an Amending Plat Decision 		Approve 			
Plat Vacation 	Approve 		Recommend 		Review* 
Development Plat 		Approve 	Review 		Review* 
Construction Plans 				Approve 	
Extension of Construction Plans beyond Expiration Date 				Approve 	
Pre-Construction Meeting 				Approve 	
Construction Release 				Approve 	
Performance Agreements and Security for Completion 	Approve** 			Review 	
Inspection of Public Improvements 				Approve 	
Park Land Dedication 	Approve 	Recommend* 	Review 		
Determining the Approved Means of Wastewater Collection and Treatment 				Approve 	
Minor Subdivision Waiver 
(As Applicable) 			Approve 	Approve 	
Appeal of a Minor Subdivision Waiver Decision 	Approve 	Recommend 			
Major Subdivision Waiver 	Approve 	Recommend 			
Subdivision Proportionality Appeal 	Approve 			Recommend 	
Decision by the Responsible Official on a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition (As Applicable) 			Approve 	Approve 	
Decision by Commission on a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition 		Approve 			
Decision by City Council on a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition 	Approve** 	Approve** 	Approve** 	Approve** 	
Appeal to the Council of a Decision on Subdivision Vested Rights Petition 	Approve 				
*Indicates possible review. 
** City Council may authorize the City Manager to approve. 
***Approval is based on the original Application and associated Decision-Maker for said Application. 
  
Section 3. - Application Submittal and Processing Procedures 
 
3.01. - General Application Processing 
A.  Initiation of Application 
1.  Initiation by Owner or Owner's Agent 
a.  Unless provided by this Subdivision Ordinance, any petition or Application may be initiated only by the property owner, owner of interest in the land, or by the owner's designated agent. 
b.  If the Applicant is a designated agent, the Application shall include a written statement from the property owner authorizing the agent to file the Application on the owner's behalf. 
c.  The Responsible Official may require submission of documents, such as an affidavit from the owner, to provide evidence of ownership or agency. 
2.  Initiation by City Manager 
The City Manager can initiate any Application authorized under this Subdivision Ordinance. 
B.  Waiver of Application Information 
The Responsible Official may initially waive the submission of any information in the Application and accompanying materials that are not necessary due to the scope and nature of the proposed activity. 
C.  Universal Application Contents 
1.  Application Forms Generally 
The City is hereby authorized to prepare Application Forms that include information requirements, checklists, architectural or engineering drawing sizes, Applicant contact information, and any other information necessary to show compliance with City codes. 
2.  Information for All Applications 
All Applications shall contain the following information and shall be signed stating that the Applicant believes the information contained therein is true to the best of his or her knowledge: 
a.  Identification of property owner and authorized agent; 
b.  Description of the property and the nature of the development that is the subject of the application; 
c.  Identification of all zoning classifications (inside the City only) for the property; 
d.  Identification of all pending legislative applications for the property; 
e.  Identification of decisions on all quasi-judicial or administrative Applications for the property that remain in effect; 
f.  Identification of all accompanying Applications; 
g.  Identification of all pending or accompanying requests for relief; 
h.  Demonstration of compliance with prior approved permits; 
i.  Application signed by the owner of an interest in the land subject to the Application, or the owner's designated agent; 
j.  Title search; and 
k.  Statement of indebtedness to the City. 
3.  All Application Forms are available from the Director of Development Services. 
D.  Application Forms 
The Director of Development Services shall create, manage, and update Application Forms for all Development Applications authorized under 3.01.C.1. 
E.  Application Fees 
1.  Every Application shall be accompanied by the prescribed fees set forth in the adopted Fee Schedule. 
2.  The prescribed fee shall not be refundable. 
3.  The Fee Schedule may be amended from time to time by the City Council. 
F.  Payment of all Indebtedness Attributable to the Subject Property 
1.  No Application shall be accepted or reviewed for completeness from a person who owes delinquent taxes, assessments, any fees, or is otherwise indebted to the City until the taxes, assessments, debts, or obligations shall have been first fully discharged by payment, or until an arrangement has been made for the payment of such debts or obligations. 
2.  It shall be the Applicant's responsibility to provide evidence or proof that all taxes, fees, etc. have been paid, or that other arrangements have been made for payment of said taxes, fees, etc. 
G.  Modification of Applications 
The Applicant may modify any complete Application following its Official Vesting Date and prior to the expiration of the period, if any, during which the City is required to act on the Application. 
1.  Modifications Requested by the City 
If the modification is for revisions requested by the City, and the modification is received at least five (5) business days prior to the time scheduled for decision on the Application, then the Application shall be decided within the period for decision prescribed by this Subdivision Ordinance. 
2.  Modifications not Requested by the City 
a.  In all other instances (e.g., when the Applicant chooses to submit a revised Application of his/her own accord because of a change in development decisions), submittal of a modified Application shall be treated as a new Application with regards to review time periods. 
b.  The extension of the time for deciding the Application shall commence on the date the modified Application is submitted. For Plat Applications, a modified Application shall be accompanied by a properly executed Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action. If a waiver is not signed, then the modified Application shall be denied and the original Application shall be decided within the period for decision prescribed by this Subdivision Ordinance. 
H.  Action by Responsible Official 
1.  Circulate and Compile Comments 
After the determination of completeness has been established, the Responsible Official shall circulate the Application to all other administrative officials and departments whose review is required for a decision on the Application and shall compile the comments and recommendations of the officials. 
2.  Decision Rendered, If Applicable 
The Responsible Official shall render a decision in the time prescribed for the applicable Application, if the official is the Decision-Maker for the Application. 
3.  Forward Application and Provide Notification 
a.  In cases where the Responsible Official is not the Decision-Maker, the Responsible Official shall forward the Application for review to any advisory board/commission and the final Decision-Maker, and shall prepare a report to such board or commission, or to the City Council, including the compilation of any comments and recommendations by other administrative officials. 
b.  The Responsible Official also shall prepare required notices and schedule the Application for decision within the time and in the manner required by this Subdivision Ordinance and as otherwise may be required by law. 
I.  Recommendation by Advisory Board/Commission 
Unless otherwise prescribed within this Subdivision Ordinance, an advisory board/commission that is required to offer a recommendation to the Decision-Maker shall recommend one of the following: 
1.  Recommend approval of the Application by the Decision-Maker; 
2.  Recommend approval of the Application with conditions; or 
3.  Recommend denial of the Application. 
J.  Action by the Decision-Maker 
1.  The Decision-Maker for the Application shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the Application within the time prescribed by this Subdivision Ordinance. 
2.  Unless otherwise prescribed by law or City Charter, where the Decision-Maker is a board, commission or the City Council, the Application shall be decided by majority vote of a quorum of the members of the board, commission or the City Council. 
K.  Conditions 
The initial or final Decision-Maker may attach such conditions to the approval of an Application as are reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with applicable requirements of this Subdivision Ordinance.  
3.02. - Pre-Application Conference 
A.  Purpose 
1.  The Pre-Application Conference is intended to allow for the exchange of non-binding information between the Applicant and City Staff to ensure that the Applicant is informed of pertinent City development regulations and processes. 
2.  The Pre-Application Conference provides an opportunity for the Applicant and City Staff to discuss major development considerations such as utilities, roadways, drainage concerns, Comprehensive Plan elements, specific neighborhood characteristics, and historic information. 
3.  This exchange of information is intended to promote an efficient and orderly review process. 
B.  Pre-Application Conference before the Submission of Plans and Applications 
1.  Prior to formal submittal of any required plan or Application, the Applicant is encouraged to consult with the Director of Development Services, the Director of Public Works and Utilities, the Building Official, and any other pertinent City Staff in order for the Applicant to become familiar with the City's development regulations and the development process. 
2.  At the Pre-Application Conference, the Applicant may be represented by his/her land planner, engineer, surveyor, or other qualified professional. 
3.  Pre-Application Conferences are encouraged for all Plat Applications, see Sections 4.04 through 4.10. 
C.  Vested Rights Waiver 
1.  The Pre-Application Conference is optional and allows for the exchange of information between the Applicant and City Staff. 
a.  It is not the intent of the Pre-Application Conference to bind either the Applicant or City Staff to items discussed at the meeting. 
b.  For consideration of a vested right to develop under previously adopted regulations, refer to 7.03 Subdivision Vested Rights Petition. 
2.  Based on the voluntary and non-binding nature of meeting, a Pre-Application Conference shall not commence or be held unless the property owner, or Applicant as an authorized agent of the property owner, signs a Vested Rights Waiver stating that no vested rights shall accrue from any discussion that occurs at the Pre-Application Conference. (Note: Vesting occurs on the Official Vesting Date.) 
a.  If the property owner does not sign a Vested Rights Waiver, no such conference shall be held, and the property owner or his/her representatives may proceed with his/her Application submittal as he/she so chooses. 
b.  A copy of the Vested Rights Waiver form shall be available in the office of the Director of Development Services.  
3.03. - Completeness and Expiration of Applications 
A.  Applicability 
The following procedures shall apply to any subdivision related plan or Application that is required by the City and is submitted in accordance with this Subdivision Ordinance. 
B.  Determination of Completeness for Subdivision Related Applications 
Every required Application shall be subject to a determination of completeness by the Responsible Official for processing the Application. 
1.  Acceptance Standards 
The Application shall only be accepted by the Responsible Official for processing when it is accompanied by all documents required by, and prepared in accordance with, the requirements of this Subdivision Ordinance. A typographical error shall not, by itself, constitute an incomplete Application. 
2.  Acceptance Procedures 
A determination of completeness of an Application shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedures: 
a.  A determination of completeness shall be made by the Responsible Official not later than the tenth (10 th ) business day, unless otherwise specified, after the Official Vesting Date. 
b.  If the submitted Application is incomplete, then the Applicant shall be notified in writing not later than the tenth (10 th ) business day after the Official Vesting Date. 
i.  Such notice shall be served by depositing it in the U.S. Postal Service, or by electronic mail transmission, before the tenth (10 th ) business day following submission of the Application. 
ii.  The notification shall specify the documents or other information needed to complete the Application, and shall state the date the Application will expire (see 3.03.E Expiration of a Subdivision Related Application - Before Approval Decision) if the documents or other information are not provided to the City. 
c.  An Application shall be deemed complete on the eleventh (11 th ) business day after the Application has been received if notice is not served in accordance with 3.03.B.2.b (above). 
d.  If the Application is determined to be complete, the Application shall be processed as prescribed by this Subdivision Ordinance. 
3.  Acceptance shall not Constitute Compliance 
A determination of completeness shall not constitute a determination of compliance with the substantive requirements of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
4.  Acceptance shall not Guarantee Approval 
There is no implied intent or guarantee that an accepted and completed Application will be approved, if after the Application is deemed complete, it is determined that the Application does not comply with this Subdivision Ordinance. 
C.  Re-Submittal after Notification of Incompleteness 
1.  If the Application is re-submitted after a notification of incompleteness, the Application shall be processed upon receipt of the re-submittal. 
2.  The statutory 30-day time frame for Plat approvals shall begin on the date of the re-submittal. 
3.  To the extent that the information or documents submitted is not sufficient to enable the Decision-Maker to apply the criteria for approval, the Application may be denied on such grounds. 
D.  Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action 
The Director of Development Services may approve a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action. 
1.  Request 
An Applicant may submit in writing a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action at any time prior to the Application's final decision. 
2.  Received 
a.  If the Applicant requests a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action, the Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action must be received by the Director of Development Services on or before the seventh (7 th ) calendar day prior to the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting at which action would have to be taken (based on the 30-day requirement in State law) on the Application. 
b.  Waiver requests that are not received by the time for final decision shall not be considered properly submitted, and action shall be taken on the Application at such meeting as scheduled. 
3.  Requirements Maintained 
a.  Action pursuant to a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action shall not be deemed in any way a waiver to any requirement within this Subdivision Ordinance. 
b.  A waiver from requirements herein is a separate and distinct process (see 7.01 Petition for Subdivision Waiver of Modification). 
E.  Expiration of a Subdivision Related Application - Before Approval Decision 
Pursuant to Texas Local Government Code Chapter 245, a subdivision related Application shall automatically expire (ending all vesting claims) at the close of business on the forty-fifth (45 th ) calendar day after the Application's Official Vesting Date, if: 
1.  The Applicant fails to provide documents or other information necessary to comply with the City's technical requirements relating to the form and content of the permit Application; 
2.  The City provides to the Applicant, not later than the tenth (10 th ) business day after the date the Application is filed, written notice that specifies the necessary documents or other information, and the date the Application will expire if the documents or other information is not provided; and 
3.  The Applicant fails to provide the specified documents or other information necessary to comply with the City's requirements relating to the Application within the time provided in the notification. 
F.  Vesting Begins on the Official Vesting Date 
An Application shall be vested into the standards of the Subdivision Ordinance in effect at the time of the Application's Official Vesting Date. 
G.  Right to 30-Day Action for Plats Applications Begins on the Official Submission Date 
The statutory 30-day time frame for Plat approvals, established by TLGC 212, shall commence on the Official Submission Date.  
3.04. - Processing, Action, and Notification Following Subdivision Application Decision 
A.  Action by the Responsible Official 
1.  The Responsible Official for an Application shall initiate internal (i.e., City) review and assessment of the Application following the City's development review procedures. 
2.  The Responsible Official shall also, to the extent possible, work with the Applicant by advising on and communicating revisions that may be necessary to bring the Application into compliance with City regulations in preparation for consideration by the appropriate Decision-Maker. 
B.  Decision 
The Decision-Maker for the Application shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the Application within the time period prescribed by these Subdivision Regulations. 
C.  Conditions Attached 
The Decision-Maker may attach such conditions to the approval of an Application as are reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with all applicable requirements of these Subdivision Regulations, in which case the Application is considered denied until the conditions are satisfied. 
D.  Notification of Decision 
The City shall send written notice within fourteen (14) calendar days following the date of a decision on an Application. 
E.  Notification of Appeal 
Whenever appeal is taken from a final decision on an Application, notice of the appeal or revocation proceeding shall be provided to the Applicant by mail to the person and address listed on the Application or as provided to by the City in writing.  
3.05. - Public Hearings for Replat and Plat Vacation Applications 
A.  Setting the Hearing 
1.  When the Responsible Official determines that an Application is complete and that a public hearing is required by these Subdivision Regulations (see 4.07.B [Replat]and 4.09.C [Plat Vacation]) or by State law, the official shall cause notice of such hearing to be prepared and made in accordance with State law. 
2.  The time set for the public hearing shall conform to the time periods required by Sections 4.07.B (Replat) and 4.09.C (Plat Vacation) in these Subdivision Regulations and by State law. 
B.  Conduct of the Hearing 
1.  The public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with State law. 
2.  Any person may appear at the public hearing and submit evidence, either individually or as a representative of an organization. 
3.  Each person who appears at a public hearing shall state his or her name and address, and if appearing on behalf of an organization or Applicant, state the name of the organization or Applicant for the record. 
C.  Record of Proceedings 
The City shall record the hearing proceedings using standard municipal record-keeping procedures. 
D.  Notice Requirements for Replats 
1.  Published Notice for Replats 
a.  Whenever published notice of a public hearing for a Replat approval before the Planning and Zoning Commission is required under State law, or this Subdivision Ordinance, the Responsible Official shall cause notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City before the fifteenth (15 th ) calendar day before the date set for the required hearing. 
b.  The notice shall set forth the date, time, place and purpose of the hearing, and identification of the subject property, where the decision concerns an individual tract or parcel of land. 
2.  Personal Notice for Replats 
a.  Notification by Mail 
Whenever personal notice of a Replat public hearing is required by State law or this Subdivision Ordinance before the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Director of Development Services shall cause notice to be sent by regular mail before the tenth (10 th ) calendar day before the hearing date to the following: 
i.  Each owner of real property located within the original subdivision within two hundred feet (200') of the exterior boundary of the property in question, and 
ii.  The Applicant and/or property owner. 
b.  Notification Details 
i.  The notice shall set forth the name of the Applicant, the time, place and purpose of the hearing, identification of the subject property. 
ii.  Notice shall be sent to each owner indicated in the records of the Gillespie County Central Appraisal District, published as of January of each year. 
iii.  Notice shall be considered served by depositing the notice, addressed in accordance with 3.05.D.2.b.ii (above) and first class postage prepaid, in the United States Postal Service mail. 
E.  Notice Requirements for Plat Vacations 
1.  Published notice of the public hearing on the Plat Vacation Application shall be given in accordance with 3.05 Public Hearings for Replat and Plat Vacation Applications and State law. 
2.  The hearing shall be conducted by the City Council.  
3.06. - Amendments and Expiration to Approved Subdivision Applications 
A.  Amendments/Revisions to an Approved Subdivision Application 
Unless another method is expressly provided by these Subdivision Regulations, any request to amend or revise an approved Application shall be considered a new Application, which must be decided in accordance with the procedures governing the original Application and the standards in effect at the time such new Application is filed with the City. 
B.  Expiration of an Approved Subdivision Application 
1.  Subdivision Application Expiration - Two (2) Years 
a.  Unless otherwise expressly provided by these Subdivision Regulations, an approved Application shall automatically expire two (2) years following the approval date of the Application (see 5.01.G Expiration Date for Construction Plans for expiration of Construction Plans), and shall become null and void. 
b.  All activities under the Application thereafter shall be deemed in violation of these Subdivision Regulations, if: 
i.  The Applicant fails to satisfy any condition that was imposed by these Subdivision Regulations or as part of the approval of the Application or that was made under the terms of any Performance Agreement, within the time limits established for satisfaction of such condition or term; or 
ii.  A Performance Agreement, if applicable, (5.05 Performance Agreements and Security for Completion) is not approved for the development. 
2.  Applications with No Time Limit 
If no time limit for satisfaction of conditions is specified in the decision on the Application or in the regulations governing, the time shall be presumed to be two (2) years following the date the Application was approved. 
3.  Applications with Vested Right 
Unless a different date is determined pursuant to and upon review of a vested rights petition, an Application approved prior to the effective date of these Subdivision Regulations shall expire in accordance with the terms of the regulations in effect at the time the Application was filed. 
C.  Effect of Expiration 
A new Application must be submitted for consideration and approval subject to regulations in effect at the time the new Application is filed.  
Section 4. - Platting Requirements 
 
4.01. - General Subdivision and Platting Procedures 
A.  Plats Required for Land Subdivision 
A Final Plat or Minor Plat shall be approved prior to any land division that is subject to these regulations and prior to commencement of any new development. 
B.  Replats and Amending Plats 
1.  Replat 
A Replat, in accordance with State law, and the provisions of Section 4.07 Replat shall be required any time a platted, recorded lot is further divided or expanded, thereby changing the boundary and dimensions of the property. 
2.  Amending Plat 
In the case of minor revisions to recorded Plats or lots, an Amending Plat may also be utilized if in accordance with Section 4.08 Amending Plat. 
C.  Zoning 
1.  Conformance with Existing Zoning 
All Applications for land within the city limits shall be in conformance with the existing zoning on the property. 
2.  Request to Rezone First 
If an Applicant seeks to amend the zoning for the property, the request to rezone the land shall be submitted and approved prior to acceptance of an Application for filing of a plat, unless as otherwise provided below. 
a.  The Applicant may request approval from the Director of Development Services to submit an Application simultaneously with the zoning change request, in which case the Application for the zoning amendment shall be acted upon first, provided that the Application is accompanied by a properly executed Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action (due to the more lengthy time frame necessary to advertise and process zoning Applications). 
b.  In the event that the requested zoning amendment is denied, the Plat Application shall also be rejected or denied. 
3.  Zoning Ordinance Site Plan Approval 
Where Site Plan approval is required by the Zoning Ordinance prior to development, no Final Plat shall be approved until a Site Plan has been approved for the land subject to the proposed Plat.  
4.02. - Pre-Application Conference 
See 3.02 Pre-Application Conference.  
4.03. - Sketch Plat 
A.  Purpose 
The purpose of a Sketch Plat shall be to serve as a visual aid to the Applicant and Director of Development Services during the Pre-Application Conference (Section 3.02). The Sketch Plat shall be used to identify major development considerations such as utilities, roadways, drainage concerns, comprehensive plan elements, specific neighborhood characteristics, and historic information. 
B.  Sketch Plat for Pre-Application Meeting 
A Sketch Plat shall be prepared by the Applicant. The Applicant shall bring the Sketch Plat to the Pre-Application Conference, but is not required to submit the Sketch Plat prior to the Pre-Application Conference. 
C.  Sketch Plat Standards 
The Sketch Plat shall be a freehand pencil sketch or computer drawn sketch to approximate scale showing streets, lots, public areas, and other significant features.  
4.04. - Preliminary Plat 
A.  Purpose 
The purpose of a Preliminary Plat shall be to determine the general layout of the subdivision, the adequacy of public facilities needed to serve the intended development, and the overall compliance of the land division with applicable requirements of these Subdivision Regulations. 
B.  Applicability 
No subdivision of land shall be allowed without proper submittal, approval, and adoption of a Preliminary Plat. 
C.  Exceptions 
1.  A Preliminary Plat is not required when a Minor Plat is submitted (refer to 4.06 Minor Plat). 
2.  A Final Plat in accordance with 4.05 Final Plat, along with Construction Plans in accordance with 5.01 Construction Plans, may be submitted in lieu of a Preliminary Plat if a Performance Agreement and appropriate surety (see 5.05 Performance Agreements and Security for Completion) are submitted along with the Application. 
D.  Accompanying Applications 
1.  Preliminary and Other Types of Plans 
An Application for a Preliminary Plat shall be accompanied by the following: 
a.  A Preliminary Plat Application Form, which can be obtained from the Director of Development Services; 
b.  Preliminary Drainage Plan (Section 6.18.I); 
c.  Preliminary Storm Water Management Plan (Section 6.18.J); 
d.  Preliminary Utility Plan (Section 6.16.C); and 
e.  Other plans if deemed necessary for thorough review by the Director of Development Services or the Director of Public Works and Utilities, such as a Planned Development Master Plan. 
Approval of each shall be separate and in accordance with this 4.04 Preliminary Plat. 
2.  Current Title Commitments 
The Applicant shall furnish with the Application to the City a current title commitment issued by a title insurance company authorized to do business in Texas, a title opinion letter from an attorney licensed to practice in Texas, or some other acceptable proof of ownership, identifying all persons or entities having an ownership interest in the property subject to the Preliminary Plat to include all lienholders. 
E.  Review by Director of Development Services 
The Director of Development Services shall: 
1.  Initiate review of the plat and materials submitted (including the required Preliminary Drainage Plan, Preliminary Storm Water Management Plan, and Preliminary Utility Plan). 
2.  Request written comments from the Development Review Committee (DRC), if deemed necessary. 
3.  Make available Plats and reports to the Commission for review. 
4.  Upon determination that the Application is ready to be acted upon, schedule the Preliminary Plat for consideration on the agenda of the next available meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
F.  Action by the Planning and Zoning Commission 
The Commission shall: 
1.  Review the Preliminary Plat Application, the findings of the Director of Development Services, and any other information available. 
a.  From all such information, the Commission shall determine whether the Preliminary Plat conforms to these Subdivision Regulations. 
2.  Act within thirty (30) calendar days following the Official Submission Date, unless the Applicant submits a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action as outlined in 3.03.D. 
a.  If no decision is rendered by the Commission within the thirty (30) day period described above or such longer period as may have been agreed upon, the Preliminary Plat, as submitted, shall be deemed approved by the Commission. 
3.  Take one of the following actions: 
a.  Approve the Preliminary Plat; 
b.  Approve the Preliminary Plat with conditions, which shall mean that the Preliminary Plat shall be considered to have been approved once such conditions are fulfilled and until the conditions are satisfied, it is considered denied; or 
c.  Deny the Preliminary Plat. 
G.  Criteria for Approval 
The following criteria shall be used by the Commission to determine whether the Application for a Preliminary Plat shall be approved, approved with conditions, or denied: 
1.  All Plats must be drawn to conform to the zoning regulations currently applicable to the property. If a zoning change for the property is proposed, then the zoning change must be completed before the approval of any Preliminary Plats/Final Plats; 
2.  No Plat or Replat may be approved that leaves a structure located on a remainder subdivided lot. 
3.  The Preliminary Plat is consistent with any approved Performance Agreement; 
4.  The proposed provision and configuration of Public Improvements including, but not limited to, roads, water, wastewater, storm drainage, electric, park facilities, open spaces, habitat restoration, easements and Right-of-Way that are adequate to serve the development, meet applicable standards of these Subdivision Regulations, and conform to the City's adopted master plans for those facilities; 
5.  The Preliminary Plat has been duly reviewed by applicable City staff; 
6.  The Preliminary Plat conforms to design requirements and construction standards as set forth in the Standard Details and Specification for Public Infrastructure Construction Manual; 
7.  The Preliminary Plat is consistent with the adopted Comprehensive Plan, except where application of the Plan may conflict with State law; 
8.  The proposed development represented on the Preliminary Plat does not endanger public health, safety or welfare; and 
9.  The Preliminary Plat conforms to the Director of Development Services' subdivision Application checklists. 
H.  Effect of Approval 
1.  Approval of a Preliminary Plat shall allow the Applicant to proceed with the development and platting process by submitting Construction Plans (5.01) and a Final Plat (4.05). 
2.  Approval of the Preliminary Plat shall be deemed general approval of the subdivision's layout only, and shall not constitute approval or acceptance of Construction Plans or a Final Plat. 
I.  Expiration 
1.  Two-Year Validity 
a.  The approval of a Preliminary Plat shall remain in effect for a period of two (2) years following the date of approval, during which period the Applicant shall submit and receive approval for Construction Plans and a Final Plat for the land area shown on the Preliminary Plat. 
b.  If Construction Plans and a Final Plat Application have not been approved within the two (2) year period, the Preliminary Plat shall expire. 
2.  Relationship to Construction Plans 
A Preliminary Plat shall remain valid for the period of time in which approved Construction Plans are valid (5.01.G Expiration Date for Construction Plans). 
3.  Action on Final Plat 
Should a Final Plat Application be submitted within the two (2) year period, but not be acted upon by the Commission within the two (2) year period, the Preliminary Plat shall expire unless an extension is granted as provided in 4.04.J Preliminary Plat Extension. 
4.  Void If Not Extended 
If the Preliminary Plat is not extended as provided in 4.04.J Preliminary Plat Extension, it shall expire and shall become null and void. 
J.  Preliminary Plat Extension 
A Preliminary Plat may be extended for a period not to exceed one (1) year beyond the Preliminary Plat's initial expiration date. A request for extension shall be submitted to the Director of Development Services in writing at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to expiration of the Preliminary Plat, and shall include reasons why the Preliminary Plat should be extended. 
1.  Decision by the Director of Development Services 
a.  The Director of Development Services will review the extension request and shall approve it, approve it with conditions, or deny the extension request within thirty (30) calendar days following the Official Vesting Date of the request. 
b.  Should the Director of Development Services fail to act on an extension request within thirty (30) calendar days, the extension shall be deemed to be approved. 
2.  Considerations 
In considering an extension, the Director of Development Services shall consider whether the following conditions exist: 
a.  A Final Plat has been submitted and/or approved for any portion of the property shown on the Preliminary Plat; 
b.  Construction Plans have been submitted and/or approved for any portion of the property shown on the Preliminary Plat; 
c.  Construction is occurring on the subject property; 
d.  The Preliminary Plat complies with new ordinances that impact the health, safety and general welfare of the community; and/or 
e.  If there is a need for a park, school or other public facility or improvement on the property. 
3.  Conditions 
a.  In granting an extension, the Director of Development Services may impose such conditions as are needed to ensure that the land will be developed in a timely fashion and that the public interest is served. 
b.  Any extension may be predicated upon compliance with new development regulations and/or the Applicant waiving any vested rights. 
4.  Appeal of Denial for Extension 
a.  Appeal of the Director of Development Services' Decision on a Preliminary Plat Extension 
i.  The denial of an extension by the Director of Development Services may be appealed to the Commission. 
ii.  A written request for such appeal shall be received by the Director of Development Services within fourteen (14) calendar days following the denial. 
iii.  The Commission shall hear and consider such an appeal within thirty (30) calendar days following receipt of the appeal request by the Director of Development Services. 
b.  Appeal of the Commission's Decision on a Preliminary Plat Extension 
i.  The denial of an extension by the Commission may be appealed to the City Council. 
ii.  A written request for such appeal shall be received by the Director of Development Services within fourteen (14) calendar days following the denial. 
iii.  The City Council shall hear and consider such an appeal within thirty (30) calendar days following receipt of the appeal request by the Director of Development Services. 
iv.  The decision of the City Council is final. 
K.  Amendments to Preliminary Plats Following Approval 
1.  Minor Amendments to Preliminary Plats 
a.  Minor amendments to the design of the subdivision subject to an approved Preliminary Plat may be incorporated in an Application for approval of a Final Plat without the necessity of filing a new Application for re-approval of a Preliminary Plat. 
b.  Minor amendments may only include minor adjustments in street or alley alignments, lengths and paving details, and minor adjustments to lot lines that: 
i.  Do not result in creation of additional lots or any non-conforming lots (such as to zoning standards), and 
ii.  Are consistent with approved prior Applications. 
2.  Major Amendments to Preliminary Plats 
All other proposed changes to the design of the subdivision subject to an approved Preliminary Plat shall be deemed major amendments that require submittal and approval of a new Application for approval of a Preliminary Plat (including new fees, new reviews, new Official Vesting Date, new Official Submission Date etc.) before approval of Construction Plans and/or a Final Plat. 
3.  Determination of Minor or Major Amendment 
The Director of Development Services shall make a determination of whether proposed amendments are deemed to be minor or major, thereby requiring new submittal of a Preliminary Plat.  
4.05. - Final Plat 
A.  Purpose 
The purpose of a Final Plat is to ensure: 
1.  That the proposed Subdivision and development of the land is consistent with all standards of these Subdivision Regulations pertaining to the adequacy of public facilities, 
2.  That Public Improvements to serve the Subdivision or development have been installed and accepted by the City, or that provision for such installation has been made, and 
3.  That all other City requirements and conditions have been satisfied or provided for to allow the Final Plat to be recorded. 
B.  Applicability 
No subdivision of land shall be allowed without proper submittal, approval, and adoption of a Final Plat. 
C.  Exceptions 
A Final Plat is not required when a Minor Plat is submitted (refer to 4.06 Minor Plat). 
D.  Ownership 
1.  The Applicant shall furnish with the Application to the City a current title commitment issued by a title insurance company authorized to do business in Texas, a title opinion letter from an attorney licensed to practice in Texas, or some other acceptable proof of ownership, identifying all persons having an ownership interest in the property subject to the Final Plat. 
2.  The Final Plat shall be signed by each owner, or by the representative of the owners authorized to sign legal documents for the owners and lienholder, effectively denoting that they are consenting to the platting of the property and to the dedications and covenants that may be contained in the Final Plat. 
E.  Accompanying Applications 
1.  A Final Plat Application Form, which can be obtained from the Director of Development Services. 
2.  An Application for a Final Plat may be accompanied by Construction Plans if also accompanied by a Performance Agreement and appropriate surety in accordance with 5.05 Performance Agreements and Security for Completion. 
3.  Approval of each shall be separate and in accordance with this Section 4.05 Final Plat and with Section 5.01 Construction Plans. 
F.  Prior Approved Preliminary Plat 
The Final Plat and all accompanying data shall conform to the approved Preliminary Plat, or as the Preliminary Plat may have been amended subsequently Section 4.04.K Amendments to Preliminary Plats Following Approval, if applicable, incorporating all conditions imposed or required, if applicable. 
G.  Review by Director of Development Services 
The Director of Development Services shall: 
1.  Initiate review of the plat and materials submitted, 
2.  Request written comments from Development Review Committee (DRC), if deemed necessary, 
3.  Make available Plats and reports to the Commission for review, and 
4.  Upon determination that the Application is ready to be acted upon, schedule the Final Plat for consideration on the agenda of the next available meeting of the Commission. 
H.  Action by Planning and Zoning Commission 
The Commission shall: 
1.  Review the Final Plat Application, the findings of the Director of Development Services, and any other information available. 
a.  From all such information, the Commission shall determine whether the Final Plat conforms to the applicable regulations of these Subdivision Regulations. 
2.  Act within thirty (30) calendar days following the Official Submission Date, unless the Applicant submits a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action as outlined in 3.03.D. 
a.  If no decision is rendered by the Commission within the thirty (30) day period described above or such longer period as may have been agreed upon, the Final Plat, as submitted, shall be deemed to be approved by the Commission. 
3.  Take one of the following actions: 
a.  Approve the Final Plat; 
b.  Approve the Final Plat with conditions, which shall mean that the Final Plat shall be considered to have been approved once such conditions are fulfilled, and until the conditions are satisfied, it is considered denied; or 
c.  Deny the Final Plat. 
4.  A motion to approve a Final Plat shall be subject to the following conditions, whether or not stated in the motion to approve: 
a.  All required fees shall be paid. 
b.  All covenants required by ordinances have been reviewed and approved by the City. 
c.  On-site easements and rights-of-way have been dedicated and filed of record and properly described and noted on the proposed plat. 
d.  All required abandonments of public rights-of-way or easements that must be approved by the City Council and the abandonment ordinance numbers are shown on the plat. 
e.  Original tax certificates have been presented from each taxing unit with jurisdiction of the real property showing the current taxes are paid. 
I.  Final Plat Criteria for Approval 
The following criteria shall be used by the Commission to determine whether the Application for a Final Plat shall be approved, approved with conditions, or denied. 
1.  With Prior Approved Preliminary Plat 
a.  The Final Plat conforms to the approved Preliminary Plat except for minor amendments that are authorized under Section 4.04.K Amendments to Preliminary Plats Following Approval and that may be approved without the necessity of revising the approved Preliminary Plat; 
b.  All conditions imposed at the time of approval of the Preliminary Plat, as applicable, have been satisfied; 
c.  The Construction Plans conform to the requirements of Section 5.01 Construction Plans and have been approved by the Director of Public Works and Utilities; 
d.  Where Public Improvements have been installed, the improvements conform to the approved Construction Plans and have been approved for acceptance by the Director of Public Works and Utilities; 
e.  Where the Director of Public Works and Utilities has authorized Public Improvements to be deferred, a Performance Agreement has been executed and submitted by the property owner in conformance with Section 5 Construction Plans and Procedures; 
f.  The final layout of the Subdivision or development meets all standards for adequacy of public facilities contained in this Subdivision Ordinance; 
g.  The Plat conforms to design requirements and construction standards as set forth in the Standard Details and Specification for Public Infrastructure Construction Manual; and 
h.  The plat conforms to Director of Development Services subdivision Application checklists and Subdivision Ordinance regulations. 
2.  Without Prior Approved Preliminary Plat 
a.  The Final Plat conforms to all criteria for approval of a Preliminary Plat; 
b.  The Construction Plans conform to the requirements of Section 5.01 Construction Plans and have been approved by the Director of Public Works and Utilities; 
c.  A Performance Agreement with surety for installation of Public Improvements has been prepared and executed by the property owner in conformance with Section 5 Construction Plans and Procedures; 
d.  The final layout of the Subdivision or development meets all standards for adequacy of public facilities contained in this Subdivision Ordinance; and 
e.  The Final Plat conforms to the Director of Development Services' subdivision Application checklist and Subdivision Ordinance regulations. 
J.  Procedures for Final Plat Recordation upon Approval 
The Applicant shall provide to Director of Development Services the required number of signed and executed copies of the Final Plat that will be needed to file the Plat, upon approval, with the County (in the County's required format) at least seven (7) calendar days prior to the meeting at which it will be considered for approval. 
1.  General 
a.  Signatures 
After approval of the Final Plat, the Director of Development Services shall procure the appropriate City signatures on the Final Plat. 
b.  Recording upon Performance 
The Final Plat shall be recorded after: 
i.  The Final Plat is approved by the City; 
ii.  All required Public Improvements have been completed and accepted by the City or a Performance Agreement has been executed and appropriate surety provided in accordance with Section 5.05 Performance Agreements and Security for Completion; 
iii.  All County filing requirements are met; and 
iv.  All fees are paid to the City. 
2.  Submittal of Final Plat Where Improvements Installed 
Where all required Public Improvements have been installed prior to recording of the Final Plat, the Applicant shall meet all requirements in accordance with Section 5 Construction Plans and Procedures. 
3.  Submittal of Final Plat Where Improvements Have Not Been Installed 
Where some or all required Public Improvements are not yet completed in connection with an approved Final Plat, the Applicant shall submit the Final Plat as approved, revised to reflect any conditions imposed as part of approval. 
4.  Update of Proof of Ownership 
If there has been any change in ownership since the time of the Proof of Ownership provided under 4.05.D Ownership, the Applicant shall submit a new consent agreement executed by each owner and lienholder consenting to the platting of the property and the dedications and covenants contained in the Plat. 
K.  Effect of Approval 
The approval of a Final Plat: 
1.  Supersedes any prior approved Preliminary Plat for the same land. 
2.  If applicable, authorizes the Applicant to install any improvements in public Right-of-Way in conformance with approved Construction Plans and under a Performance Agreement (refer to Section 5 Construction Plans and Procedures). 
3.  Authorizes the Applicant to seek 5.03 Construction Release and/or issuance of a Building Permit. 
L.  Revisions Following Recording/Recordation 
Revisions may only be processed and approved as a Replat, Minor Replat, or Amending Plat, as applicable. 
M.  Signature Blocks 
Unless otherwise modified by the Director of Development Services, the following signature blocks shall be used in conjunction with the Final Plat. 
1.  Certificate of Surveyor 
 
2.  Owner's Statement for Fire Lane Easement 
 
3.  Owner's Acknowledgement and Dedication 
 
4.  Lienholder's Ratification of Plat Dedication 
 
5.  Certificate of Final Plat Approval (For Final Plats with Required Public Improvements Installed After Approval) 
 
6.  Certificate of Final Plat Approval (For Final Plats with Required Public Improvements Installed Before Approval) 
 
7.  Certificate of Completion, Acceptance, and Authorization to File 
  
4.06. - Minor Plat 
A.  Purpose 
The purpose of a Minor Plat is to simplify divisions of land under certain circumstances as outlined in Texas Local Government Code Section 212.0065. 
B.  Applicability 
An Application for approval of a Minor Plat may be filed only in accordance with State law, when all of the following circumstances apply: 
1.  The proposed division results in four (4) or fewer lots; 
2.  All lots in the proposed Subdivision front onto an existing public street and the construction or extension of a street or alley is not required to meet the requirements of these Subdivision Regulations; and 
3.  Except for Right-of-Way widening and easements, the plat does not require the extension of any municipal facilities to serve any lot within the Subdivision. 
C.  Application Requirements 
The requirements for the submittal of a Minor Plat shall be determined by the Director of Development Services on the Application Form. 
D.  Additional Requirements 
To be considered a Minor Plat it must also meet the following requirements: 
1.  The proposed Plat shall be for the Subdivision of one (1) tract into four (4) or fewer lots. 
2.  The person, firm or corporation presenting the proposed Plat shall dedicate all easements and Right-of-Way as required elsewhere in these regulations. 
3.  Private wells and private wastewater treatment facilities that meet the current TCEQ health standards shall be considered adequate when existing public water and wastewater lines are not within one hundred (100) feet of the proposed Plat. 
E.  Minor Plat Criteria for Approval 
The following criteria shall be used to determine whether the Application for a Minor Plat shall be approved, approved with conditions, or denied: 
1.  The Minor Plat is consistent with all zoning requirements for the property (if applicable), any approved Performance Agreement (if applicable), and all other requirements of these Subdivision Regulations that apply to the Plat; 
2.  All lots to be created by the plat already are adequately served by improved public street access and by all required City utilities and services and by alleys, if applicable; 
3.  The ownership, maintenance, and allowed uses of all designated easements have been stated on the Minor Plat; and 
4.  Except for Right-of-Way widening and easements, the plat does not require the extension of any municipal facilities to serve any lot within the subdivision. 
F.  Review by Director of Development Services 
The Director of Development Services shall: 
1.  Initiate review of the plat and materials submitted; and 
2.  Request written comments from the Development Review Committee (DRC), if deemed necessary. 
G.  Action by Director of Development Services 
Authority to approve a Minor Plat is delegated to the Director of Development Services. The Director of Development Services shall: 
1.  Determine whether the Minor Plat meets the regulations of these Subdivision Regulations. 
2.  Act within thirty (30) calendar days following the Official Submission Date, unless the Applicant submits a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action as outlined in 3.03.D. 
a.  If no decision is rendered by the Director of Development Services, or if the Director of Development Services has not deferred the Application to the Planning and Zoning Commission for decision, within the thirty (30) day period described above or such longer period as may have been agreed upon, the Minor Plat, as submitted, shall be deemed to be approved. 
3.  Take one of the following actions: 
a.  Approve the Minor Plat; 
b.  Approve the Minor Plat with conditions, which shall mean that the Minor Plat shall be considered to have been approved once such conditions are fulfilled and until the conditions are satisfied, it is considered denied; or 
c.  Defer the Minor Plat to the Planning and Zoning Commission for consideration prior to expiration of the required 30-day approval period unless a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action is submitted in accordance with 3.03.D. 
H.  Deferral of Decision of a Minor Plat Application 
1.  Deferral to the Commission of a Minor Plat Decision 
Per Section 4.06.G.3.c, if the Director of Development Services defers the Minor Plat Application to the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Commission shall consider the Application at a regular meeting no later than thirty (30) calendar days after the date on which the Director of Development Services deferred the Application to the Commission. The Commission shall, upon simple majority vote, take one of the following actions: 
a.  Approve the Minor Plat; 
b.  Approve the Minor Plat with conditions, which shall mean that the Minor Plat shall be considered to have been approved once such conditions are fulfilled and until the conditions are satisfied, it is considered denied; or 
c.  Deny the Minor Plat. 
I.  Procedures for Minor Plat Recordation Following Approval 
The procedures for recordation of a Minor Plat shall be the same as the procedures for recordation of a Final Plat, as outlined in Section 4.05.J Procedures for Final Plat Recordation upon Approval. 
J.  Revisions Following Approval 
Revisions may only be processed and approved as a Replat, Minor Replat, or Amending Plat, as applicable.  
4.07. - Replat 
A.  Purpose and Applicability 
1.  A Replat of all or a portion of a recorded Plat may be approved in accordance with State law without vacation of the recorded Plat, if the Replat: 
a.  Is signed and acknowledged by only the owners of the property being replatted; 
b.  Is approved after a public hearing; and 
c.  Does not propose to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions previously incorporated in the recorded Plat. 
2.  A Replat shall be subject to approval by the Commission. 
B.  General Notice and Public Hearing Requirements 
1.  Published notice of the public hearings on the Replat Application shall be given in accordance with 3.05 Public Hearings for Replat and Plat Vacation Applications, if applicable. 
a.  See specific notice and hearing requirements for Certain Replats in Section 4.07.F.2 Notice and Public Hearing Requirements for Certain Replats). 
2.  A public hearing shall be conducted by the Commission on all Replat Applications. 
C.  Application 
The Application for a Replat of a Subdivision shall meet all Application requirements of a Final Plat. The Applicant shall acknowledge that the Replat will not amend or remove any covenants or restrictions previously incorporated in the recorded Plat. 
D.  Partial Replat Application 
If a Replat is submitted for only a portion of a previously platted subdivision, the Replat must reference the previous Subdivision name and recording information, and must state on the Replat the specific lots which are being changed along with a detailed "Purpose for Replat" statement. 
E.  Criteria for Approval 
1.  The Replat of the Subdivision shall meet all review and approval criteria for a Final Plat. 
2.  The Replat document shall be prepared by a Texas Registered Professional Land Surveyor. 
F.  Additional Requirements for Certain Replats 
1.  Applicability of Certain Replats 
Pursuant to Texas Local Government Code Chapter 212.015, a Replat without vacation of the preceding Plat must conform to the requirements of this Section 4.07.F Additional Requirements for Certain Replats if: 
a.  During the preceding five (5) years, any of the area to be replatted was limited by an interim or permanent zoning classification to residential use for not more than two (2) residential units per lot; or 
b.  Any lot in the preceding plat was limited by deed restrictions to residential use for not more than two (2) residential units per lot. 
2.  Notice and Public Hearing Requirements for Certain Replats 
Notice of the required public hearing shall be given before the fifteenth (15 th ) calendar day before the date of the hearing by: 
a.  Publication in an official newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in the applicable City or unincorporated area (as applicable) in which the proposed Replat property is located; and 
b.  Written notice, with a copy of Section 212.015(c) of the Texas Local Government Code (as amended) attached, forwarded by the City to the owners of lots that are in the original Subdivision and that are within two hundred feet (200') of the lots to be replatted, as indicated on the most recently approved municipal tax roll or in the case of a Subdivision within the ETJ, the most recently approved applicable county tax roll of the property upon which the Replat is requested. The written notice may be delivered by depositing the notice, properly addressed with postage prepaid, in a post office or postal depository within the boundaries of the City. 
3.  Protest 
a.  If the Replat Application is accompanied by a waiver petition (per 7.01 Petition for Subdivision Waiver of Modification) and is protested in accordance with this Section 4.07.F.3 Protest), approval of the Replat shall require the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths of the voting members of the Commission present at the meeting. 
b.  For a legal protest, written instruments signed by the owners of at least twenty percent (20%) of the area of the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered by the Replat Application and extending two hundred feet (200') from that area, but within the original Subdivision, must be filed with the Commission prior to the close of the public hearing. 
c.  The area of streets and alleys shall be included in the area computations. 
G.  Replat Review and Approval 
1.  Replat 
The review and approval processes for a Replat shall be the same as the review and approval processes for a Final Plat (except for the special public hearing and notice requirements described in Section 4.07.F.2 Notice and Public Hearing Requirements for Certain Replats). 
2.  Minor Replat 
a.  Pursuant to Texas Local Government Code 212.0065, a Replat involving four (4) or fewer lots fronting on an existing street and not requiring the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities may be approved by the Director of Development Services in accordance with this Section 4.07 Replat. 
b.  Prior to the Director of Development Services taking action on a proposed Minor Replat, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing thereon. Otherwise, the review and approval process shall be the same as 4.06 Minor Plat, including: 
i.  Deferral to the Commission of a Minor Replat Decision. 
H.  Effect 
Upon approval of the Application, the Replat may be recorded and is controlling over the previously recorded Plat for the portion replatted.  
4.08. - Amending Plat 
A.  Purpose 
The purpose of an Amending Plat shall be to provide an expeditious means of making minor revisions to a recorded Plat consistent with provisions of State law. 
B.  Applicability 
The procedures for an Amending Plat shall apply only if the sole purpose of the Amending Plat is to achieve one or more of the following Purposes: 
1.  Error Corrections or Administrative Adjustments 
a.  Correct an error in a course or distance shown on the preceding Plat. 
b.  Add a course or distance that was omitted on the preceding Plat. 
c.  Correct an error in a real property description shown on the preceding Plat. 
d.  Indicate monuments set after the death, disability or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor responsible for setting monuments. 
e.  Show the location or character of a monument that has been changed in location or character or that is shown incorrectly as to location or character on the preceding Plat. 
f.  Correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or omission previously approved by the municipal authority responsible for approving Plats, including lot numbers, acreage, street names, and identification of adjacent recorded Plats. 
g.  Correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between two adjacent lots if: 
i.  Both lot owners join in the Application for amending the Plat; 
ii.  Neither lot is abolished; 
iii.  The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; and 
iv.  The amendment does not have a material adverse effect on the property rights of the other owners in the Plat. 
2.  Relocate Lot Lines 
a.  Relocate a lot line to eliminate an inadvertent encroachment of a building or other improvement on a lot line or easement. 
b.  Relocate one or more Lot Lines between one or more adjacent lots if: 
i.  The owners of all those lots join in the Application for amending the Plat; 
ii.  The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; and 
iii.  The amendment does not increase the number of lots. 
3.  Replatting 
a.  Replat one or more lots fronting on an existing street if: 
i.  The owners of all those lots join in the Application for amending the Plat; 
ii.  The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; 
iii.  The amendment does not increase the number of lots; and 
iv.  The amendment does not create or require the creation of a new street or make necessary the extension of municipal facilities. 
C.  Certificates of Correction 
Certificates of Correction are prohibited. 
D.  Application Requirements 
The requirements for the submittal of a Amending Plat shall be determined by the Director of Development Services on the Application Form. 
E.  The requirements for the submittal of an Amending Plat shall be determined by the Director of Development Services on the Application Form. Notice Not Required 
The approval and issuance of an Amending Plat shall not require notice, hearing or approval of other lot owners. 
F.  Review by Director of Development Services 
The Director of Development Services shall: 
1.  Initiate review of the plat and materials submitted; and 
2.  Request written comments from the Development Review Committee (DRC), if deemed necessary. 
G.  Action by Director of Development Services 
The Director of Development Services shall: 
1.  Determine whether the Amending Plat meets the regulations of these Subdivision Regulations. 
2.  Act within thirty (30) calendar days following the Official Submission Date, unless the Applicant submits a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action as outlined in 3.03.D. 
3.  Take one of the following actions: 
a.  Approve the Amending Plat; 
b.  Approve the Amending Plat with conditions, which shall mean that the Amending Plat shall be considered to have been approved once such conditions are fulfilled and until the conditions are satisfied, it is considered denied; or 
c.  Defer the Amending Plat to the Commission for consideration prior to expiration of the required 30-day approval period unless a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action is submitted in accordance with 3.03.D. 
H.  Deferral of Decision on an Amending Plat Application 
1.  Deferral to the Commission of an Amending Plat Decision 
Per Section 4.08.G.3.c, if the Director of Development Services defers the Amending Plat Application to the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Commission shall consider the Application at a regular meeting no later than thirty (30) calendar days after the date on which the Director of Development Services deferred the Application to the Commission. The Commission shall, upon simple majority vote, take one of the following actions: 
a.  Approve the Amending Plat; 
b.  Approve the Amending Plat with conditions, which shall mean that the Amending Plat shall be considered to have been approved once such conditions are fulfilled and until the conditions are satisfied, it is considered denied; or 
c.  Deny the Amending Plat.  
4.09. - Plat Vacation 
A.  Purpose 
The purpose of a Plat Vacation is to provide an expeditious means of vacating a recorded Plat in its entirety, consistent with provisions of State law. 
B.  Initiation of a Plat Vacation 
1.  By Property Owner 
The property owner of the tract covered by a Plat may submit an Application to vacate the Plat at any time before any lot in the Plat is sold. 
2.  By All Lot Owners 
If lots in the Plat have been sold, an Application to vacate the plat must be submitted by all the owners of lots in the Plat. 
3.  By City Council 
If the City Council, on its own motion, determines that the Plat should be vacated in the interest of and to protect the public's health, safety and welfare; and: 
a.  No lots within the approved Plat have been sold within five (5) years following the date that the Final Plat was approved by the City; or 
b.  The property owner has breached a Performance Agreement, and the City is unable to obtain funds with which to complete construction of Public Improvements, except that the vacation shall apply only to lots owned by the property owner or its successor; or 
c.  The Plat has been of record for more than five (5) years, and the City Council determines that the further sale of lots within the Subdivision or addition presents a threat to public health, safety and welfare, except that the vacation shall apply only to lots owned by the property owner or its successors. 
C.  Notice 
Published notice of the public hearing shall be given in accordance with 3.05 Public Hearings for Replat and Plat Vacation Applications. 
D.  Review and Recommendation by the Director of Development Services 
The Director of Development Services shall: 
1.  Initiate review of the Plat Vacation Application and materials submitted; 
2.  Request written comments from the Development Review Committee (DRC), if deemed necessary; and 
3.  Recommend action on Plat Vacation to the City Council. 
E.  Action by the City Council 
The City Council shall: 
1.  Review the Plat Vacation Application, the findings of the Director of Development Services, and any other information available. From all such information, the City Council shall make a finding as to whether or not the plat should be vacated. 
2.  Take one of the following actions: 
a.  Approve the Plat Vacation; 
b.  Approve the Plat Vacation with conditions, which shall mean that the Plat Vacation shall be considered to have been approved once such conditions are fulfilled and until the conditions are satisfied, it is considered denied; or 
c.  Deny the Plat Vacation. 
3.  The City Council's decision on a Plat Vacation shall be final. 
F.  Procedures for Recordation Following Approval 
1.  If the City Council adopts a resolution vacating a plat in whole, it shall record a copy of the resolution in the County Clerk's Office. 
2.  If the City Council adopts a resolution vacating a plat in part, it shall cause a revised Final Plat to be recorded along with the resolution which shows that portion of the original plat that has been vacated and that portion that has not been vacated. 
G.  Effect 
1.  On the execution and recording of the vacating instrument, the previously filed plat shall have no effect. 
a.  Regardless of the City Council's action on the petition, the property owner(s) or Developer will have no right to a refund of any monies, fees or charges paid to the City nor to the return of any property or consideration dedicated or delivered to the City except as may have previously been agreed to by the City Council. 
2.  The Plat is vacated when a signed, acknowledged instrument declaring the Plat vacated is approved and recorded in the manner prescribed for the original Plat. 
3.  The City Council, at its discretion, shall have the right to retain all or specific portions of road Right-of-Way or easements shown on the Plat being considered for vacation. However, the City Council shall consider Plat Vacation upon satisfactory conveyance of easements and/or Right-of-Way in a separate legal document using forms provided by the City Attorney's office.  
4.10. - Development Plat 
A.  Purpose 
The purpose of a Development Plat is to assure the adequacy of public facilities needed to serve the intended development and the overall compliance of such development with applicable requirements of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
B.  Authority 
This Section 4.10 is adopted pursuant to the Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 212, Subchapter B, Sections 212.041 through 212.050, as amended. 
C.  Applicability 
1.  To Whom Development Plat Regulations Apply 
Any person who proposes the development of a tract of land located within the limits or in the Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) of the City must have a Development Plat of the tract prepared in accordance with LGC 212 Subchapter B and this Subdivision Ordinance, unless a Development Plat is not required in accordance with Section 4.10.D Exceptions. 
2.  The Term "Development" 
For purposes of this Section 4.10, "development" means the new construction or the enlargement of any exterior dimension of any building, structure, or improvement. 
3.  Cases Where Development Plat Regulations Apply 
Development Plat regulations shall apply to any land within the City or within its Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) in the following circumstances: 
a.  The development of any tract of land which has not been platted or replatted prior to the effective date of this Subdivision Ordinance, unless expressly exempted herein; or 
b.  The development of any tract of land for which the property owner claims an exemption from the City's subdivision requirements, including requirements to replat, which exemption is not expressly provided for in Section 4.10.D Exceptions; or 
c.  The development of any tract of land for which the only access is a private easement or street; or 
d.  The division of any tract of land resulting in parcels or lots each of which is greater than five (5) acres in size, and where no public improvement is proposed to be dedicated or constructed. 
D.  Exceptions 
A Development Plat is not required: 
1.  When the land has an approved Final Plat, Minor Plat, Replat, or Amending Plat; or 
2.  For bona fide agricultural activities; or 
3.  For construction of agricultural accessory structures and related development activities. 
E.  Prohibition on Development 
No development shall commence, nor shall any building permit, utility connection permit, electrical connection permit or similar permit be issued for any development or land division subject to this Section 4.10 until a Development Plat has been approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and submitted to the City for filing at the County. Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section, the City shall not require building permits or otherwise enforce the City's Building Code in the City's Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) in relation to any Development Plat required by this Subdivision Ordinance. 
F.  Required Information for all Development Plat Applicants 
All Applications shall be submitted with the required information as stated on the Application Form. Information required shall be the same as required for a Final Plat. In addition to this information, a Development Plat shall: 
1.  Be prepared by a Texas Registered Professional Land Surveyor as a boundary survey; 
2.  Clearly show the boundary of the Development Plat; 
3.  Clearly show each existing or proposed building, structure, or improvement or proposed modification of the external configuration of the building, structure, or improvement involving a change of the building, structure, or improvement; 
4.  Clearly show each easement and right-of-way within or abutting the boundary of the surveyed property; 
5.  Clearly show the dimensions of each street, sidewalk, alley, square, park, or other part of the property intended to be dedicated to public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent to the street, sidewalk, alley, square, park, or other part; and 
6.  Be accompanied by the required number of copies of the Development Plat, a completed Application Form, the required submission fee (per the City's current Fee Schedule), and a certificate or some other form of verification from the County appraisal district showing that all taxes have been paid on the subject property and that no delinquent taxes exist against the property. 
G.  Accompanying Applications 
An Application for a Development Plat may be accompanied by an application for rezoning approval. The rezoning Application and shall be decided first. The applicant must execute a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action that is mandated by the State for general approval of Plats, including Development Plat approval. 
H.  Development Plat Criteria for Approval 
The following criteria shall be used to determine whether the application for a Development Plat shall be approved, approved with conditions, or denied. 
1.  The proposed development conforms to all City plans, including but not limited to, the Comprehensive Plan, utility plans and applicable capital improvements plans; 
2.  The proposed development conforms to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance (if located within the City's corporate limits) and this Subdivision Ordinance; 
3.  The proposed development is adequately served by public facilities and services, in conformance with City regulations; 
4.  Appropriate agreements for acceptance and use of public dedications to serve the development have been tendered; and 
5.  The proposed development conforms to the design and improvement standards contained in this Subdivision Ordinance, Standard Details and Specification for Public Infrastructure Construction Manual, and any other applicable codes or ordinances of the City that are related to development of a land parcel. 
I.  Development Plat Review and Approval 
The review and approval procedure for a Development Plat shall be the same as the review and approval processes for a Final Plat (see Section 4.05 Final Plat). 
J.  Effect 
Upon approval, the Development Plat shall be filed at the County by the City in the same manner as prescribed for a Final Plat (see Section 4.05 Final Plat).  
Section 5. - Construction Plans and Procedures 
 
5.01. - Construction Plans 
A.  Purpose 
To require that Public Improvements be installed to serve a development in accordance with all Subdivision Regulations. 
 
B.  Submitting Plans 
Plans shall be submitted in accordance with Director of Development Services' requirements, as provided in the related Application Form. Incomplete Construction Plans shall not be accepted and such plans shall be returned to the Applicant. 
C.  Responsible Official and Decision Authority for Construction Plans 
1.  Review and Approval Action 
The Director of Public Works and Utilities shall be the Responsible Official for review and approval of Construction Plans. 
2.  Outside Review 
If an outside consultant is contracted to review Construction Plans, then the Applicant shall reimburse the City for the review fees. 
3.  Decision-Maker Options 
In this capacity, therefore, the Director of Public Works and Utilities shall approve, approve subject to modifications, or deny the Construction Plans. 
D.  Approval Required and Timing of Construction 
Construction Plans must be approved in accordance with this Section 5 Construction Plans and Procedures prior to the approval and/or recordation of the Final Plat, unless otherwise stated within this Subdivision Ordinance. 
E.  Criteria for Approval 
The Director of Public Works and Utilities shall approve Construction Plans if: 
1.  The Construction Plans are consistent with the approved Preliminary Plat, or the proposed Final Plat; and 
2.  The Construction Plans conform to the subject property's zoning and any planned development (PD) standards (including zoning design standards), and to the standards for adequate public facilities, contained in these Subdivision Regulations and all other applicable City codes. 
F.  Effect 
Approval of Construction Plans authorizes the Applicant to: 
1.  Schedule a Pre-Construction Meeting (5.02); and 
2.  Apply for Construction Release (5.03). 
G.  Expiration Date for Construction Plans 
The approval of Construction Plans shall remain in effect for a period of one (1) year from the date of approval, or for the duration of construction of the project, provided that progress toward completion of the project continues to be demonstrated, unless the Construction Plans are extended in accordance with Section 5.01.H Extension of Construction Plans beyond Expiration Date. 
H.  Extension of Construction Plans beyond Expiration Date 
1.  General 
a.  Construction Plans may be extended for a period of six (6) additional months beyond the expiration date. 
b.  A request must be made in writing to the Director of Public Works and Utilities for such extension prior to expiration of the plans, and shall include reasons why the plans should be extended. 
2.  Decision by the Director of Public Works and Utilities 
a.  The Director of Public Works and Utilities will review the extension request, and shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the extension request within thirty (30) calendar days following the date of the extension request. 
b.  Should the Director of Public Works and Utilities fail to act on an extension request within thirty (30) calendar days, the extension shall be deemed to be approved. 
3.  Consideration 
The Director of Public Works and Utilities shall extend Construction Plans approval for a period of six (6) additional months beyond the expiration date if: 
a.  A Final Plat has been submitted, approved or filed of record for any portion of the property shown on the Construction Plans; 
b.  The Construction Plans comply with new ordinances (i.e., ordinances that have been adopted after approval of the original Construction Plans) that impact the health, safety and general welfare of the City; 
c.  Demonstrable forward progress has been made to proceed with construction or required improvements; and 
d.  A Performance Agreement (Section 5.05 Performance Agreements and Security for Completion), if applicable, is still valid and in full effect. 
4.  Conditions 
In granting an extension, the Director of Public Works and Utilities may impose such conditions as are needed to ensure that the land will be developed in a timely fashion and that the public interest is served. Any extension may be predicated upon compliance with new development regulations and/or the Applicant waiving any vested rights. 
5.  Total Extension 
A second six (6) month extension may be requested using the same process outlined above.  
5.02. - Pre-Construction Meeting 
A.  Requirement 
1.  The Applicant(s) shall attend a Pre-Construction Meeting with the Director of Public Works and Utilities following the approval of Construction Plans and prior to commencement of any construction on the property. 
2.  The Applicant shall be responsible for contacting the Director of Public Works and Utilities, requesting a meeting time, and notifying all participants of the meeting. 
3.  After receiving a meeting request from the Applicant, the Director of Public Works and Utilities shall promptly schedule a Pre-Construction Meeting. 
B.  Purpose 
1.  Discussion of Procedures 
The purpose of the Pre-Construction Meeting is to discuss administrative, communication, and operating procedures for project construction prior to Construction Release or issuance of a Building Permit. 
2.  Review of Criteria 
A list of typical inspection items, procedures, and acceptance criteria for items in public Right-of-Way and easements will also be furnished to the Applicant. 
C.  Review time for Construction Plans 
The Director of Public Works and Utilities shall review Construction Plans within 60 days. 
D.  Notice 
The Applicant shall receive written notice from the Director of Public Works and Utilities that Construction Plans have been approved and that the project is eligible for a Pre-Construction Meeting. 
E.  Effect 
Following the Pre-Construction Meeting and upon approval of the Construction Plans and full compliance with all pre-construction requirements, the Director of Public Works and Utilities shall authorize Construction Release, allowing the Applicant to commence with construction of the project.  
5.03. - Construction Release 
1.  Requirements for a Construction Release 
a.  Upon approval of the Preliminary Plat and/or the Construction Plans, receipt of all documentation (e.g., insurance information, bonds, etc.) and fees, and after the Pre-Construction Meeting with City staff and a franchise utility representative, the Director of Public Works and Utilities shall release the plans for construction if all City requirements pertaining to construction have been met. 
b.  The Construction Release shall remain in effect for a period of one (1) year from the date of issuance, or for the duration of construction of the project, provided that progress toward completion of the project continues to be demonstrated. 
2.  Construction Release Expiration and Extension 
Expiration, and possible extension, of the Construction Release shall be the same as for the Construction Plans (see Sections 5.01.G and 5.01.H).  
5.04. - Timing of Public Improvements 
A.  Timing Options for Approval of the Final Plat 
1.  Option 1: Public Improvements Completed Prior to Final Plat Approval and Recordation 
a.  Option 1A: 100 Percent Completion of Public Improvements 
Unless developed in accordance with Sections 5.04.A.1.b or 5.04.A.2 (below), completion of all required Public Improvements shall occur prior to Final Plat approval and recordation. 
b.  Option 1B: 90 Percent of Completion of Public Improvements 
A Final Plat may be approved and recorded if 90 percent of the Public Improvements and 100 percent of the franchise utilities have been completed and installed. The determination of percentage complete shall be made by the Director of Public Works and Utilities. The Final Plat shall be conditioned on execution of a Performance Agreement and provision of security, in accordance with Section 5.05 Performance Agreements and Security for Completion. 
2.  Option 2: Public Improvements to be Completed After Final Plat Approval and Recordation 
a.  The Director of Public Works and Utilities shall allow construction of all Public Improvements after Final Plat approval and recordation. 
b.  The construction of Public Improvements after Final Plat approval and recordation shall be conditioned on execution of a Performance Agreement and provision of security, in accordance with Section 5.05 Performance Agreements and Security for Completion. 
c.  It shall be at the Director of Public Works and Utilities' discretion to determine whether postponing construction of Public Improvements until after Final Plat approval and recordation is appropriate, and whether financial guarantee is acceptable through a Performance Agreement. 
d.  All construction of the required Public Improvements shall be completed within two (2) years of construction release. An extension may be granted by the city council for up to one (1) year. 
3.  Option 3: Special Provision for the Deferral of Public Improvements and obligations on Gifted or Inherited Tracts 
a.  When property is being subdivided to partition the same among individuals who own the property in undivided interests, ("Original Owners") including an individual's trust, certain Public Improvements and obligations, described below, may be deferred and the Plat recorded and lots sold under the following circumstances: 
i.  All Original Owners shall apply for Plat approval. 
ii.  All Original Owners shall request deferral of improvements (all or part) under this section. 
iii.  Proof of the vesting deed or inheritance shall be submitted at the time of Plat Application. 
iv.  The tract being subdivided shall not be divided into more tracts than the number of Original Owners. 
v.  The following Public Improvements and obligations may be deferred: 
(a)  installation of onsite or offsite utilities, 
(b)  street improvements, 
(c)  curbing, 
(d)  driveways, 
(e)  drainage improvements, 
(f)  detention improvements, 
(g)  sidewalk improvements, 
(h)  curb cuts, 
(i)  tap fees and 
(j)  park dedication requirements. 
vi.  For properties containing flood plain: If the Original Owners desire to defer determination of the base flood elevation, the current FEMA map will be used to determine initial dedications. The Plat will be notated as follows: "This plat does not comply with the flood plain requirements of the City, and notice is given that any and all improvements, including those not requiring a building permit, must comply with such requirements. The flood plain shown hereon is based on the FEMA maps on file with the City, are approximate only and may not be relied upon." A study, if required, will be performed at the time completion of the deferred Public Improvements and obligations is required (see 5.04.A.3.a.ix below,) and additional dedications made or requirements completed at such time. The Plat will be amended (see 4.08 Amending Plat) to reflect the study and amended dedications or requirements. 
vii.  No other subdivision requirements or dedications may be deferred. 
viii.  All deferrals will be specifically noted on the recorded plat and assigned to each lot. 
ix.  All deferred Public Improvements and obligations assigned to a lot will be completed by the earlier of (1) re-conveyance of the lot by the Original Owner, or (2) the issuance of a building permit, or (3) any further subdivision of the lot to which the improvements are assigned. No building permit shall be issued prior to completion of said improvements or obligations. 
b.  No deferrals shall be granted if a vesting deed results in the owner (or his or her trust) continuing to own an undivided interest or if the Director of Development Services determines that a conveyance was made to effect a deferral. The Director of Development Services may require affidavits of all applicants in making his or her determination. 
B.  Phased Development 
If the development is being platted and constructed in phases, improvements shall be completed as platted areas are approved and phases are constructed. 
C.  Easements for Utility Providers 
1.  The Applicant is responsible for contacting all utility providers prior to beginning construction, and for securing all necessary easements for same prior to Final Plat approval and recordation. 
2.  The Applicant's engineer shall provide the Director of Public Works and Utilities with written certification that all necessary easements are secured for the various utility providers, and such easements shall be shown on the Final Plat with the recording information for each. 
D.  Off-Site Easements 
1.  All necessary off-site easements required for installation of required off-site Public Improvements to serve the development shall be acquired by the Applicant prior to the Pre-Construction Meeting (see Section 5.02 Pre-Construction Meeting). 
2.  Off-site easements shall be conveyed and recorded at the County by an instrument approved by the City. 
3.  If the property on which the off-site easement is required has been platted, a separate instrument shall be required to dedicate the easement. 
4.  The Applicant shall be responsible for the acquisition of all required off-site easements. If the Applicant is unable to acquire the necessary off-site easements, the Applicant may request assistance from the City. The Applicant shall provide the City with easements or Right-of-Way survey documents and exhibits, documentation, including evidence of a reasonable offer made to the affected property owner. Upon receiving a written request for assistance, the City may, at its option, acquire these easements either through negations, or in appropriate situations through eminent domain proceedings. 
5.  The Applicant shall reimburse the City for the costs of acquiring the necessary easements including but not limited to attorney's fees and costs.  
5.05. - Performance Agreements and Security for Completion 
A.  Performance Agreements and Security for Completion 
When any of the required Public Improvements will be postponed and constructed after Final Plat approval and recordation, the Final Plat shall not be accepted for filing, nor shall it be approved, unless and until the Applicant enters into a Performance Agreement of standardized format approved by the City by which the Applicant: 
1.  Will complete the improvements; 
2.  Warrants the improvements for a period of two (2) years following final acceptance by the City; 
3.  Provides a maintenance bond in the amount of one hundred and ten percent (110%) of the costs of the improvements for such period to ensure the repair and replacement of all defects due to faulty materials and workmanship that appear within the two year period following date of acceptance; 
4.  Provides provisions (e.g., performance and payment bonds) for securing the obligations of the agreement consistent with Section 5.05.D Security for Completion of Improvements; and 
5.  Outlines other terms and conditions as are agreed to by the Applicant and the City, or as may be required by these Subdivision Regulations, including insurance requirements and covenants to comply with other ordinances of the City. 
B.  Agreement to Run with the Land 
1.  The Performance Agreement shall provide that the covenants and other items of agreement contained therein shall run with the land and shall bind all successors, heirs and assignees of the Applicant. 
2.  All existing owners and lienholders shall be required to execute the agreement or provide written consent to the covenants and other items contained in the agreement. 
C.  Decision by the City Council 
1.  The Director of Public Works and Utilities shall review all Performance Agreements. 
2.  The Director of Public Works and Utilities shall recommend an action to the City Council (or City Manager if applicable) for all Performance Agreements. 
3.  The Performance Agreement shall require the approval of the City Council. The City Council may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a Performance Agreement. 
a.  The City Council may authorize the City Manager to approve specific Performance Agreements on behalf of the City Council (e.g., Performance Agreements under a specific dollar amount). In the event of a disagreement between the City staff and the Subdivider concerning stipulations of the Performance Agreement, the Subdivider may request City Council approval of alternative provisions. 
D.  Security for Completion of Improvements 
1.  Type of Security 
a.  When any of the required Public Improvements will be constructed after approval and recordation of the Final Plat, the Applicant shall guarantee proper construction of such postponed improvements and payment of all claimants supplying labor and materials for the construction of the improvements, in accordance with the City's standards and with these Subdivision Regulations, by a bond executed by a surety company holding a license to do business in the State of Texas, and acceptable to the City, on the form provided by the City. 
b.  The performance and payment bonds shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney. Alternatively, irrevocable letter of credit (ILOC) or cash may be accepted and approved as to form by the City Attorney. 
2.  Estimated Cost and Security Approval 
a.  Security shall be issued in the amount of one hundred and ten percent (110%) of the cost to construct and complete all required Public Improvements to the City's standards as estimated by the Applicant's professional engineer, and as approved by the Director of Public Works and Utilities. 
b.  Security shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Attorney. 
c.  The Applicant shall reimburse the City for all related legal costs for review (this reimbursement shall be paid in full prior to filing of the Final Plat). 
E.  Escrow Policies and Procedures 
1.  Request for Escrow 
a.  The City may require or the Developer may petition the City to defer required improvements in exchange for a deposit of escrow up to an amount not to exceed $25,000 for a period of two (2) years from acceptance of the project. An example may include a timing issue due to pending street improvements by another agency such as TXDOT. 
b.  The Director of Public Works and Utilities may require studies and other information to support the Developer's request to escrow. 
2.  Escrow Deposit with the City 
a.  When the Director of Public Works and Utilities requires or agrees to accept escrow deposits, the Developer shall deposit in escrow with the City, at a financial institution to be determined by the City, an amount equal to one hundred and ten percent (110%) of the total "turnkey" costs including, but not limited to, the design, permitting, acceptance and inflation costs related to the improvement(s). The full amount of escrow shall remain deposited with the City until completion of the project. 
b.  The Director of Public Works and Utilities shall review and approve the amount, which shall be approved and paid prior to recordation of the Final Plat. 
3.  City Usage of Escrowed Funds 
The City may also use the escrowed funds in participation with another entity (such as TXDOT or the County, etc.) to jointly construct the Public Improvement(s). 
4.  Termination of Escrow 
a.  Escrows, or portions of escrowed amounts, which remain unused after a period of ten (10) years following the date of such payment shall, upon written request, be returned to the Developer. 
b.  Such return of escrowed funds does not remove any obligations of the Developer for construction of the required improvement(s). 
5.  Refund 
If all or a portion of a street or other type of Public Improvement for which escrow is deposited is constructed by a party other than the City, the remaining unused escrowed funds, upon written request shall be refunded to the Developer after completion and City acceptance of the street or Public Improvement. The City shall require thirty (30) days from the request to process the refund. 
6.  Interest on Escrowed Funds 
When escrowed funds are returned or refunded to the escrowing Developer, the City shall retain all of the interest accrued by the funds. 
7.  Escrow Fee Agreement 
The Director of Public Works and Utilities, at his/her discretion, may require an escrow fee agreement be executed.  
5.06. - Inspection, Maintenance, and Acceptance of Public Improvements 
A.  Inspection of Public Improvements 
1.  Timing and Contact 
a.  The Director of Public Works and Utilities shall inspect the construction of improvements while in progress, as well as upon completion. 
b.  The Applicant, or Applicant's contractor, shall maintain contact with the Director of Public Works and Utilities during construction of improvements. 
2.  Conformance with Construction Plans 
a.  Construction shall be in accordance with the approved Construction Plans. 
b.  Any significant change in design required during construction shall be made by the Applicant's engineer, and shall be subject to approval by the Director of Public Works and Utilities. 
3.  Corrections to Improvements 
If the Director of Public Works and Utilities finds, upon inspection, that any of the required Public Improvements have not been constructed properly and in accordance with the approved Construction Plans, the Applicant shall be responsible for completing and/or correcting the Public Improvements to bring such into compliance. 
B.  Public Works Inspection Fees 
1.  Fee Standards 
a.  The Developer may be charged an inspection fee to reimburse the City inspection cost if the City is required to have third party inspections of the public infrastructure in each Subdivision or development. 
b.  Inspections shall be conducted during normal business hours, Monday through Friday. 
2.  Cost for Construction 
a.  The Developer shall submit to the City a cost for construction of the public infrastructure to be dedicated to the City and upon which the maintenance bond and inspection fees will be based. 
b.  The cost of construction shall be reviewed and approved by the Director of Public Works and Utilities. 
3.  Inspection During Non-Business Hours 
a.  Public works inspections may be conducted at times other than normal working hours with prior approval. 
b.  A minimum forty-eight (48) hour notice must be given and the Developer shall reimburse the City a minimum of four (4) hours at the current overtime rate per hour upon receipt of an invoice. 
C.  Maintenance during Construction 
The Applicant shall maintain all required Public Improvements during construction of the development. 
D.  Submission of Record Drawings 
1.  The City shall not accept dedication of required Public Improvements until the Applicant's engineer has certified to the Director of Public Works and Utilities, through submission of detailed Record Drawings, which have been approved by the City, of the project and filed copies of any off-site easements that the Public Improvements have been built in accordance with the approved Construction Plans. 
2.  Applicable Record Drawings shall be submitted to the City before a Plat is approved. 
3.  Each record drawing sheet shall show all changes made in the Construction Plans during construction, and on each sheet, there shall be a "record" stamp bearing the signature of the engineer and date, which shall be maintained by the Director of Public Works and Utilities. One (1) Mylar copy may be requested. 
4.  Digital files of all the Record Drawings shall be submitted by the Applicant in AutoCAD and Adobe PDF formats, as required by the City. 
E.  Acceptance or Rejection of Improvements by the Director of Public Works and Utilities 
1.  Responsible Official 
The Director of Public Works and Utilities shall be responsible for inspecting all required Public Improvements shown in the Construction Plans, and for accepting completed subdivision improvements intended for dedication to the City. 
2.  Final Inspection 
After completion of all improvements, franchise utilities, grading, and erosion control, the Director of Public Works and Utilities and other designated representatives (as applicable) will perform a final inspection before recommending acceptance of the improvements via a Letter of Final Acceptance. 
3.  Letter of Final Acceptance 
If all improvements are completed, inspected, tested (if applicable), and determined by the City to be in conformance with Subdivision Ordinance regulations and with the City's design standards and all inspection fees have been paid, then the Director of Public Works and Utilities shall issue a Letter of Final Acceptance to the Applicant, thereby notifying the Applicant of the City's approval of improvements and acceptance or future acceptance subject to approval of a Final Plat. 
a.  In cases where a Final Plat has not been approved, the Letter of Final Acceptance will indicate that the City's acceptance of the Public Improvements will occur concurrently with the approval of a Final Plat. 
b.  In cases where a Final Plat has already been approved with a Performance Agreement, the Letter of Final Acceptance will indicate the City's acceptance of the Public Improvements. 
c.  Dedication and acceptance language shall be shown on the Final Plat. 
4.  Meaning of Acceptance 
Acceptance of the Improvements shall mean that the Applicant has transferred all rights to all the Public Improvements to the City for title, use, and maintenance, this shall not release the Developer from the maintenance bond (see Section 5.06.G Maintenance Bond for more information). 
5.  Rejection 
The Director of Public Works and Utilities shall reject those Improvements that fail to comply with the City's standards and specifications. The City shall enforce the guarantee provided by agreement(s). 
F.  Disclaimer 
1.  Approval of a Preliminary Plat by the Planning and Zoning Commission, or Construction Plans by the Director of Public Works and Utilities, shall not constitute acceptance of any of the Public Improvements required to serve the Subdivision or development. 
2.  No Public Improvements shall be accepted for dedication by the City except in accordance with this Section. 
G.  Maintenance Bond 
1.  Per requirements established and maintained by the Director of Public Works and Utilities, the Developer shall furnish maintenance bonds to the City for Public Improvements for a period of two (2) years from the date of acceptance by the City (see 5.06.E.3 Letter of Final Acceptance for acceptance dates). 
2.  The maintenance bond or other surety shall be a good and sufficient bond executed by a corporate surety approved by the City in an amount equal to the total cost of said improvements and guaranteeing their maintenance for two (2) years from the date of Final Plat approval or acceptance of the related Public Improvements (if the Public Improvement is accepted after Final Plat approval). 
3.  Maintenance bonds shall be in a form acceptable to the City Attorney.  
Section 6. - Subdivision Design Standards 
 
6.01. - Minimum Standards 
A.  Basis for Standards 
The standards established within this Subdivision Ordinance for dedication and construction of public facilities and infrastructure are based upon engineering studies and historical usages and demands by different categories of development. 
B.  Minimum Level of Service Necessary 
This Subdivision Ordinance identifies certain minimum requirements and sizes for utilities, roadways, parks, and other facilities that have been determined by the City Council to be necessary in order to provide the minimum level of service necessary to protect or promote the public health, safety, and welfare and to ensure the quality of life currently enjoyed by the citizens. 
1.  It is the intent of this Subdivision Ordinance that no development occur until, and unless, these minimum levels of service are met. 
2.  Therefore, each Subdivision in the City shall be required to dedicate, construct or upgrade required facilities and infrastructure to a capacity that meets these minimum levels. 
C.  Minimum Standards for Public Infrastructure 
1.  For each category of public infrastructure, a minimum standard of infrastructure has been developed based upon historic studies and construction projects of the City and other cities. 
2.  The minimum standards take into consideration the soil standards, the topographic configuration of the City, the use and impact analyses in developing standard specifications. 
3.  The minimum standards reflect the minimum level of facilities that can be built to meet the health, safety and welfare of the citizens.  
6.02. - Adequate Public Facilities 
A.  Services Required 
Land proposed for development in the City and in the City's Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) must be served adequately by essential public facilities and services, including water facilities, wastewater facilities, roadway and pedestrian facilities, and drainage facilities. 
B.  Approval Timing 
Land shall not be approved for platting or development unless and until adequate public facilities necessary to serve the development exist or provision has been made for the facilities, whether the facilities are to be located within the property being developed or off-site. 
C.  Rough Proportionality and Fair Share Policy Statement 
1.  There is a direct correlation between the increased demand on public facilities that is created by a new development, and the City's requirements to dedicate Right-of-Way and Easements and to construct a fair and proportional share of Public Improvements that are necessary to offset such impacts such that new development does not negatively affect the City as a whole. 
2.  The City desires that a new development project contribute its fair and proportional share of such costs. 
3.  A fair and proportional share shall be determined as the level or standard of service that is required to adequately serve a new development. 
4.  Standards relating to the dedication or construction requirements shall be roughly proportional (see definition Proportionality/Proportional Share) to the nature and extent of the impacts created by the proposed development on the City's water, wastewater, storm drainage, parks or roadway system, as the case may be, or does reasonably benefit the proposed development. 
5.  See 7.02 Subdivision Proportionality Appeal for proportionality approval procedures.  
6.03. - Conformance to Plans and Codes 
A.  Public Improvements Conform to Plan and Codes 
1.  Design and construction of Public Improvements must conform to the standards, criteria, and requirements of the following, as they may from time to time be amended by those responsible for their promulgation. 
a.  The Transportation Plan; 
b.  The Drainage Design Manual; 
c.  The Standard Construction Details; 
d.  The Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (TMUTCD); 
e.  Approved Standard Specifications for Construction of Public Works; 
f.  American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials Design Manual; 
g.  Texas Health Code; 
h.  Standard Details and Specification for Public Infrastructure Construction Manual (Standard Details Manual); 
i.  Texas Water Code; 
j.  Master Drainage Plans; 
k.  Floodplain Ordinance; 
l.  Erosion Control Ordinance; 
m.  Stormwater Management Plan; and 
n.  International Code Council (ICC) Fire Code 
o.  All other codes and ordinances of the City 
2.  If the construction of Public Improvements is not completed within two (2) years from the Preliminary Plat approval date, then the infrastructure must be redesigned using the most current criteria.  
6.04. - Access Management 
A.  Intent of Access Management 
It is the intent of this section to: 
1.  Prohibit the indiscriminate location and spacing of driveways while maintaining reasonable vehicular access to and from the public street system; 
2.  Reduce conflicting turning movements and congestion and thereby reducing vehicular accidents; and 
3.  Maintain and enhance a positive image for the attraction of new, high-quality developments in the City. 
B.  Applicability 
1.  A person commits an offense if the person constructs, reconstructs, relocates or in any way alters the design or operation of any driveway without first obtaining a building permit issued by the Building Official. 
2.  No driveway shall be allowed or permitted if, in the determination of the City Engineer, it is detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. 
C.  Street Section Classifications 
Street section classifications shall be defined in accordance with the Transportation element of the City's Comprehensive Plan. 
D.  Access Requirement 
Every lot shall have frontage on, and access to, a public street or other approved public access easement. 
E.  Traffic Impact Analysis 
1.  A Traffic Impact Analysis may be required at the time of Preliminary Plat submittal for Subdivision with the city limits on an Arterial Street or Collector Street. 
a.  Threshold for a Traffic Impact Analysis: 
i.  Residentially zoned Subdivisions that are projected to generate more than 1,000 new average daily trips (ADT) shall require a TIA. 
ii.  Office zoned Subdivisions that are projected to generate more than 500 new average daily trips (ADT) shall require a TIA. 
iii.  Retail/commercial zoned Subdivisions that are projected to generate more than 2,500 new average daily trips (ADT) shall require a TIA. 
iv.  Industrial zoned Subdivisions that are projected to generate more than 500 new average daily trips (ADT) shall require a TIA. 
b.  Calculation of the ADT for Subdivisions: 
i.  For calculating the ADT for residentially zoned Subdivisions, a housing unit shall be considered to generate 10 vehicle trips a day. 
ii.  For calculating the ADT for office zoned Subdivisions, a 50,000 square foot building shall be considered to generate 500 ADT. In order to anticipated if a 50,000 square foot building can be built on a lot, the lot size with all setbacks and other related area zoning standards should be applied. 
iii.  For calculating the ADT for retail/commercial zoned Subdivisions, a 60,000 square foot building shall be considered to generate 2,500 ADT. In order to anticipated if a 60,000 square foot building can be built on a lot, the lot size with all setbacks and other related area zoning standards should be applied. 
iv.  For calculating the ADT for industrial zoned Subdivisions, a 75,000 square foot building shall be considered to generate 500 ADT. In order to anticipated if a 75,000 square foot building can be built on a lot, the lot size with all setbacks and other related area zoning standards should be applied. 
2.  A Minor Subdivision Waiver may be granted by the Director of Development Services if the roadway is fully built. 
F.  Common Access 
1.  Lots with sufficient frontage to safely meet the design requirements below may be permitted their own driveways. 
2.  A Common Access Easement may be required between adjacent lots fronting on any street section in order to minimize the total number of access points along those streets and to facilitate traffic flow between lots. 
3.  Common Access Easement 
a.  The use of common driveways shall require the dedication of a joint-use private access easement on each affected property. 
b.  Said dedication shall be provided on the Final Plat of the subject properties, or be filed by separate instrument approved by the City Attorney with the County with a copy forwarded to the City. 
c.  The Plat shall state that the easement shall be maintained by the property owner. 
d.  The Common Access Easement shall encompass the entire width of the planned driveway plus an additional width of one foot on both sides of the drive. 
 
G.  Driveway Design for State Maintained Roadways (e.g., HWY 290) Criteria 
1.  Driveway Dimensions and Spacing 
The minimum dimensional values required for driveways along State-maintained roadways shall be found in the latest Texas Department of Transportation (TXDOT) Access Management Manual. 
2.  Additional Design Requirements 
a.  Plans for all work within State Right-of-Way shall be submitted to the Director of Public Works and Utilities. 
b.  The City will review and submit an Application for permit to work with State Right-of-Way based upon the approved plans and forward to the State. 
c.  Deceleration lanes shall be provided according to the TXDOT Access Management Manual. 
H.  Driveway Design for City Maintained Roadways 
The following standards shall be followed in the design and construction of driveways. The values in the following tables represent minimum standards to be applied in designing and locating driveways on City streets. 
1.  Driveway Dimensions and Spacing (City Maintained Roadways) 
The following Table 7: Dimensions for Driveways along City Maintained Roadways indicates the minimum dimensional values required for driveways along City maintained roadways (local streets, collectors, Arterial Streets). 
Table 7: Dimensions for Driveways along City Maintained Roadways 
Criteria 	Street Classification 	Commercial and Multi-Family 
Driveway 	Service Driveway 	Single Family Driveways 
Driveway Throat Width 	Arterial Streets 	24-40 Feet 	30-48 Feet 	10-24 Feet 
	Collectors 	24-40 Feet 	30-48 Feet 	10-24 Feet 
	Minor/Local Streets 	24-40 Feet 	24-36 Feet 	10-24 Feet 
Driveway Curb Radius 	Arterial Streets 	20-30 Feet 	25-30 Feet 	5-10 Feet 
	Collectors 	10-20 Feet 	10-20 Feet 	5-10 Feet 
	Minor/Local Streets 	10-20 Feet 	10-20 Feet 	5-10 Feet 
Minimum Distance to Intersection Along Roadway 	Arterial Streets 	150 Feet 	150 Feet 	20 Feet 
	Collectors 	100 Feet 	100 Feet 	20 Feet 
	Minor/Local Streets 	75 Feet 	75 Feet 	20 Feet 
Minimum Centerline Driveway Spacing Along Roadway 	Arterial Streets 	250 Feet 	250 Feet 	N/A 
	Collectors 	150 Feet 	150 Feet 	20 Feet 
	Minor/Local Streets 	100 Feet 	100 Feet 	10-20 Feet 
 
Notes: 
1 	The requirements for Driveway Throat Width and Driveway Curb Radius are for standard undivided two-way operation and may be varied by the Director of Public Works and Utilities if traffic volumes, truck usage, common driveways, and other factors warrant such. 
2 	Minimum centerline spacing does not implicitly determine the number of driveways allowed. Driveways served by deceleration lanes may be spaced at closer intervals if approved by the Director of Public Works and Utilities. 
3 	Distance measured from the intersection Right-of-Way line to the centerline of the proposed driveway. 
4 	Refer to 6.04.H.2 (below). Commercial, multi-family and service driveways may not be permitted on local streets. 
 
2.  Additional Design Requirements (City Maintained Roadways) 
a.  Driveways Prohibited 
i.  Commercial, multi-family and service driveways shall not be permitted on local streets unless the tract or lot has no other public access. 
ii.  In the event there is no other access to a public street, commercial, multi-family and service driveways shall be permitted on local streets provided that they meet the design standards in Table 7: Dimensions for Driveways along City Maintained Roadways. 
b.  Deceleration Lanes for Driveways on Arterial Streets Required 
i.  When the turning volume for a driveway exceeds 60 vehicles per hour during the peak hour, a deceleration lane shall be provided on Arterial Streets with a posted speed of 40 mph to 45 mph. 
ii.  When the turning volume for a driveway exceeds 50 vehicles per hour during the peak hour, a deceleration lane shall be provided on Arterial Streets with a posted speed greater than 45 mph. 
I.  Required Internal Storage (Minimum Throat Length/Stacking) 
1.  Minimum Throat Length 
The driveway for any multi-family, commercial or industrial property that connects to a highway, Arterial Street, or collector or local street shall extend onto private property a minimum distance of 15 feet, but not less than the required front landscape edge width, from the Right-of-Way line before intersecting any internal circulation drive. 
2.  Internal Storage (Stacking) 
Internal storage (stacking) shall be provided on multi-family, commercial or industrial properties for corresponding driveways in accordance with Table 8: Required Internal Storage for driveways that provide ingress/egress to parking areas of 20 or greater spaces. 
Table 8: Required Internal Storage 
Average Number of Parking Spaces per Driveway* 	Total Number of Parking Spaces** 	Minimum Storage length 
20-49 	20-49 	Landscape edge width +20' 
	50-199 	50' 
	200+ 	75' 
50-199 	50-199 	75' 
	200+ 	100' 
200+ 	200+ 	100' 
 
Notes: 
1 	The average number of parking spaces per driveway is calculated by dividing the total number of parking spaces by the number of commercial and multi-family driveways. (Service driveways are not included in the calculation.) 
2 	The total number of parking spaces is the sum of all spaces accessible by a driveway or driveways both on-site and off-site. The internal storage shall be separated from parking areas by a five-foot (5') wide, raised curb island or median. Planting requirements for the island or median shall be one (1) Small Tree and one (1) five-gallon (5 Gal.) shrub for every fifteen (15) linear feet. Appropriate signage (e.g. stop, yield, etc.) shall be placed for any vehicular cross movement or internal circulation that intersects the ingress/egress circulation beyond the required internal storage. 
 
J.  Adequate Sight Distance 
1.  Driveways shall be prohibited where adequate sight distance is not available for the established speed limit. 
2.  Sight distances shall be calculated in accordance with the latest edition of the AASHTO "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets." 
3.  If a field inspection indicates that driveway sight distance may be insufficient, the Applicant will be required to submit vertical and horizontal information prepared by a registered professional engineer to the Director of Public Works and Utilities that verifies adequate sight distance is available for the proposed driveway location. 
4.  For sight triangle requirements, (i.e., visibility triangles), please refer to 6.07.C. Triangular Sight Visibility Easements (see also Figure 11: Visibility Triangles).  
6.05. - Alleys 
A.  Alleys are Optional Improvements 
If alleys are constructed at the discretion of the Developer, then the alleys shall meet the standards of this Section 6.05. 
B.  Standards for Commercial and Industrial Alleys 
Alleys in commercial and industrial areas shall be 15 feet in paving width and 20 feet in Right-of-Way width. 
C.  Standards for Residential Alleys 
Alleys in all residential areas shall be 15 feet in paving width and 20 feet in Right-of-Way width. 
D.  Radii of the Turn-Outs 
The radii of the turn-outs for alleys intersecting any street shall be 5 feet. 
E.  Alley Fences 
Where driveways connect to alleys in commercial, industrial, or residential areas, fences may be constructed along the rear lot line of any lot to a point within five (5) feet of a point where the driveway would intersect the alley pavement at 90 degrees. Fences are optional. 
F.  Alley Right-of-Way Width and Design 
1.  The minimum Right-of-Way width of an alley serving industrial and commercial areas shall be 20 feet. 
2.  Alleys serving residential areas shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 20 feet. 
3.  Alleys may be required along the rear lot lines when adjacent to Arterial Streets for rear entrance. 
4.  See section 6.12.J Street and Alley Requirements for additional requirements. 
G.  Alley/Street Intersection - Right Angles 
Alleys shall intersect streets at right angles or radially to curved streets. 
H.  Alley/Street Intersection - Prohibition 
Alleys shall not intersect streets that are designated in the Comprehensive Plan as Arterial Streets. 
I.  Alley/Street Intersection - Separation 
The minimum distance between an alley/street intersection and a street/street intersection shall be the width of at least one (1) lot. 
J.  Maximum Alley Length 
1.  Maximum alley length between access points to a street shall be 600 feet. 
2.  A length of more than 600 feet without access to a public street or approved access easement may be approved by Minor Subdivision Waiver. 
K.  Dead-End Alleys 
Dead-end alleys shall be provided with adequate turn-around facilities. 
L.  Alleys Intersections or Alley Sharp Angle 
In cases where two alleys intersect or turn a sharp angle, lot corners shall be platted so that a triangular area of 25' x 25' or greater, is dedicated as part of the alley for the purpose of providing a minimum radius of 30 feet to the inside edge of the alley paving. For sight visibility safety, no utilities taller than three (3) feet shall be placed in the triangular area.  
6.06. - Blocks 
A.  Block Length Measurement 
The length of a block shall be considered to be the distance from property corner to property corner measured along the property line of the Block Face: 
1.  Of greatest dimension, or 
2.  On which the greatest number of lots face. 
B.  Block Width Measurements 
The width of a block shall be considered to be the distance from property corner to property corner measured along the property line of the block face: 
1.  Of least dimension, or 
2.  On which the fewest number of lots face. 
C.  Block Measurement Factors 
The length, width and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
1.  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated; 
2.  Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions; 
3.  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic; 
4.  Limitations of topography; and 
5.  Compatibility with efficient development of public facilities as established by surrounding developments. 
D.  Block Design 
1.  Intersecting streets shall be provided at such intervals as to serve traffic adequately and to meet existing streets. 
2.  Where no existing subdivision controls, the block lengths should not exceed 1,200 feet. 
3.  Where no existing subdivision controls, the blocks should not be less than 500 feet in length. However, in cases where physical barriers, property ownership, or individual usage creates conditions where it is appropriate that these standards be varied then, upon approval by the Director of Development Services, the length may be increased or decreased to meet existing conditions, having due regard for connecting streets, circulation of traffic and public safety. 
E.  Exceptions 
1.  These limits shall be exceeded only upon approval of a Subdivision Waiver. 
2.  Blocks longer than 600 feet shall be prohibited in commercial and industrial districts.  
6.07. - Easements and Dedications 
Easements and dedications of property needed for the construction of streets, alleys, private common access easements, sidewalks, storm drainage facilities, floodways, water mains, wastewater mains and other utilities, retaining walls and any other property necessary to serve the Plat and to implement the requirements of the Subdivision Ordinance and Standard Details and Specification for Public Infrastructure Construction Manual shall be provided on Subdivision Plats and maintained by the property owner. 
A.  Utility Easements 
1.  Where not adjacent to a public Right-of-Way, easements at least fifteen (15) feet wide shall be provided for utility construction, service, and maintenance shall be provided where necessary. 
2.  Easements accommodating both water and wastewater (sewer) facilities and easements accommodating both public utilities and franchise utilities shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide. 
a.  More easements or additional easement width may be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission if deemed necessary by the Director of Public Works and Utilities. 
3.  Easements at least fifteen (15) feet wide for utility construction, service, and maintenance shall be provided for lots which have frontage along state highways. 
4.  Easements having greater width dimensions may also be required along or across lots where engineering design or special conditions make it necessary for the installation of utilities and drainage facilities outside public Right-of-Way. 
5.  The following full statement of restrictions shall be placed in the dedication instrument: 
Easements: Any public utility, including the City, shall have the right to move and keep moved all or part of any building, fences, trees, shrubs, other growths or improvements that in any way endanger or interfere with the construction, maintenance, or efficiency of its respective systems on any of the easements or Right-of-Way shown on the Plat (or filed by separate instrument that is associated with said property); and any public utility, including the City, shall have the right at all times of ingress and egress to and from and upon said easements for the purpose of construction, reconstruction, inspection, patrolling, maintaining and adding to or removing all or part of its respective systems without the necessity at any time of procuring the permission of anyone. Easements shall be maintained by property owners. The City can move trees or any other improvements and does not have the responsibility to replace them. 
B.  Fire Lane Easement 
1.  Emergency access and fire lane easements shall be provided in locations required by the City and be curbed. 
2.  These easements shall have a minimum width of twenty (20) feet and a minimum height clearance of fourteen (14) feet. Internal drives within parking lots are not required to be curbed. 
3.  All turns shall have a minimum inside radius of twenty-two (22) feet and a minimum outside radius of 50'. 
4.  Any emergency access and fire lane easement more than 150 feet in length shall either connect at each end to a dedicated public street or private way or be provided with a cul-de-sac having 100 feet diameter of paving with an additional distance of ten (10) feet on all sides clear of permanent structures or other obstructions. 
5.  These easements shall be maintained by the owner or the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association and a statement shall appear on the face of the Plat indicating maintenance responsibility. 
C.  Triangular Sight Visibility Easements 
1.  Triangular sight visibility easements shall be required as follows for properties whose zoning falls within one of the following categories: 
a.  Residential zoning districts (including all single family, multi-family, mobile/modular home zoning districts and planned development districts having a single family, multi-family or mobile/modular home use designation): 
i.  30' x 30' sight visibility easements on corner lots at the intersection of two streets. 
b.  Nonresidential zoning districts (including all commercial, industrial and utility districts and planned development districts having a commercial, industrial or utility use designation): 
i.  30' x 30' sight visibility easement on corner lots at the intersection of two streets. 
c.  Multi-family and nonresidential zoning districts (including all multi-family, commercial, industrial and utility districts and planned development districts having a commercial, industrial or utility use designation): 
i.  30' x 30' sight visibility easements at the main driveways. 
d.  All zoning districts (as noted above): 
i.  30' x 30' sight visibility easements on corner lots at the intersection of an alley and a street. 
 
2.  The following full statement of restrictions shall be placed in the dedication instrument or on the face of the Plat: 
Sight Visibility Restriction: No structure, object, or plant of any type may obstruct vision from a height of twenty-four (24) inches to a height of ten (10) feet above the top of the curb, including, but not limited to buildings, fences, walks, signs, trees, shrubs, cars, trucks, etc., in the sight visibility easement as shown on the Plat. These sight visibility easements will remain in effect until vacated by ordinance adopted by the City Council and the property replatted. 
D.  Drainage Easements 
1.  Easements for storm drainage facilities shall be provided at locations containing proposed or existing drainage ways. 
2.  Storm drainage easements of twenty (20) feet minimum width shall be provided for existing and proposed enclosed drainage systems. 
a.  Easements shall be centered over the systems. 
b.  Larger easements, where necessary, shall be provided as directed by the Director of Public Works and Utilities. 
3.  Where lot-to-lot drainage occurs, a drainage easement at least ten (10) feet in width shall be provided along the back and down one side of the downstream property. For information regarding applicable drainage standards see 6.18 Drainage and Storm Water, specifically 6.18.C.1. Lot to Lot Drainage Standards. 
4.  Storm drainage easements shall be provided for emergency overflow drainage ways of sufficient width to contain within the easement storm water resulting from a 100-year frequency storm less the amount of storm water carried in an enclosed system of a capacity required by the City. 
5.  Where a Subdivision is bounded by a water-course, drainage way, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage Right-of-Way conforming substantially to the lines of such water-course, and of such width to provide for increased drainage from anticipated future upstream developments, plus a minimum of ten (10) feet on each side. 
6.  As required by the City, drainage easements shall be dedicated up to the full width of easement necessary to construct the ultimate drainage facility (culvert, storm water, channel, etc.) to be constructed within the easement, including provisions for access ingress and egress by crews and equipment for maintenance purposes. 
E.  Floodplain Easements 
1.  Floodplain easements shall be provided along natural drainage ways and lakes or reservoirs. 
2.  Floodplain easements shall be provided in accordance with the recommendation of the Director of Public Works and Utilities and the Director of Development Services to accommodate the 100 year storm drainage flows or the flow of the flood of record, whichever is greater. 
3.  Floodplain easements shall encompass all areas beneath the water surface elevation of the Base Flood, plus such additional width as may be required to provide ingress and egress to allow maintenance of the banks and for the protection of adjacent property, as determined by the Director of Public Works and Utilities. 
4.  The following full statement of structures shall be placed in the dedication instrument of the Plat: 
100 Year Floodplain Easement Restriction: Construction within the floodplain may not occur. (A request for construction within the floodplain easement must be accompanied with detailed engineering plans and studies indicating that no flooding will result, that no obstruction to the natural flow of water will result; and subject to all owners or the property affected by such construction becoming a party to the request.) Where construction is permitted, all finished floor elevations shall be a minimum of one (1) foot above the 100-year flood elevation as determined by analyzing the ultimate build-out conditions of the entire drainage basin. 
a.  Existing creeks, lakes, reservoirs, or drainage channels traversing along or across portions of this addition, will remain as an open channel at all times and will be maintained by the individual owners of the lot or lots that are traversed by the drainage courses along or across said lots. The City will not be responsible for the maintenance and operation of said drainage ways or for the control of erosion. Each property owner shall keep the natural drainage channels traversing his/her property clean and free of debris, silt, or any substance, which would result in unsanitary conditions. The City shall have the right of ingress and egress for the purpose of inspection and supervision of maintenance work by the property owner to alleviate any undesirable conditions, which may occur. The City is not obligated to maintain or assistance with maintenance of the area. 
b.  The natural drainage channel, as in the case of all natural drainage channels, are subject to storm water overflow and natural bank erosion. The City shall not be liable for damages of any nature resulting from the occurrence of these natural phenomena, nor resulting from a failure of any structure(s) within the natural drainage channels. The natural drainage channel crossing each lot is shown by the Floodway easement line as shown on the plat. If a Subdivision alters the horizontal or vertical floodplain, a FEMA Floodway map revision may be required. 
c.  The location of the floodplain easement shall be shown on the Plat and monuments shall be placed on the property marking the easement. 
F.  Retaining Wall Easements 
1.  If in the opinion of the Director of Public Works and Utilities, the grading plans submitted with the Application for approval of a Final Plat indicate a need for the construction of one or more retaining walls, a private retaining wall easement showing the location of the retaining wall(s) and the no-build zone shall be dedicated and shown on the Preliminary Plat and the Final Plat. 
2.  The width of the retaining wall easement shall be 10 feet or the width of the retaining wall, whichever is greater, plus the width of the no-building zone, as established by the Applicant's structural engineer and approved by the Director of Public Works and Utilities. 
3.  The retaining wall easement shall include a no-building zone extending from the retaining wall on both sides, within which any additional load from future construction would exceed the design capacity of the retaining wall. 
a.  No structure (other than the retaining wall), swimming pool, landscaping, or any other feature which adds load to the retaining wall, shall be constructed within the no-building zone. 
4.  See Section 6.19 Retaining Wall Construction for retaining wall construction requirements. 
5.  A retaining wall easement shall be located entirely on one lot and shall not straddle property lines unless the wall is constructed within a retaining wall easement dedicated to the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association in accordance with 6.07.F.6 (below). 
6.  The Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association for the subdivision, as applicable, shall be responsible for maintenance of the retaining wall, and a note shall be included to this effect on the Final Plat. 
G.  Needs/Benefits Determination 
1.  No dedication otherwise required by this ordinance may be imposed upon a property owner unless the City determines that the dedication is related to the impact of the proposed development; is roughly proportional to the needs created by the proposed development; and provides a benefit to the development. 
2.  An Applicant may appeal a staff recommendation that a dedication be required in accordance with the provisions of Section 7 Subdivision Relief Procedures. 
H.  Maintenance of Easement 
1.  An area established for public purposes on private property upon which the City shall have the right to remove and keep removed all or part of any buildings, fences, trees, shrubs, or other improvements or growths which in any way endanger or interfere with the construction, maintenance, or efficiency of City systems. 
2.  The City shall at all times have the right of ingress and egress to and from and upon the said easements for the purpose of constructing, reconstructing, inspecting, patrolling, maintaining, and adding to or removing all or part of its respective systems without the necessity at any time or procuring the permission of anyone. 
3.  The property owner shall be responsible for maintaining the easement.  
6.08. - Homeowners' or Property Owners' Associations 
A.  Applicability 
When a Subdivision contains common areas, common property, Usable Open Space or other improvements not intended to be conveyed to the City, a Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association shall be created, and the duties and responsibilities shall be established in a declaration consistent with State laws. 
B.  Dedication 
The common areas shall be shown on the Final Plat or record Plat along with an adequate form for dedication thereof. This dedication form shall: 
1.  Save the title to common area properties for the benefit of the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association; and 
2.  Express a definite undertaking by the subdivider to convey the common properties to the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association. 
C.  Membership 
A Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association shall be an incorporated organization operating under recorded land declarations through which: 
1.  Each lot owner in a described land area is automatically a member; and 
2.  Each lot is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share of the expenses for the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association's activities, such as maintenance of common areas, common open spaces or the provision and upkeep of Usable Open Space and common recreational facilities. 
D.  Legal Requirements 
To ensure the establishment of a permanent Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association, including its financing and the rights and responsibilities of the homeowners in relation to the use, management and ownership of common areas or common property, the Subdivision plat, dedication documents, covenants, and other recorded legal agreements must: 
1.  Legally create an automatic membership, Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association; 
2.  Place title to the common property in the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association or give definite assurance that it automatically will be so placed within a reasonable, definite time; 
3.  Place responsibility for operation and maintenance of the common property in with the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association; 
4.  Provide for or place an association charge or assessment on each lot in a manner which will ensure sufficient association funds to maintain the common property or improvements; 
5.  Identify the land area within the association's jurisdiction including, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  The property to be transferred to public agencies; 
b.  The individual residential lots; 
c.  The common properties to be transferred by the Developer to the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association; and 
d.  Other parcels. 
E.  Protective Covenants 
Protective covenants shall be developed which, including, but not limited to, shall make the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association responsible for the maintenance and operation of all common property, and include provisions for assessments, to be enforced by lien. 
F.  Procedure 
Prior to filing the Plat, the Subdivider shall: 
1.  Draft the articles of incorporation of the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association, its bylaws, and the restrictive covenants; 
2.  Submit draft articles, bylaws, and covenants to the Director of Development Services for approval; 
3.  After approval (see above), create the appropriate legal entity; 
4.  Record approved covenants, at the County Clerk's office, which automatically make every lot owner a member of the association, give him/her the right to use the common property, and establish his/her voting rights and his/her obligations to pay assessments; 
5.  Provide evidence of the recorded articles, bylaws, and the restrictive covenants prior to Final Plat approval. 
G.  Maintenance, Repair or Capital Improvement 
1.  Any maintenance, repair or capital improvement made to the property or facilities of the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association by the City pursuant to its ordinances and as a result of non-performance or negligence on the part of the Association, shall be assessed to the Association and paid by the Association within 30 days of the date of notification. 
2.  If the Association fails to pay within 30 days, then the cost will be divided between the various Association members in proportion to the taxable value of their properties, as shown by the current year valuations of the Gillespie County Appraisal District.  
6.09. - Lots 
A.  Lot Design 
Lot design shall provide adequate width, depth, and shape to provide open area, to eliminate overcrowding, and to be appropriate for the location of the Subdivision for the type of development and use contemplated, and shall meet the requirements of the Zoning Regulations of the City. 
B.  Lot Frontage Requirement 
Every lot shall have frontage on, and access to, a public street or other approved public access easement. 
C.  Lot Frontage Prohibition for SF Lots on Arterial Streets 
Lots zoned for single family use shall not front upon an Arterial Street as designed in the Comprehensive Plan. The Director of Development Services may grant a Minor Subdivision Waiver, for existing lots if no other reasonable access is available. 
D.  Right Angles for Side Lot Lines 
All side lines of lots shall be as close to right angles as possible to straight street lines and radial to curved street lines except where a variation to this rule will provide a better street and lot layout. The Director of Development Services may grant a Minor Subdivision Waiver, if unusual circumstances exist on the subject property or on adjacent property that make it difficult to comply with this requirement. 
E.  Lot Width 
The width of every lot at the building line shall be equal to or greater than that required by the Zoning Regulations. 
F.  Scenarios where Additional Lot Depth is Required 
Where a lot in a residential area backs up to a Right-of-Way, drainage easement, a high-pressure gasoline, oil or gas line, electric transmission lines (69kv or higher), water or wastewater transmission lines, an Arterial Street, an Industrial, Commercial, or other land use that has a significant change in use from the residential use of the property, and where no street or alley is provided at the rear of such lot, additional lot depth will be required. 
G.  Double Frontage and Reverse Frontage Lots 
Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be prohibited except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation or exist prior to the adoption of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
H.  Lots with Septic Tanks 
1.  Within the City Limits 
Septic tanks or On-Site Sewage Facilities (OSSF) are not permitted in platted subdivision. All lots within the city limits must be connected to the City's wastewater collection system. 
2.  Within the ETJ 
In a Subdivision where buildings are to be served by septic tanks or the approved OSSF, the size of lots shall be sufficiently large to accommodate adequate drainage fields and to meet the standards set forth by the State of Texas, the County or any other governmental unit having appropriate jurisdiction. 
I.  Land Subject to a 100-Year Floodplain 
1.  Development shall not be permitted within the FEMA regulated 100-year floodplain, according to FEMA maps. 
2.  Any land which, in its natural state, is subject to a 100-year flood or which cannot be properly drained shall not be subdivided, re-subdivided or developed until receipt of evidence that the construction of specific improvements proposed by the Developer can be expected to yield a usable building site, i.e. Flood Study and FEMA CLOMR (Conditional Letter of Map Revision). 
3.  Thereafter, the Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend approval of the Plat; however, building construction upon such land shall be prohibited until the specific drainage improvements have been planned, construction completed, and a LOMR (Letter of Map Revision) been received from FEMA.  
6.10. - Survey Monuments and Lot Markers 
A.  Permanent Survey Reference Monuments 
1.  A concrete monument six inches (6") in diameter and twenty-four inches (24") long, shall be placed by the surveyor on each of the development's perimeter boundary corners which do not have a "found" monument. 
a.  An eighteen inch (18") long steel rod, 5/8 inch in diameter and embedded at least twelve inches (12") into the monument, shall be placed at the boundary intersection point on each monument. 
b.  These monuments shall be set at such an elevation that they will not be disturbed during construction. 
c.  The tops of the monuments shall be at least twelve inches (12") below the finished grade. 
2.  Submission of the Final Plat prepared by the licensed surveyor shall be considered evidence that the monuments, guard stakes and flagging have been set, regardless of whether or not the Preliminary Plat has been sealed and signed. 
3.  The Director of Development Services may approve alternative survey methods. 
B.  Public Right-of-Way Markers 
1.  Monuments shall be placed at PI, PC, PCC, and PT. 
2.  Where concrete streets are constructed, the monuments shall be an "X" cut into the concrete pavement. 
3.  Each leg of the "X" shall be at least six inches (6") long and andfrac14;-inch deep. 
4.  Where asphalt streets are constructed and in unpaved areas, the monument shall be a 5/8 -inch iron bar, eighteen inches (18") long. 
C.  Lot Markers 
Lot markers shall be iron pins no less than 18 inches long nor less than one-half inch in diameter set flush with the ground at every corner, at all angle points, and at all points of curves not otherwise designated under the subparagraphs above or industry adopted survey benchmark documents, as approved by the Director of Development Services.  
6.11. - Sidewalks 
A.  Sidewalks are required as a part of Plat approval to help the City achieve the following: 
1.  Promote the mobility, health, safety, and welfare of residents, property owners, and visitors to the City and to implement objectives and strategies of the Comprehensive Plan, 
2.  Improve the safety of walking by providing separation from motorized transportation and improving travel surfaces for pedestrians, 
3.  Improve public welfare by providing an alternate means of access to transportation and social interaction, especially for children, other citizens without personal vehicles, or those with disabilities, and 
4.  Facilitate walking as a means of physical activity. 
B.  Sidewalk Location and Design Requirements 
1.  Sidewalks shall be constructed within all new Subdivisions as identified on the City's Sidewalk and Trails Plan. [2] 
2.  Sidewalks shall be constructed within the Right-of-Way and along all lots line adjoining dedicated streets, along major Arterial Streets where lots do not adjoin the street, across power line easements and in other areas where pedestrian walkways are necessary. 
3.  Routing to clear poles, trees or other obstacles shall be subject to Director of Public Works and Utilities approval. 
4.  The Plat or Construction Plans shall show the location of all proposed sidewalks and shall state at what stage of the project they will be constructed. 
5.  All sidewalks shall conform to Federal Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements and barrier-free ramps should be provided for access to the street. 
C.  Sidewalk General Construction 
1.  Sidewalks shall be constructed by Class "A" concrete and shall have a width of not less than five (5) feet and a minimum thickness of four (4) inches. 
2.  Sidewalks adjacent to screening walls shall be 5 feet in width and shall abut the wall, eliminating the landscape area found along the wall, thereby reducing maintenance. 
3.  Sidewalks shall be constructed one foot (1') from the property line within the street or Arterial Street Right-of-Way and shall extend along the street frontage including the side of corner lots and block ends. 
4.  Construction of sidewalks adjacent to curbs will be considered where driveway entrances are constructed from the rear of lots on each side of the street for the full length of the block or where Mountable Curbs are installed. In these instances, the sidewalks shall be five feet (5') wide. 
5.  Sidewalk construction may be delayed until development of lots, but in locations not adjacent to lots and across bridges and culverts, the sidewalk shall be constructed with the other improvements to the Subdivision. 
D.  Sidewalks in Commercial and Industrial Areas 
Sidewalks in commercial and industrial areas shall be a minimum width of five feet (5') or extend from the back of the curb to the building line as required by the City. 
E.  Sidewalk Escrow Option 
In accordance with Section 5.05.E Escrow Policies and Procedures, the City may require or the Developer may petition the City to defer required sidewalk improvements in exchange for a deposit of escrow. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Note— The City of Fredericksburg Sidewalk Plan - 2015, as adopted by the city council on June 1, 2015, and attached to Ord. No. 25-007, is on file and available for public review in the offices of the city. 
 
6.12. - Streets 
A.  Adequate Streets 
1.  The property owner shall ensure that the Subdivision is served by adequate streets and shall be responsible for the costs of Right-of-Way and street improvements, in accordance with the following policies and standards. 
2.  Additional Right-of-Way may be required at some street intersections to accommodate utilities, sidewalks, traffic control devices and/or sight distances. 
B.  General Requirements 
1.  Streets must be designed in relation to the Comprehensive Plan/Transportation Plan, existing and proposed streets, the terrain, streams, and other physical conditions. 
a.  The arrangement of streets must provide for the continuation of streets between adjacent properties when the continuation is necessary for the safe and efficient movement of traffic and for utility efficiency. 
b.  The arrangement, character, extent, pavement width, Right-of-Way width, grade and location of each street shall be considered in its relationship to the Comprehensive Plan, to existing and planned streets, topographical conditions, public safety and convenience, and its relationship to the proposed uses of land to be served by such street. 
2.  Whenever a tract to be subdivided abuts any part of any street so designated on the Comprehensive Plan, or where a street designated on the Comprehensive Plan crosses any part of the tract to be subdivided, such part of the proposed public street shall be platted, the Right-of-Way shall be dedicated, and the street shall be constructed by the Developer, consistent with the location as indicated on the Comprehensive Plan, and to a width consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and the requirements contained within these regulations. 
3.  All streets shall be designed to coordinate with existing streets in adjoining Subdivisions. 
a.  Centerline offsets, where unavoidable, shall be at least one hundred thirty-five (135) feet. 
b.  Greater centerline offsets as may be required by the Director of Public Works and Utilities shall be planned where necessary for traffic safety. 
4.  Streets shall be named to provide continuity with existing streets. 
5.  Names of new streets shall not duplicate or cause confusion with the names of existing streets. 
6.  Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets in the Subdivision shall make provision for the proper projection of streets into such unsubdivided area. 
7.  Streets should be platted to allow two tiers of lots between streets when possible. 
8.  The reservation in private ownership of strips of land at the end of proposed or existing streets and intended solely or primarily for the purpose of controlling access to property not included in the Subdivision shall be prohibited. 
9.  Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the reasonable development of the Subdivision in conformance with the other requirements of these regulations, and where the City finds it will be reasonable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining land is subdivided. The other half of the street shall be platted within the adjacent tract at the time it is platted. 
10.  Median openings shall have a minimum offset of at least 125 feet from the centerline of an intersecting street or alley. 
11.  To ensure adequate access to each Subdivision, there should be at least two (2) planned points of ingress and egress, except that cul-de-sacs shall be permitted in conformance with Section 6.12.G Cul-de-Sacs and Dead-End Streets (below). 
a.  The City Council may require that more than two access points be constructed if the configuration, number of lots, or other consideration creates the need for additional access points. 
12.  Street layout shall provide for continuation of Collector Streets in areas between Arterial Streets. 
13.  Local Streets shall be extended through the tract to the tract boundary to provide future connection with adjoining unplatted lands at intervals necessary to facilitate internal vehicular circulation with adjoining unplatted lands. 
14.  Where single family uses abut an existing or proposed arterial street, the Plat or dedication instrument will provide: 
a.  Lots to side onto the arterial with a non-access restriction on the arterial side, or 
b.  Reverse frontage with screening and containing a non-access restriction along the rear property line, or 
c.  Lots with screened rear alleys, or 
d.  Other treatment as may be necessary or required for adequate protection of adjoining properties, after taking into consideration the proposed method of off-street parking and maneuvering which will prevent the necessity of backing into the arterial street. 
C.  Design and Construction 
Design and construction shall conform to specifications included within these Subdivision Ordinance regulations as well as those included within the Standard Details and Specification for Public Infrastructure Construction Manual. 
1.  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all proposed streets shall conform to the general plan of the community, and their relationship shall be considered to that of the existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. 
2.  Where such is not shown in the general plan for the community, the arrangements of streets in a Subdivision shall: 
a.  Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal streets in surrounding areas; 
b.  Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the City to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuation of or conformance to an existing street impracticable; and 
c.  Be laid out so that they shall intersect, as nearly as possible, at right angles. 
3.  Residential streets shall be laid out so that their use by through traffic shall be discouraged. 
4.  Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five feet (125') shall be avoided. 
5.  Street grades shall be established regarding topography, proposed land-use, and the facilities in the area surrounding the land to be subdivided. 
a.  An absolute minimum grade of three-tenths percent (0.30%) is required on concrete streets; however, where it is possible, a grade of five-tenths percent (0.50%) shall be provided. 
6.  Street name markers shall be installed in accordance with the prescribed type currently in use by the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
a.  Street markers and the erection thereof shall be at the expense of the Subdivider. 
7.  Residential lots less than one (1) acre shall not face Arterial Streets. 
8.  Driveways or alley pavement cuts shall not be permitted on Arterial Streets. 
D.  Street Right-of-Way Dedication 
1.  Any Subdivider laying out and constructing new streets or whose Subdivision includes any portion of or is adjacent to an existing street shall dedicate sufficient Right-of-Way in accordance with the following conditions: 
a.  General Dedication Requirements 
i.  All street Right-of-Way dedications shall in the aggregate provide the Right-of-Way widths required according to street classifications in City Ordinances and be consistent with the City's Comprehensive Plan or Transportation Plans. 
ii.  The required alignment of the Right-of-Way shall be determined with respect to property boundaries, safety, design, topography, and traffic management consideration. 
(a)  Concerns for safety, sound design principles and orderly development will prevail. 
(b)  Principles of efficient traffic management will be applied in accordance with the City's goals and objectives as expressed in the current Comprehensive Plan or Transportation Plans. 
iii.  The appropriate alignment of any street Right-of-Way can only be determined by examining the property and topographical conditions along the entire length of the street. 
(a)  In order to provide adequate information to establish an appropriate Right-of-Way alignment the Developer shall provide property and topographical information for a minimum distance of 200 feet in every direction that the street extends off of the property. 
(b)  Additional information may be required if, in the opinion of the City, the information provided indicates conditions that may require additional Right-of-Way consideration. 
b.  New Streets 
New streets shall be provided where there is not an existing street, roadway or passage. 
i.  Internal Streets 
Internal streets shall be designed and provided in accordance with the current City Ordinances and Engineering/Construction Criteria and be consistent with the City's Comprehensive Plan or Transportation Plan. 
ii.  Perimeter Streets 
(a)  When a proposed residential or nonresidential Subdivision is developed abutting an existing or planned Arterial Street or Collector Street, the Developer shall dedicate sufficient Right-of-Way within the Subdivision. 
(b)  The Developer shall be responsible for their proportional share of the abutting street (see definition Proportionality/Proportional Share) and shall construct the entire abutting street and its appurtenances (such as curbs and gutters, sidewalks, barrier-free ramps, street trees, etc.) to the City's design standards for that type of street. 
(c)  The Developer's proportional share of the street construction shall be determined by the Developer's engineer and approved by the Director of Public Works and Utilities. 
(d)  If the Developer disagrees with the Director of Public Works and Utilities' decision of rough proportionality (see Section 6.02.C Rough Proportionality and Fair Share Policy Statement for reference), then the Developer may file a Subdivision Proportionality Appeal (see Section 7.02 Subdivision Proportionality Appeal). 
c.  Existing Streets 
i.  Cases Where Existing Right-of-Way does not Meet Minimum City Standards 
(a)  Where Subdivisions are adjacent to existing streets and the Right-of-Way widths of those existing streets are less than the minimum Right-of-Way width as set out in this Subdivision Ordinance for all streets, the Developer may be required to dedicate on the plat the Right-of-Way width required adjacent to the land being platted to bring the existing street to Right-of-Way width as set out in this Subdivision Ordinance. 
(b)  In the case of a Subdivision that is served by existing streets, and the Right-of-Way widths of such streets do not meet the minimum requirements of subsection 6.12.F Street Design Criteria, the developer shall dedicate the following Right-of-Way, as appropriate to the situation as described below: 
(i)  One hundred (100) percent of the Right-of-Way necessary to bring the street into conformance with subsection 6.12.F Street Design Criteria for a local or collector street, whichever is needed to serve the development, when the Subdivision abuts both sides of the existing street; or 
(ii)  One-half of the Right-of-Way necessary to bring the streets into conformance with section 6.12.F Street Design Criteria for a local or collector street, whichever is needed to serve the development, when the Subdivision abuts only one side of the existing street. 
(c)  Under Section 6.12.D.2, the Developer may request a Minor Subdivision Waiver reducing the Right-of-Way standards found in Table 9: Minimum Street Design Criteria up to five (5) feet. 
ii.  Cases Where Additional Right-of-Way is Needed above the Minimum Standard 
Streets may currently exist by reasons of Plat, metes and bounds description, general description or by prescription. If the existing geometrical configuration does not address safety, design, topography, and traffic management considerations, then the City may require the dedication of additional Right-of-Way to address such. 
(a)  Adjacent to a platted Subdivision: 
The Right-of-Way dedication shall be based upon the distance from the platted Subdivision boundary. Reasonable geometric adjustments will be made to accommodate safety, design, topography, and traffic management considerations. 
(b)  Along a Right-of-Way described by a metes and bounds or a general written description: 
The Right-of-Way dedication shall be based upon the geometric centerline of the Right-of-Way as described. Reasonable geometric adjustments will be made to accommodate safety, design, topography, and traffic management considerations. All existing Right-of-Way dedication within the Subdivision shall be converted from "separate instrument" to a platted Right-of-Way by being a part of the Final Plat. 
(c)  Along a prescriptive Right-of-Way: 
The Right-of-Way dedication shall be based upon the apparent centerline of the existing pavement or of the travel way if unpaved. Reasonable geometric adjustments will be made to accommodate safety, design, topography, and traffic management considerations. The Developer shall indicate on the Preliminary Plat and Final Plat property lines and features which identify prescriptive Right-of-Way. These features may include fences, borrow ditches, utility lines, drainage improvements, limits of plowed or improved fields, etc. All existing prescriptive Right-of-Way dedications within the Subdivision shall be converted from prescriptive to a platted Right-of-Way by being a part of the Final Plat. 
2.  The Director of Development Services may grant a Minor Subdivision Waiver reducing the Right-of-Way standards found in Table 9: Minimum Street Design Criteria up to five (5) feet to accommodate development in existing neighborhoods (e.g., an existing street does not meet the current standard) or if unusual circumstances exist on the property or on adjacent property that make it difficult to comply with the Right-of-Way standard. 
E.  Street Classification Descriptions 
1.  Arterial Streets 
a.  Carries traffic from one urban area to another and serves the major activity centers of urbanized areas. 
b.  Used for longer urban trips and carries a high portion of the total traffic with a minimum of mileage. 
c.  A "divided highway" is an arterial meeting the design standard of "divided highway" in Table 9: Minimum Street Design Criteria. 
d.  Existing and proposed arterials are designated on the Transportation Plan. 
2.  Collector Streets 
a.  Carries traffic from local streets to Arterial Streets. 
b.  Uses served would include medium and high density residential, limited commercial facilities, some small offices and as direct access within industrial parks. 
3.  Local Streets 
a.  Local Streets distribute traffic to and from residences. 
b.  Local Streets are short in length and non-continuous to discourage through traffic. 
c.  A Local Street is a street used primarily for access to abutting property especially residential areas. Local Streets also provide secondary or minor access and circulation to community facilities (school, parks, etc.) and other traffic generators such a commercial and industrial areas. Local streets will be designated as Type A Local Street, Type B Local Street, Type ETJ Local Street, and Marginal Access Local Street based on the function they serve as described below. 
i.  Type A Local Street 
This type Local Street shall be used for primary and secondary access to single-family detached residential units or duplex residential units where such residential units comprise 75 percent of the abutting street frontage on both sides of the street of a particular block. 
ii.  Type B Local Street 
This type Local Street shall be used for primary and secondary access to all residential areas except those specified to be served by a Type A Local Street local street. Also, this street shall be used for secondary access and circulation to community facilities (schools, parks, etc.) and other traffic generators such as commercial and industrial areas. 
iii.  Type ETJ Local Street 
This type Local Street shall be used for primary and secondary access to all residential areas outside and not adjacent to the city limits, not served by city water and wastewater, and where Type A Local Street and Type B Local Street sections are inappropriate due to the rural character of the neighborhood and/or the lack of storm drainage facilities to tie into curb and gutter design. 
iv.  Marginal Access Local Street 
This type of Local Street is used to provide the primary means of access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. Marginal Access Local Streets should be located parallel to and adjacent to an Arterial Street. 
v.  Private Street 
Private Streets are Local Streets that may be allowed in planned unit developments (PUDs) or the ETJ with homeowners' associations that maintain them. Unless otherwise approved through the PUD zoning process, Private Streets shall meet the minimum right-of-way and pavement widths and all other city construction standards for Type A Local Street and Type B Local Street, unless otherwise approved through the PUD zoning process, consistent with the location and nature of the subdivision and subject to approval by the Director of Development Services. The Director of Development Services may refer such approvals for private streets to the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
vi.  PUD Local Street 
Street widths narrower than public Local Street standards may be allowed through the PUD zoning process in the zoning ordinance if adequate off-street parking is provided and emergency access is ensured to the satisfaction of the director. The PUD zoning option is not available in the Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ). 
vii.  Type RR Local Street 
Similar in nature to the Type A Local Street, this type of street is associated only with the Rural Residential zoning district and shall be used for primary and secondary access to single family detached residential units, where excessive through traffic is not anticipated 
F.  Street Design Criteria 
All dedicated streets shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan/Transportation Plan and the following Table 9: Minimum Street Design Criteria. 
Table 9: Minimum Street Design Criteria 
Street Classification 	Minimum Right-of-Way 	Roadway Width (Overall to Back of Curb) 	Number of Travel Lanes 	Parking 	Number of Parkways and Width 	Median Width 
Divided Highway 	Figure 12 	100' 	2 @ 27' 	4 	Limited 	2 @ 13' 	20' 
Civic Street 	Figure 13 	80-100' 	48 	4 	Limited 	2 @ 16' 	Varies 
Arterial Street 	Figure 14 	80' 	64' 	4 	Limited 	2 @ 8' 	None 
Collector Street 	Figure 15 	60' 	44' 	2 	Permitted 	2 @ 10' 	None 
Type A Local Street - A1 	Figure 16 	50' 	40' 	2 	Permitted 	2 @ 5' 	None 
Type A Local Street - A2 	Figure 17 	50' 	36' 	2 	Permitted 	2 @ 7' 	None 
Type B Local Street 	Figure 18 	60' 	44' 	2 	Permitted 	2 @ 8' 	None 
Type ETJ Local Street 	Figure 19 	60' 	24' Pavement 
32' Base 
(No Curb) 	2 	Prohibited 	2 @ 14' 	None 
Marginal Access Local Street 	Figure 20 	40' 	30' 	2 	Prohibited 	2 @ 5' 	None 
Private Street 	Same as Local Street (Type A or B) or as Approved Through the PUD Zoning Process 
PUD Local Street 	Smaller than a Local Street (Type A or B) and Approved Through the PUD Zoning Process 
Type RR Local Street 	Figure 21 	50' 	31' 
(No Curb) 	2 	Prohibited 	2 @ 9.5' 	None 
 
Notes: 
1 	Depending upon the nature and impact of the proposed development, additional Right-of-Way will be required at most intersections and may be required at high-volume driveways to provide left and right turn lanes to maintain traffic volume capacities through the intersections. Also, additional utility easements may be required beyond the Right-of-Way. 
2 	If provided, the minimum width of a median adjacent to a left turn lane shall be five feet (5'). 
3 	Under authority and criteria in Section 6.12.D.2, the Director of Development Services may grant a Minor Subdivision Waiver reducing the width of a street Right-of-Way up to five (5) feet. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
G.  Cul-de-Sacs and Dead-End Streets 
1.  Cul-de-sacs 
a.  A cul-de-sac street shall not exceed five hundred (500) feet in length, unless approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission in the following cases. 
i.  The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve a cul-de-sac street greater than five hundred (500) feet, if the street is zoned or used for single-family residential development and no more than 15 single family lots are created along the street. 
ii.  The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve a cul-de-sac street greater than five hundred (500) feet, if the street is zoned or used for single-family residential development, all lots along the street are two (2) acres in size or greater, and no more than 30 single family lots are created along the street. 
iii.  The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve a cul-de-sac street greater than five hundred (500) feet for land zoned or used for non-residential development for specific reasons of topography, engineering design or limited non-residential use intensity. In no case shall a cul-de-sac longer than 1,200 feet be allowed. 
b.  A cul-de-sac street shall be platted and constructed with a paved cul-de-sac at the closed end having a turnaround with a minimum outside paving diameter of at least one hundred (100) feet and a minimum street Right-of-Way diameter of at least one hundred-twenty (120) feet. (See 6.07.B.4 for supplemental information.) 
2.  Dead-End Streets 
a.  Dead-end streets are prohibited unless the street design meets the requirements of paragraph (1) above or unless the street is intended to be extended in the future and the dead-end design is only temporary in nature. 
b.  If a temporary dead-end street is permitted, turnaround pavement meeting the dimensions listed for cul-de-sacs in Paragraph 6.12.G.1 Cul-de-sacs (above) and a temporary turnaround easement meeting the dimensions listed for the Right-of-Way in Paragraph 6.12.G.1 shall be provided on the Plat. 
i.  The portion of the temporary turnaround easement lying outside of the street Right-of-Way shall be shown as a dotted line on the Final Plat which shall denote a temporary easement. 
In the event that the temporary dead-end street (as approved and shown on the Final Plat) is extended in the future, the portions of the temporary turnaround easement shall revert back to the lot(s) abutting the temporary turnaround easement. 
3.  Drainage Improvements 
Provisions shall be made for adequate storm drainage at the ends of dead-end streets. 
4.  Barricades 
a.  Barricades and other traffic controls shall be installed by the Developer at dead-ends in accordance with City specifications. 
b.  Barricades and other traffic controls shall be maintained by the Developer or Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association. 
H.  Street Intersection Design 
1.  No street intersecting an Arterial Street shall vary from a 90 degree angle of intersection by more than five (5) degrees. 
2.  Intersections of collector and local streets shall not vary from 90 degrees by more than 15 degrees. 
I.  Construction Responsibilities 
1.  Local Street and Alley Construction 
The Developer shall, at the Developer's cost and expense, pay for constructing all local streets and alleys within the Developer's Subdivision. 
2.  Collector Street Construction 
The Developer shall, at the Developer's cost and expense, pay for constructing all Collector Streets within the Developer's Subdivision. 
J.  Street and Alley Requirements 
1.  General Requirements 
a.  As a minimum, a street must be designated to safely provide two-way traffic for passenger, delivery, emergency, utility, and maintenance vehicles. 
b.  If the City determines that streets greater than the minimum standard are required, the City's engineer will conduct investigations, studies, and calculations to determine the infrastructure requirements. 
i.  If the Developer proposes to construct no greater than the minimum standard of infrastructure, it will be the responsibility of the Applicant to submit to the City engineering investigations, studies, and calculations in support of constructing the minimum standard. 
2.  Local Streets, Collector Streets, and Alleys 
a.  Local street paving shall be in conformance with Table 9: Minimum Street Design Criteria. 
b.  Collector Street paving shall be in conformance with Table 9: Minimum Street Design Criteria. 
c.  Alley paving shall be fifteen feet (15') wide in residential areas and fifteen feet (15') wide in commercial and industrial areas. 
i.  Alley turnouts shall be paved to the property line and shall be at least two feet (2') wider than the alley paving at that point. 
ii.  Paving radius where alleys intersect residential and Collector Streets shall be five feet (5') and where alleys intersect Arterial Streets the radius shall be five feet (5'). 
d.  For additional alley requirements, please see 6.05 Alleys. 
3.  Street Returns 
a.  The minimum radius for all street returns shall be twenty-five feet (25'). 
b.  Returns for driveways on local streets shall be five feet (5'). Commercial and industrial driveway returns shall be a minimum of ten feet (10'). 
K.  Street Signs 
1.  Street signs shall be furnished and installed by the Developer for all intersections within or abutting the Subdivision. 
2.  Such signs shall be of a type approved by the City and include the block number. 
3.  Street signs shall be installed in accordance with the prescribed type currently in use by the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
L.  Curbs: Barrier Curbs and Mountable Curbs 
1.  Barrier Curbs, as shown in the Standard Details and Specification for Public Infrastructure Construction Manual, shall be required for all developments, except for the following cases: 
a.  For single-family, duplex, or multifamily developments Mountable Curbs are permitted. 
b.  Mountable Curbs may be allowed along Private Streets within a Planned Development Zoning District. 
c.  Barrier Curbs or Mountable Curbs shall not be required in single-family subdivisions when all platted lots are one (1) acre or greater; however, an eighteen (18) inch ribbon curb will be required in these cases. 
2.  All curbs shall conform to the Standard Details and Specification for Public Infrastructure Construction Manual governing the placement and construction for curbs.  
6.13. - Private Streets and Gated Subdivisions 
A.  Applicability 
1.  Within the City Limits 
Within the city limits, Private Streets and gated subdivisions shall be permitted only within a planned development (PD) zoning district. 
2.  Within the Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) 
Private Streets are allowed in the ETJ subject to the formation of a Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association. 
B.  General 
1.  Requirements 
Subdivisions with Private Streets and gated communities shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  The general provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance and other City Codes as they relate to development, streets, and utilities will apply. 
b.  A vehicular turn-around shall be provided at entry gates to allow vehicles that have been denied entry the ability to exit without having to backup. 
c.  All plans concerning private subdivisions are subject to review and approval by the local fire department. 
d.  The definition of a "subdivision" and "street", as contained in the Subdivision Ordinance, will apply to all subdivisions or streets, whether public or private. 
2.  Authority Maintained by City 
a.  All streets, gates, and other fire protection features, signage, and equipment are subject to periodic inspection by the City and must be repaired immediately if found to be in a condition of disrepair or inadequate for public access. 
b.  The City shall have the right to enter the subdivision and disable, open, or remove any gate, device, or other feature that impedes or controls vehicle access at the sole expense of the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association. 
c.  Access shall be provided for sanitation trucks. 
3.  Owners Responsibility 
The person or corporation in control of the property is responsible for, and liable for, any violations of this private road requirement. This includes, but is not limited to, the developer, property owner, the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association and its officers, if applicable, or others who may own or exercise control over the property. 
4.  Private Street Lot 
Each Private Street and alley must be constructed within a separate lot owned by the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association. 
a.  Each lot must conform to the City's standards for design of a public street and alley right-of-way. An easement covering the street lot shall be granted to the City providing unrestricted use of the property for utilities and the maintenance of the same. This right shall extend to all utility providers including telephone and cable companies, operating within the City. 
b.  The easement shall also provide the City with the right of access for any purpose related to the exercise of a governmental service or function, including but not limited to fire and police protection, inspection and code enforcement. The easement shall permit the City to remove any vehicle or obstacle within the street lot that impairs emergency access. 
5.  Payment 
The City shall not pay for any portion of the cost of constructing or maintaining a Private Street. 
6.  Plans and Inspections 
An applicant for a proposed subdivision with Private Streets must submit to the City the same plans and engineering information required to construct public streets and utilities. Requirements pertaining to inspection and approval of improvements prior to final plat approval shall apply. Fees charged for these services shall also apply. The City may periodically inspect private streets and require repairs necessary to ensure emergency access. 
7.  Waiver of Services 
The final plat, property deeds and Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association documents shall note that certain City services shall not be provided on private streets. Among the services that will not be provided are the following: 
a.  Routine police patrols. 
b.  Enforcement of traffic and parking ordinances and preparation of accident reports. 
c.  Depending on the characteristics of the proposed development, other services may not be provided. 
8.  Signs 
All private traffic regulatory signs shall conform to the Texas Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
9.  Indemnification 
The Final Plat shall contain the following language: 
a.  Whereby the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association, as owner of the Private Streets and appurtenances, agrees to release, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, any governmental entity and public utility: 
i.  For damages to the private street occasioned by the reasonable use of the private street by the City, governmental entity of public utility; 
ii.  For damages and injury (including death) arising from the condition of said Private Street; 
iii.  For damages and injury (including death) arising out of the use by the City, governmental entity or public utility of any restricted access gate or entrance; and 
iv.  For damages and injury (including death) arising out of any use of the subdivision by the City, governmental entity or public utility. Further, such language shall provide that all lot owners shall release the City, governmental entities and public utilities for such damages and injuries. 
b.  THE INDEMNIFICATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ABOVE LANGUAGE APPLY REGARDLESS OF WHETHER OR NOT SUCH DAMAGES AND INJURY (INCLUDING DEATH) ARE CAUSED BY THE NEGLIGENT ACT OR OMISSION OF THE CITY, GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY OR PUBLIC UTILITY, OR THEIR REPRESENTATIVE OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES OR AGENTS. 
C.  Gates 
1.  Each gate installation in a gated community must conform to the following provisions: 
a.  Fire Department Approval Required 
Each gate installation must be approved by the fire department which that serve the proposed subdivision prior to installation. The installation must be completed and tested prior to the City's acceptance of the subdivision. 
b.  Gate Openings and Clearances 
Gate design may incorporate one or two gate sections to meet the required minimum gate width of twenty-four feet. If the entrance will incorporate a median, guard shack, or similar structure that necessitates a divided gate arrangement, the gate widths may be reduced if approved by the fire marshal, but in no case shall any gate or street pavement have a clear opening of less than eighteen feet. 
c.  If a gate design incorporates any overhead obstruction, the obstruction must be a minimum of fourteen feet (14') above the finished road surface. 
2.  Setback Required 
Approach and departure areas on both sides of a gated entrance must provide adequate setbacks and proper alignment to allow free and unimpeded passage of emergency vehicles through the entrance area. 
3.  Gates to Be Constructed in Agreement with Fire Department Guidelines 
An automatic gate installation must conform to the design and performance guidelines established by the fire department. 
4.  Good Working Order Required 
All components of the gate system must be maintained in an approved operating condition, with all components serviced and maintained on a regular basis as needed to ensure proper gate operation. A proper power supply shall be maintained to all electrical and electronic components at all times. 
5.  Failure to Meet Requirements 
Each security gate is subject to a performance test on a regular basis as determined by the fire department. Upon failure of a performance test, the security gate system shall be disabled and maintained in the open position until repaired, and shall not be placed back in service until tested and authorized by the fire department. 
D.  Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association Required 
1.  Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association Required 
Subdivisions developed with private streets and alleys must have a mandatory Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association which includes all property to be served by Private Streets. The association shall own and be responsible for the maintenance of private streets and appurtenances. 
2.  The Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association documents must establish a reserve fund for the maintenance of streets and other improvements. The association documents shall be reviewed and approved by the City's attorney to ensure that they conform to this and other applicable City ordinances. The documents shall be filed of record prior to the approval of the Final Plat. Lot deeds must convey membership in the association and provide for the payment of dues and assessments required by the association. The association may not be dissolved without the prior written consent of the City. No portion of the association documents pertaining to the maintenance of the private streets and alleys and assessment therefore may be amended without the written consent of the City. 
E.  Construction and Utilities 
Water, sewer, drainage facilities, street lights and signs placed within the private street and alley lot shall be installed to City standards prior to approval of the Final Plat. All City regulations relating to infrastructure financing and developer cost participation shall apply to subdivisions with private streets. 
F.  Converting Private Streets to Public Streets 
The Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association documents shall allow the association to request the City to accept private streets and alleys and the associated property as public streets and right-of-way upon written notice to all association members and to convey the same to the City upon the consent by written signatures of the owners of 75% of the affected lots on the street. However, in no event shall the City be obligated to accept said Private Streets and alleys as public. 
1.  City's Acceptance of Streets and Alleys 
Should the City elect to accept the streets and alleys as public, the City may inspect the private streets and assess the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association or lot owners for the expense of needed repairs concurrent with the City's acceptance of the streets and alleys. The City will be the sole judge of whether repairs are needed. 
2.  City's Requirements 
The City may also require, at the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association's expense, the removal of guard houses, access control devices, landscaping or other aesthetic amenities located within the street. The association documents shall provide for the City's right to such assessment. Those portions of the association documents pertaining to the subject matter contained in this paragraph shall not be amended without the written consent of the City. 
G.  Access Restrictions 
1.  General Requirements 
The entrances to all Private Streets shall be marked with a sign stating that it is a private street. Either a guard house or an access control device such as a gate or cross arm shall be constructed at each entrance. All restricted access entrances shall be manned 24 hours every day, or an alternative means shall be provided of ensuring access to the subdivision by the City and other utility service providers with appropriate identification. If the association fails to maintain reliable access as required to provide City services, the City shall have the right to enter the subdivision and remove any gate or device which is a barrier to access at the sole expense of the association. 
2.  Restricted Access 
Private streets that have access controlled by a gate, cross arm, or other access control device shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.  The street must have a minimum uninterrupted pavement width of 24 feet at the location of the access control device. 
b.  If an overhead barrier is used, it shall have minimum height above the road surface as required by the local fire department for fire lanes. 
c.  The design of all gates, cross arms and access control devices, including automatic opening systems and manual backup systems, shall be approved by the local fire department before installation. 
d.  The gates, cross arms, and access control devices shall be tested and accepted by the fire department before being put into operation. 
e.  Gate designs may incorporate one or two gate sections to meet the required minimum width of 24 feet. 
f.  If the entrance incorporates a median, guard shack, or similar structure that necessitates a divided gate arrangement, the gate and street pavement widths may be reduced if approved by the fire department. This approval shall be contingent upon the subdivision with private streets having a second approved means of access, but in no case shall any single gate or street pavement have a clear opening of less than 15 feet. 
3.  Visitor Entrance Design Standards 
At least one entrance to a subdivision with Private Streets shall be equipped for visitor access. In addition to meeting the above design standards, the visitor entrance shall be equipped with a call or code box located at least 50 feet from the boundary of the subdivision to provide for visitors calling in and automobile queuing. A turn-around space with a minimum outside radius of 30 feet shall be located between any call or code box and the access control device to allow vehicles denied access to safely exit onto public streets in a "headout" position. A sign shall be erected next to the edge or such turn-around space to prohibit vehicle parking in such space. A resident entrance used in combination with a visitor entrance shall comply with the requirements of this Subsection. 
4.  Resident Only Entrance Design Standards 
In addition to meeting the above design standards, an access control device that requires residents to use a key, card, or code, or other method to gain access shall setback internally a minimum of 50 feet from the boundary of the subdivision to provide for automobile queuing; except that resident entrances equipped with an electronic opener that allows residents to remotely open the access control device and enter the subdivision without having to stop are exempted from this requirement. A sign shall be erected next to any resident entrance that does not meet the 50 foot setback requirement of this paragraph and does not provide a turn-around space with a minimum outside radius of 30 feet to indicate that it is for resident use only and not for visitors.  
6.14. - Residential Thoroughfare Screening 
A.  Purpose Statement 
The image of the City and its related influence on property values and the types of development that occur directly affect the public welfare of the City. With streets being the largest public land use, the image people experience when traveling City streets can have a substantial impact on the overall image of the City. This section (Section 6.14 Residential Thoroughfare Screening) is designed to create a positive visual image from City streets by providing quality screening options using landscaping, masonry, or fence materials. In addition to improving the City's image, these landscape screening options are intended to buffer residential uses from roadway noise to minimize sound and visual nuisances of roadway adjacency. 
B.  Required Screening 
Screening is required for all single-family detached, two-family, and townhome lots and subdivisions as follows: 
1.  Back of Lots 
The rear of all lots that back to an Arterial Street or Collector Street; and 
2.  Side of Lots 
The side of all lots that side to an Arterial Street or Collector Street. 
C.  Screening Plan 
1.  Preliminary Screening Plan 
A Preliminary Screening Plan shall be submitted for review and approval with the Preliminary Plat. 
2.  Final Screening Plan 
a.  A Final Screening Plan, including entry features and showing all elevations and materials, shall be submitted with the Construction Plans. 
b.  The Screening Plan shall be reviewed and considered for approval by the Director of Development Services prior to approval of the Construction Plans, and prior to scheduling a Pre-Construction Meeting (see Section 5.02 Pre-Construction Meeting). 
3.  City Design Standards 
a.  Screening walls and fences shall be designed in accordance with the City's codes. 
b.  Structural elements shall be sealed by a licensed professional engineer and approved by the City. 
4.  Timing of Installation and Inspection 
The timing and inspection of all required screening shall comply with Section 5.06 Inspection, Maintenance, and Acceptance of Public Improvements. 
D.  Screening Standards 
Required screening shall be construction in accordance with one of the following methods. 
1.  A solid masonry wall at least six (6) feet but not greater than eight (8) feet in height. 
2.  Cement fiberboard materials (commonly referred to as HardiePlank), may be used as masonry materials for screening.  
6.15. - Park Land Dedication 
A.  Purpose 
1.  The purpose of this section is to provide recreational areas and amenities in the form of neighborhood parks as a function of Subdivision development in the City. This section is derived from the ordinance enacted in accordance with the Home Rule powers of the City, granted under the Texas Constitution and statutes of the State of Texas including, without limitation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 51.071 et seq. and 212.001 et seq. 
2.  It is hereby declared by the City Council that recreational areas, in the form of neighborhood parks and related amenities and improvements, are necessary and in the public welfare, and that the only adequate procedure to provide for the same is by integrating such a requirement into the procedure for planning and developing property of a residential Subdivision in the City, whether such development consists of new construction on previously vacant land or rebuilding and redeveloping existing residential areas. 
3.  Neighborhood parks are those parks providing for a variety of outdoor recreational opportunities and within convenient distances from a majority of the residences to be served thereby, the standards for which are set forth in the latest Comprehensive Plan, as amended. The neighborhood parks shown within the zones on the map of the City, which is on file with the City, based upon the official latest Comprehensive Plan, as amended, shall be prima facie evidence that any park located therein is within such a convenient distance from the majority of residences to be served thereby within such zone. The cost of the neighborhood parks should be borne by the ultimate residential property owners who, by reason of the proximity of their property to such parks within such zones, shall be the primary beneficiaries of such facilities. Therefore, the requirements listed in Subsection 6.15.D (Park Land Requirements) of this section are adopted to attain such purposes. 
4.  The dedications of land and fees collected from within the various Park Service Zones shall be utilized to create neighborhood parks within such Park Service Zone. 
B.  Process Overview 
Before a Plat Application may be submitted for review, the Developer shall gain the City Council's approval of the dedication required by this section. The prerequisite of the City Council's approval of the dedication before the submittal of a Plat Application is required because the City Council is not a part of the general platting approval process. Therefore, the only opportunity for the City Council to approve a park land dedication that best meets the community's vision is before a Plat Application is submitted. 
C.  Park Land Dedication Submittal Application and Approval 
1.  The Director of Development Services shall establish the Application Form and requirements (e.g., the size of map, the information to be shown, etc.) for the park land dedication Application and review the Application. The City Council shall have the authority to approve park land dedications. At the City Council's discretion, it may request a recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission regarding the dedication requirement. 
2.  Proposed land dedications shall be presented as part of the Application. 
3.  The City Council may accept or reject the land offered by the Developer and require any dedication within Section 6.15.D (below). Some issues for consideration by the City may include: 
a.  Land is unusable or not compatible with the Comprehensive Plan. 
b.  Sufficient park area is already dedicated in the development area. 
c.  The area would be better served by expanding or improving existing parks. 
d.  Acquisition of the land is not in the best interest of the City. 
4.  Once the City Council has approved a dedication, a developer may submit a Plat Application. All subsequently related Plat Application shall conform to the City Council's approval. 
D.  Park Land Requirements 
1.  General requirements; dedication of land and payment of park development fee. 
a.  Dedication of Land or Payment in Lieu Required 
i.  Prior to a Plat being filed with the County, for a development of a residential area within the City and in accordance with the planning and zoning ordinances of the City, such Plat shall contain a clear fee simple dedication of one (1) acre of land for each 133 proposed dwelling units. In the event a Plat is not required, the dedication of land required under this section shall be met prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
ii.  Any proposed Plat submitted to the City for approval shall show the area proposed to be dedicated under this section. The required land dedication of this section may be met by a payment in lieu of land where permitted by the City or required by other provisions in this section. 
iii.  The City Council declares that development of an area of less than five (5) acres for neighborhood park purposes is impractical. Therefore, if fewer than 665 dwelling units are proposed by a Plat filed for approval, the City Council may require the developer to pay the applicable cash in lieu of land amount, as provided in Subsection 6.15.D.2 (Cash in Lieu of Land) of this section. 
b.  Park Development Fee Required 
i.  In addition to the required dedication of land as set forth in Subsections 6.15.D.1.a.i and 6.15.D.1.a.ii of this section, there shall also be a park development fee paid to the City as a condition to subdivision Plat approval. Such park development fee shall be set from time to time by ordinance of the City Council sufficient to provide for the development of amenities and improvements on undeveloped park land within the relevant zone at the then current costs as determined by the City Council, to meet the standards for a neighborhood park to serve the area in which the subdivision is located. The fee may vary from Park Service Zone to Park Service Zone, and may be set below actual development costs. Unless and until changed by an ordinance amendment of the City Council, the park development fee shall be calculated on the basis of $300.00 per dwelling unit. 
ii.  In lieu of payment of the required park development fee, a Developer shall have the option to construct the neighborhood park amenities and improvements. All plans and specifications for the construction of such amenities and improvements must be reviewed and approved by the City. The developer shall financially guarantee the construction of the amenities and improvements, and the City must approve the same, prior to the filing of a Plat in the case of platted subdivisions. Once the amenities and improvements are constructed, and after the City has accepted such amenities and improvements, the developer shall dedicate, by Plat, such amenities and improvements to the City. 
c.  Land Considerations 
i.  In instances where land is required to be dedicated, the City shall have the right to accept or reject the dedication and to require a cash payment in lieu of land, in the amount provided under subsection 6.15.D.2 (Cash in Lieu of Land) of this section, if the City determines that sufficient park area is already in the public domain for the area of the proposed development, or if the recreation potential for that area would be better served by expanding or improving existing neighborhood parks. 
ii.  When two or more developments will be necessary to create a neighborhood park of sufficient size in the same area, the Planning and Zoning Commission, with final approval by the City Council at the time of Preliminary Plat approval, will work with the developers to define the optimum location of the required dedication within the respective Plats. Once a park site has been determined, adjacent property owners who develop around the park site shall dedicate land and cash to the existing site unless otherwise determined by the City Council, and shall take the existence of such park into consideration in the design of its site with respect to access to the park, sidewalks and the like. This provision is applicable even if the adjacent property is not in the Park Service Zone for that park. 
iii.  In the event the City determines that the area of proposed development or construction contains a location that is desirable for a neighborhood park, but the required land dedication for such proposed development or construction is not sufficient to provide the land necessary, the following provisions will apply: 
(a)  The Developer shall negotiate in good faith with the City to sell the additional land to the City. Approval of the subdivision Plat or building permit, as the case may be, may be delayed by the City for up to 275 calendar days past the time for approval set forth in the City's Zoning Ordinance to accommodate such negotiation. 
(b)  As part of such negotiated price for the land, the City will be permitted to offer any or all of the following to the Developer: 
(i)  Double credit for both land dedication and park development fees; 
(ii)  Consideration of developer/owner's desires with respect to the type of park development or amenities planned for the park; 
(iii)  Alteration of open space requirements for the subdivision or development; 
(iv)  Offset against any other capital improvements required by City ordinance for the development; 
(v)  Commitment on the part of the City to develop the park within a specified period of time; or 
(vi)  Any other reasonable concession by the City with respect to its development ordinances. 
iv.  In the event condemnation is necessary, such incentives (above) shall not apply. 
2.  Cash in Lieu of Land 
a.  A Developer responsible for land dedication under this section may be required, at the City Council's option, to meet the dedication requirements in whole or in part by a cash payment in lieu of land, in the amount set forth in Subsection 6.15.D.2.b. Such payment in lieu of land shall be made prior to filing the Final Plat for record, or prior to the issuance of a building permit where a Plat is not required. 
b.  The cash payment in lieu of land dedication shall be met by the payment of a fee set from time to time by ordinance of the City Council sufficient to acquire neighborhood parkland or to expand or improve existing neighborhood parks within the relevant zone. Unless and until changed by the City Council, such fee shall be computed on the basis of $200.00 per dwelling unit. The City Council may review the fee from time to time, and the new fee established shall be based upon its determination of land costs in the respective Park Service Zones, for fees pertaining to each zone, or in the City generally and its extraterritorial jurisdiction, if the fee is uniform throughout the City. The fee may vary from zone to zone, and may be set below the actual costs determined. 
c.  A cash payment in lieu of land dedication, as set forth in Subsection 6.15.D.2.b, does not relieve the Developer of its obligation to pay the park development fee set forth in Subsection 6.15.D.1.b.i. The cash payment in lieu of land dedication is in addition to the required park development fee. 
d.  The City may from time to time decide to purchase land for parks in or near the area of actual or potential development. If the City does purchase park land in a park service area, subsequent park land dedications for that zone may be in cash only, the calculation of which is set forth in Subsection 6.15.D.2.b. Such cash payment is in addition to the payment of the required park development fee. 
3.  Special Fund; Right to Refund 
a.  All funds collected by this dedication process will be deposited in the City's Park Development Fund. The funds for each Park Service Zone are used solely for the purchase or leasing of parkland and the development of the same within the relevant zones. Such funds may be commingled for administrative purposes. All expenditures from the Fund will be reviewed and approved by the City Council. 
b.  The City shall account for all sums paid into the Park Development Fund with reference to the individual Plats involved. Any monies paid into the Fund must be expended by the City within ten years from the date received by the City. Such funds shall be considered to be spent on a first in, first out basis in a particular Park Service Zone. If not so expended within the ten-year period, the then owners of the property within such zone, or the then owners of property contributing to such fund, will, on the last day of such period, be entitled to a refund of the remaining fees. The current owners of the property within the Subdivision must request such a refund within one year of entitlement, in writing, or such right is waived. 
4.  Additional Requirements 
a.  Any land dedicated to the City under this section must be suitable for park and recreation uses. The following characteristics of a proposed area are generally unsuitable: 
i.  Any area primarily located in the 100-year floodplain. 
ii.  Any areas of unusual topography or slope which renders the same unusable for organized recreational activities. 
The above characteristics of a park land dedication area may be grounds for refusal of any Plat. 
b.  Drainage areas may be accepted as part of a park if the channel is to remain more or less in its natural state or constructed in accordance with City engineering standards, if no significant area of the park is cut off from access by such channel, and if not less than five acres of the site is above the 100-year floodplain, or if the dedication is in excess of ten acres, not more than 50 percent of the site is to be included in the 100-year floodplain. 
c.  Each park must have ready access to a public street. 
d.  Unless provided otherwise in this section, an action by the City shall be by the City Council. 
e.  Properties within any Preliminary Plat approved prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, or building permit issued, as applicable, shall be exempt from the requirements set forth in this section; however, when such preliminary approval expires, any resubmission of such plat shall meet the requirements of this section. 
E.  Waiver of Dedication Requirements for Affordable Housing—Apartments—Multi-family Residential. Park land dedication requirements, both dedication of land and payment of the development fee, are waived for any unit of rental housing within an apartment development—multi-family residential which qualifies as Affordable Housing under 42 U.S. Code Section 12745 (a), and for which Federal Tax Credits have been granted, under the following conditions: 
1.  An application for such waiver shall be filed with the City Development Department on forms promulgated by the Director of Development. 
2.  Proof that the housing units qualify for rental under 42 U.S. Code Section 12745 (a), and that the Federal Tax credits for the same have been granted for the specific number of qualifying units must be submitted along with the application. 
3.  The units must continue to qualify for rental under said U.S. Code section for thirty years, and the City shall file a statement to such affect in the Deed Records of Gillespie County, Texas. In the event the units are not so maintained for the thirty year period, the City will be paid for the fees waived, and the then owner of the property shall be responsible therefor, and the same shall constitute a lien against the property for which the waivers were granted. The Director will apply the cash in lieu of dedication of land criteria and the park development fee in effect at the time of the application to determine the amount of fees waived for each qualifying unit for which a fee is waived. 
4.  With regard to an apartment development containing both qualifying and non-qualifying units, the waiver of dedication and fees will be determined on a percentage basis which the fee for the number of qualifying units bears to the total fee which would be payable if there were no qualifying units. The Director will fairly determine this percentage in the event park land is dedicated for the non-qualifying units. 
F.  Park Land Dedication Requirements. Both dedication of land and payment of the development fee are waived for any unit of owner-occupied housing, or rental housing below, which qualifies as Workforce Housing under the following conditions: 
1.  An application for such waiver shall be filed with the City Development Department on forms promulgated by the Director of Development. 
2.  Proof that the housing units qualify as Workforce Housing must be submitted along with the application. Workforce Housing for the purposes hereof are: 
a.  Houses, which include townhouses and condominiums, which are sold or rented to persons who will occupy the house as his, her or their primary residence the total sales price of which is no more than ninety percent (90%) of the mean home price for home sales within the City of Fredericksburg for the year previous to that of the year of the sale. The mean home price will be that established by the Gillespie County Board of Realtors or if the same is unavailable, the Director of Development will use a comparable method to establish the mean home price. 
b.  Houses, which include townhouses and condominiums, which are financed to the borrower, if financed, must meet FHA financing guidelines with regard to interest rates, costs of the loan, closing costs and all other fees to the borrower. 
3.  That the sale occur on or before June 30, 2016. 
(Ord. No. 25-002, 2-2-2015; Ord. No. 25-009, 6-1-2015)  
6.16. - Water Utility 
A.  General 
1.  All Subdivisions shall provide an approved water distribution system connected to the existing City water system in conformance with all applicable City master plans and regulations. 
2.  In the absence of specific standards, all water supply, distribution, pumping, and storage improvements shall be designed in accordance with the most current standards of the American Water Works Association and the most current criteria included in the Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 290. 
3.  The City shall make the final determination of the adequacy of the proposed system. 
B.  Basic Requirements 
1.  Water Main Construction 
All water mains shall be constructed within the street Right-of-Way or easements dedicated to the City. 
2.  Water Lines Extended to Subdivision Borders 
a.  All water lines installed within a Subdivision must extend to the borders of the Subdivision as required for future extensions of the distribution system, regardless of whether such extensions are required for service within the Subdivision. 
b.  If due to physical constraints, a new subdivision will never be constructed beyond a developing subdivision, the Director of Public Works and Utilities may approve a Minor Subdivision Waiver for this requirement prior to action on the Construction Plans or prior to action on any Plat. 
3.  Fire Hydrants (Locations and Hose-Lay) 
a.  Fire hydrants shall be placed on block corners or near the center of the block to place all of every lot within a radius of 400' in residential areas, but under no circumstances shall a hose-lay for more than 400' be made from the fire hydrant to cover all of every lot within the Subdivision or tract under development. 
b.  Fire hydrants shall be located in commercial and industrial areas so that all of every lot shall be within a radius of 400', but under no circumstances shall a hose-lay of more than 400' be made in order to adequately afford fire protection to the building or buildings. 
c.  A fire hydrant shall be placed at the entrance of all cul-de-sacs. 
C.  Preliminary Utility Plan 
1.  General 
A Preliminary Utility Plan shall detail both Section 6.16 Water Utility and 6.17 Wastewater Utility requirements. Also, the Preliminary Utility Plan shall show electric utilities in accordance with City plans and standards. 
2.  Illustrate the Location and Size of Water Utility and Wastewater Utility Mains 
a.  Concurrent with the submission of a Preliminary Plat or Replat, the Developer shall submit a map or plan showing the location and size of Water Utility and Wastewater Utility mains, which will be required to provide adequate service and fire protection to the lots specified in the proposed plat. 
b.  Plans and specifications for fire hydrant systems shall be submitted to the Director of Public Works and Utilities and Fire Marshal for review prior to construction. 
3.  Plan Document 
The plan shall be prepared as noted in the City's Application Forms. 
4.  Coordination with other Utility Providers 
a.  Preliminary Plat 
When the subdivision is located in an area served by a utility provider other than the City, the Developer must provide a water system analysis, indicating adequate water supply and water quality. 
b.  Replat 
i.  When a Subdivision is located in an area served by a utility provider other than the City, the Developer must provide a letter from the utility provider stating that facilities exist in the area to provide adequate domestic service and fire protection. 
ii.  If the City has reason to believe that there may be water supply or pressure concerns the City may require, a water system analysis, indicating adequate water supply and water quality. 
c.  Final Plat 
The Final Plat will not be approved until a letter has been provided from the utility provider stating that they have accepted the plans for construction.  
6.17. - Wastewater Utility 
A.  General 
1.  Approved Means of Wastewater Collection and Treatment Required 
All lots, tracts or parcels on which development is proposed shall be served by an approved means of wastewater collection and treatment. 
2.  Determining the Approved Means of Wastewater Collection and Treatment 
The Director of Public Works and Utilities shall be responsible for determining the approved means of wastewater collection and treatment in accordance with City master plans and regulations. 
3.  Possible Phasing of Development Required 
a.  The Director of Development Services may require the phasing of development and/or improvements in order to maintain adequate wastewater capacity. 
b.  Subdivisions either in the ETJ or that have recently been annexed and are not served by the City shall meet the same requirements but be subject to approval by the Director of Development Services. 
B.  Basic Requirements 
1.  Wastewater Disposal System Required 
a.  All Subdivisions shall provide an approved wastewater disposal system conforming to the Fredericksburg engineering standards criteria and all applicable City master plans and regulations and the requirements of Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 217, Design Criteria for Domestic Wastewater Systems. 
b.  The City shall make the final determination of the adequacy of the proposed system. 
2.  Wastewater Lines Extended to Subdivision Borders 
a.  All laterals and sewer mains installed within a subdivision must extend to the borders of the subdivision as required for future extensions of the collection system, regardless of whether such extensions are required for service within the subdivision. 
b.  If due to physical constraints, a new subdivision will never be constructed beyond a developing subdivision, the Director of Public Works and Utilities may approve a Minor Subdivision Waiver for this requirement prior to action on the Construction Plans or prior to action on any Plat. 
C.  Preliminary Utility Plan 
When required by the Subdivision Ordinance, a Preliminary Utility Plan for Wastewater Utility requirements shall be prepared in accordance with 6.16.C Preliminary Utility Plan.  
6.18. - Drainage and Storm Water 
A.  General 
1.  Components of the Drainage System 
Drainage systems, including all conveyances, inlets, conduits, structures, basins, or outlets used to drain storm water, must be designed and constructed to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the property owner and the public. 
2.  Management of Storm Water Runoff 
Adequate provision must be made for the acceptance, collection, conveyance, detention, and discharge of storm water runoff drainage onto, through and originating within the Subdivision. 
3.  Maintenance Responsibility 
a.  Detention and retention pond maintenance is the responsibility of the property owner or the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association, unless noted on the Plat or agreed to by the City. 
b.  It is a violation of this Subdivision Ordinance for the pond not to be maintained according to the City's requirements. 
c.  It is a violation of the City's Storm Water Management Plan's Best Management Practices for a detention/retention pond or a structural control to be unable to operate for its intended purpose due to lack of maintenance. 
4.  Discharge of Storm Water Runoff 
Storm water must be discharged in an acceptable form and at a controlled rate so as not to endanger human life or public or private property. 
5.  Drainage Facilities 
Drainage facilities shall be provided and constructed by the Developer in accordance with the requirements within this 6.18 Drainage and Storm Water and the City's Code of Ordinances. 
B.  Planning and Construction 
1.  Plans, profiles, and specifications shall be prepared for storm water improvements to be constructed and shall show the locations, sizes, grades, hydraulic gradients, flow arrows, and other details for the proposed pipe, inlets, channels, manholes, culverts, outlet structures, and other appurtenances. 
a.  Each sheet of the plans and profiles shall bear the seal and signature of the Licensed Professional Civil Engineer in the State of Texas who prepared them. 
2.  The Developer shall incur the cost of all drainage improvements connected with development of the Subdivision and acceptance of current upstream flows necessary to safely and adequately drain the Subdivision, including any necessary off-site channels or storm sewers and acquisition of any required easements. 
a.  The 100-year storm must be contained within the street Right-of-Way and/or the drainage easement boundaries. 
b.  Any necessary off-site channel or storm sewers which are required to be within easements must have a separate instrument easement filed in the County Real Property Records and a filed copy shall be submitted to the City before Construction Plans will be approved. 
C.  Residential Grading and Drainage 
1.  Lot to Lot Drainage Standards 
a.  Surface runoff from residential lots shall cross no more than one additional lot before being directed toward the street or a dedicated drainage easement or public Right-of-Way. 
b.  When the flow reaches the second lot, side lot swales shall be in place to direct the flows to the street or to a public Right-of-Way or dedicated drainage easement within the rear yard. 
c.  Furthermore, no more than one lot may drain to a second lot before the flow is directed to the public Right-of-Way or dedicated drainage easement. 
d.  Where lot to lot drainage occurs, the lot lines shall be aligned and a minimum of a 10' drainage easement shall be provided. 
2.  Detailed Standards 
See the Standard Details and Specification for Public Infrastructure Construction Manual for requirements for detailed standards and policies. 
D.  Nonresidential Grading and Drainage 
1.  Lot to Lot Grading and Drainage Standards 
a.  Grading and drainage plans shall strive to ensure that surface runoff from nonresidential individual lots cross no more than one (1) additional lot before being directed toward a private on site system or a dedicated City drainage system. 
b.  When the flow reaches the third lot, side lot swales may be utilized to direct the flows to private enclosed systems or to a dedicated City drainage system within a dedicated easement or in street Right-of-Way. 
c.  No runoff may drain to a fourth lot. 
i.  The flow must be directed to the street system or to a dedicated City drainage system with a dedicated easement. 
d.  Concentrations of stormwater shall not be discharged to City Streets through driveways or flumes but shall be collected into an enclosed system, either private or public, prior to reaching the curb line of the roadway. 
e.  Specific deviations from these guidelines may be addressed on an individual basis. 
2.  Detailed Standards 
See the Standard Details and Specification for Public Infrastructure Construction Manual for detailed standards and policies. 
E.  Design Criteria 
1.  The design of the swales and enclosed systems located within a dedicated drainage easement shall utilize the City's adopted drainage design criteria for channel and pipe systems. 
2.  Side yard swales shall have a minimum slope of one (1) percent to ensure adequacy of flow during and after a rain event. 
3.  See the Standard Details and Specification for Public Infrastructure Construction Manual for requirements for detailed standards and policies. 
F.  Materials 
1.  Swales on Residential Lots 
Swales on residential lots shall be fully sodded. 
2.  Swales on Nonresidential Lots 
Swales on nonresidential lots may be constructed in a natural state fully sodded in cases where the surrounding area has been sodded and velocities and depth of flow can be contained within the proposed swale without erosive damage. 
a.  Swales within the parking and private driving lanes of nonresidential properties shall be constructed of materials similar to those of the parking and driving lanes. 
3.  Systems on Residential Lots 
Enclosed systems may be designed utilizing concrete or approved plastic pipe and collection inlets on residential lots. 
a.  Private enclosed systems on nonresidential lots may be designed utilizing approved plastic pipe and collection inlets. 
4.  Systems on Nonresidential Lots 
Enclosed systems on nonresidential lots which will be dedicated to the City shall be designed utilizing concrete pipe and collection inlets. 
G.  Roof Drains 
1.  All roof drains of residential structures shall be directed to the street or toward a rear swale and shall not be discharged directly onto the side lot. 
2.  Side downspouts may be directed to side lot swales at a 45 degree angle to the direction of flow of the side lot swale to ensure that the flows are directed away from the house foundation yet providing a less [severe] entry into the swale. 
H.  Maintenance 
1.  All grassed swales should be designed and constructed with 4:1 side slopes that will be gentle enough to allow easy mowing. 
2.  Mowing and maintenance responsibility shall be the responsibility of the property owner or Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association. 
3.  Periodic cleaning of enclosed systems located within dedicated drainage easements shall be the responsibility of the City. 
I.  Preliminary Drainage Plan 
1.  Applicability and Purpose 
a.  A Preliminary Drainage Plan shall be prepared for all developments in accordance with the requirements set forth in the City's Application Forms. 
b.  The Preliminary Drainage Plan shall show the watershed affecting the development and how the runoff from the fully-developed watershed will be conveyed to, through, and from the development. 
i.  The Preliminary Drainage Plan must comply with the standards outlined in this Subdivision Ordinance, Standard Details and Specification for Public Infrastructure Construction Manual, and the Code of Ordinances. 
c.  The Preliminary Drainage Plan is a guide for later detailed drainage design. 
d.  The review of the Preliminary Drainage Plan does not constitute final drainage plan approval or authorize a waiver to the Subdivision Regulations. 
2.  Plan Required, Previous Plans, and Waivers 
a.  For any property involved in the development process, a Preliminary Drainage Plan shall be provided, at the Developer's expense, for the area proposed for development. 
b.  For property with a previously accepted Preliminary Drainage Plan, the accepted Preliminary Drainage Plan may be submitted and enforced unless a revised Preliminary Drainage Plan is required by the City due to lot reconfiguration or other conditions created by the new Plat. 
c.  The Director of Public Works and Utilities may waive the requirement for a Preliminary Drainage Plan if the submitted plat is not anticipated to cause any significant change in runoff characteristics from a previously accepted drainage study or for single residential properties where no drainage problems are anticipated. 
d.  If the applicant requests a waiver in writing, a copy of any previous drainage plan prepared for the property shall be provided. 
3.  Submittal 
a.  Three (3) paper copies of the Preliminary Drainage Plan shall be submitted with the submittal of a Preliminary Plat or Replat for review and acceptance. 
b.  The Preliminary Drainage Plan shall be labeled as "Preliminary." 
c.  The Preliminary Drainage Plan shall be stamped by and dated by the engineer. 
J.  Preliminary Storm Water Management Plan 
1.  Applicability and Purpose 
a.  A Preliminary Storm Water Management Plan (SWMP) shall be prepared for all developments in accordance with the requirements set forth in the City's Application Forms. 
b.  The purpose of the Preliminary SWMP is to identify permanent water quality feature opportunities for the development. 
2.  Preparation Requirements 
a.  The Preliminary SWMP shall be prepared in coordination with the Preliminary Drainage Plan on all projects where both are required. 
b.  The Preliminary SWMP and the Preliminary Drainage Plan may be shown on the same sheet. 
c.  When a Preliminary Drainage Plan is not required, the Preliminary SWMP shall indicate the existing drainage patterns and runoff coefficients and the proposed changes to these items. 
3.  Standards and Criteria 
a.  The Preliminary SWMP must comply with the standards and criteria outlined in this Subdivision Ordinance, Standard Details and Specification for Public Infrastructure Construction Manual, and the Municipal Code. 
b.  The Preliminary SWMP may satisfy the storm water management portion of the Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) that is required for construction activities; however, the Preliminary SWMP is not a substitution for the SWPPP. 
c.  The City's review of the Preliminary SWMP does not constitute acceptance of the final SWMP or the final development plans. 
4.  Proposed Area 
a.  The Developer shall provide a Preliminary SWMP for the area proposed for development. 
b.  For Amending Plats or Plats with a previously accepted Preliminary SWMP, the accepted Preliminary SWMP shall be enforced unless the City Engineer requires a revised Preliminary SWMP. 
5.  Preliminary SWMP Submittal 
a.  Three (3) paper copies of the Preliminary SWMP plan shall be submitted with the submittal of a Preliminary Plat or Replat for review and acceptance. 
b.  The plan shall be labeled as "Preliminary." 
c.  Upon acceptance of the plan, the plan shall be signed and sealed by a professional engineer.  
6.19. - Retaining Wall Construction 
A.  Location 
1.  Retaining walls shall be located and constructed on private property only. 
2.  Retaining walls shall be located within a private retaining wall easement. 
3.  If a retaining wall is designed to traverse three or more lots within a Subdivision, the wall shall be located within a private retaining wall easement dedicated to the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association of the Subdivision. 
a.  The easement shall be shown on the Preliminary Plat and Final Plat and shall be dedicated to the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association of the Subdivision to maintain the wall in a safe and orderly condition. 
B.  Design by a Professional Engineer Required 
All retaining walls shall be designed by a professional engineer and plans submitted to the City for review must be signed and sealed by the design engineer. 
C.  Building Permit Required 
1.  Any earth terracing method that supports a structure or vehicle load, or that is over four feet (4') in height (as measured from the bottom of footing to top of wall), shall require a building permit and shall meet the requirements of this section. 
2.  A retaining wall shall not be constructed in excess of four feet in height. 
a.  If the wall is to be more than four feet high, the retaining wall system shall be terraced, so as to provide a minimum of two (2) feet of flat ground between the faces of the retaining walls for each four foot section of retaining wall. 
b.  The flat terrace shall be sloped to a maximum of two (2) percent to allow drainage. 
3.  No building permit, other than for a retaining wall, shall be issued for any lot within a Subdivision until all retaining walls are constructed in accordance with a grading plan for the Subdivision. 
4.  A retaining wall shall be constructed in accordance with the grading plan and shall comply with the requirements of the applicable building code and this ordinance. 
5.  Any change from the approved grading plan or design for a retaining wall within a Subdivision shall not be permitted unless the Applicant has submitted plans for the entire Subdivision showing the proposed changing in grading and the Director of Public Works and Utilities has approved the proposed change(s).  
6.20. - Miscellaneous 
A.  Underground Utilities 
1.  All distribution lines, cables, etc. for utilities shall be installed below ground within the Subdivision to eliminate the necessity for disturbing the street, curb and gutter, sidewalk and other services and structures when making connections. 
a.  Transmission lines or major cables to provide utilities such as electric, telephone, and cable television to the area as a whole may be located above ground on the perimeter of the Subdivision being served. 
b.  The installation of these utilities shall conform to commonly accepted construction standards and be subject to review by the Director of Public Works and Utilities. 
2.  The Developer shall provide separate service lines for water and wastewater (sanitary sewerage) to each lot or point of metering. 
3.  The Developer shall make arrangements with all other appropriate utility companies for the extension of their respective utility lines and service to and within the addition and for any costs or refunds of such cost. 
4.  All Plats for residential and multi-family developments shall require all telephone lines, cable television lines, electric lines, and utility lateral and services lines and wires to be placed underground except as otherwise herein provided. 
a.  In special or unique circumstances or to avoid undue hardships a Major Subdivision Waiver may be approved to permit the construction and maintenance of overhead electric utility lateral or services lines and of overhead telephone and cable TV lines and may approve any Plat or Site Plan with such approved variances or exceptions. 
b.  All Final Plats for residential and multi-family Subdivisions submitted for approval by the City must display signature approval by utility companies prior to submittal. 
i.  All multi-family Plats or Site Plans must display signature approval by utility companies before any building permits are issued. 
ii.  No Final Plat shall be approved and no building permit will be issued without such approval. 
c.  Where electrical service is to be placed underground, street or site facilities shall also be placed underground. 
d.  All electrical, cable TV and telephone support equipment (transformers, amplifiers, switching devices, etc.) necessary for underground installations in Subdivisions shall be pad mounted or placed underground. 
e.  Nothing herein set forth shall prohibit or restrict any utility company from recovering the difference between the cost of overhead facilities and underground facilities. 
i.  Each utility whose facilities are subject to the provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance shall develop policies and cost reimbursement procedures with respect to the installation and extension of underground service. 
f.  Unless specifically stated otherwise, temporary construction service may be provided by overhead utility lines and facilities without obtaining a waiver. 
g.  "Electric Utility Service Lines" shall mean those electric lines which through a transformer connect a lateral line to a customer's service entrance. 
5.  All installations regulated by the provisions set forth herein shall be in conformance with the intent of this ordinance and shall conform to any regulations and/or specifications that the various public utility companies may have in force from time to time. 
6.  Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to require any existing facilities to be placed underground when no development is proposed. 
B.  Company Notification to City 
All utility companies will notify the City before digging, boring, drilling, etc. 
C.  Street Lighting 
1.  Street lighting shall conform to the latest edition of the Illuminating Engineering Society Handbook. 
2.  Round tapered standards with bracket arms shall be used and lighting levels, as recommended, shall be provided for very light traffic in residential areas, medium traffic on Collector Streets, and heavy traffic on Arterial Streets. 
3.  The location of street lights shall follow the location criteria below. 
a.  Street lights shall be placed at street intersections. 
b.  Street lights shall be placed at the end of cul-de-sacs streets (i.e., the bulb). 
c.  Street lights shall be placed at bridges. 
d.  Street lights shall be placed on street curves of 30 degrees or greater. 
4.  Cost of installation of street lighting shall be borne by the Developer. 
5.  Full cut-off lights and fixtures shall be used and are subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works and Utilities. Street light plans will be review as part of the submittal of the Construction Plans.  
Section 7. - Subdivision Relief Procedures 
 
7.01. - Petition for Subdivision Waiver of Modification 
A.  Purpose 
The purpose of a petition for a Subdivision Waiver of a particular standard or requirement of these Subdivision Regulations, as such are applicable to Plats or Construction Plans, is to determine whether such particular standard or requirement should be applied to an Application or modified. 
B.  Definitions 
Subdivision Waivers shall be classified as a Minor Subdivision Waiver or Major Subdivision Waiver. Minor Subdivision Waivers are defined as a minor change to the standards, but not the intent, of these Subdivision Regulations and are listed in Table 10. A Major Subdivision Waiver is a significant change to both the standards and intent of the Subdivision Regulations, which involves Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council approval and is not listed in Table 10. 
C.  Decision-Maker 
1.  Minor Subdivision Waiver 
a.  Decision-Maker Authority 
The Director of Development Services or the Director of Public Works and Utilities shall act upon any Minor Subdivision Waiver listed in Table 10. 
b.  Appeal of a Minor Subdivision Waiver Decision 
i.  Appeal Review and Recommendation 
An appeal of the Minor Subdivision Waiver decision may be considered by the Commission. 
ii.  Appeal Decision 
If further appeal is made, the City Council shall then act on such an appeal. (See 7.01.J Minor Subdivision Waiver Appeal) 
Table 10: Minor Subdivision Waiver 
Section 	Standard 	Director of Development Services 	Director of Public Works and Utilities 
6.05.J 	Maximum Alley Length 	Approve 	
6.09.C 	Lot Frontage Prohibition for SF Lots on Arterial Streets 	Approve 	
6.09.D 	Right Angles for Side Lot Lines 	Approve 	
6.04.E 	Traffic Impact Analysis 	Approve 	
6.12.D.2 	Street Right-of-Way Dedication 	Approve 	
6.16.B.2 	Water Lines Extended to Subdivision Borders 		Approve 
6.17.B.2 	Wastewater Lines Extended to Subdivision Borders 		Approve 
 
2.  Major Subdivision Waiver 
a.  Decision-Maker Authority 
After review and recommendation from the Commission, the City Council shall decide a Major Subdivision Waiver. 
D.  Subdivision Waiver Applicability 
1.  Waiver of Standard or Requirement 
a.  An Applicant may request a Subdivision Waiver of a particular standard or requirement applicable to a Preliminary Plat, to Construction Plans, or where no Preliminary Plat Application has been submitted for approval, to a Final Plat or a Replat. 
b.  A Subdivision Waiver petition shall be specific in nature, and shall only involve relief consideration for one particular standard or requirement. 
c.  An Applicant may submit more than one Subdivision Waiver petition if there are several standards or requirements at issue. 
d.  For processing a Subdivision Waiver concurrently with a Plat Application, an Applicant shall submit a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action in accordance with 3.03.D Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action. 
2.  Waiver Petition Acceptance 
a.  A petition for a Subdivision Waiver may not be filed in lieu of: 
i.  A Subdivision Proportionality Appeal (7.02) or 
ii.  A Subdivision Vested Rights Petition (7.03). 
b.  If there is a question as to whether a Subdivision Proportionality Appeal or Subdivision Vested Rights Petition is required instead of a Subdivision Waiver petition, such determination shall be made by the Director of Development Services. 
E.  Subdivision Waiver Submission Procedures 
1.  Written Waiver Request with Application 
a.  A request for a Subdivision Waiver shall be submitted in writing by the Applicant with the filing of a Preliminary Plat, Construction Plans, Final Plat or Replat, as applicable. 
b.  No Subdivision Waiver may be considered or granted unless the Applicant has made such written request. 
2.  Grounds for Waiver 
a.  The Applicant's request shall state the grounds for the Subdivision Waiver request, based upon the Subdivision Waiver Criteria (7.01.F), and all of the facts relied upon by the Applicant. 
b.  Failure to do so, will result in denial of the Application unless the Applicant submits a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action in accordance with 3.03.D Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action. 
F.  Subdivision Waiver Criteria 
1.  Undue Hardship Present 
A Subdivision Waiver to regulations within this Subdivision Ordinance may be approved only when, in the Decision-Maker's opinion, undue hardship will result from strict compliance to the regulations. 
2.  Consideration Factors 
The Decision-Maker shall take into account the following factors: 
a.  The nature of the proposed land use involved and existing uses of the land in the vicinity; 
b.  The number of persons who will reside or work in the proposed development; and 
c.  The effect such Subdivision Waiver might have upon traffic conditions and upon the public health, safety, convenience and welfare in the vicinity. 
3.  Findings 
No Subdivision Waiver shall be granted unless the Decision-Maker finds: 
a.  That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved or other physical conditions of the property such that the strict application of the provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance would deprive the Applicant of the reasonable use of his or her land; and 
b.  That the Subdivision Waiver is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the Applicant, and that the granting of the Subdivision Waiver will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or injurious to other property in the area; and 
c.  That the granting of the Subdivision Waiver will not have the effect of preventing the orderly subdivision of other lands in the area in accordance with the provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
4.  Intent of Subdivision Regulations 
a.  A Subdivision Waiver may be granted only when waiving the requirement requested is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the Subdivision Regulations so that the public health, safety and welfare may be secured and substantial justice done. 
b.  Financial hardship alone to the Applicant shall not constitute undue hardship. 
5.  Minimum Degree of Variation 
No Subdivision Waiver shall be granted unless it represents the minimum degree of variation of requirements necessary to meet the objective of the Applicant in requesting the waiver. 
6.  Violations and Conflicts 
The Decision-Maker shall not authorize a Subdivision Waiver that would constitute a violation of, or conflict with, any other valid ordinance, code, regulation, master plan or Comprehensive Plan of the City. 
7.  Falsification of Information 
a.  Any falsification of information by the Applicant shall be cause for the Subdivision Waiver request to be denied. 
b.  If the Subdivision Waiver request is approved based upon false information, whether intentional or not, discovery of such false information shall nullify prior approval of the Subdivision Waiver, and shall be grounds for reconsideration of the Subdivision Waiver request. 
G.  Burden of Proof 
The Applicant bears the burden of proof to demonstrate that the requirement for which a Subdivision Waiver is requested imposes an undue hardship on the Applicant. The Applicant shall submit the proof with the Application. 
H.  Subdivision Waiver Decision 
1.  The Decision-Maker shall consider the Subdivision Waiver petition and, based upon the criteria set forth in 7.01.F Subdivision Waiver Criteria, shall take one of the following actions: 
a.  Deny the petition, and impose the standard or requirement as it is stated in these Subdivision Regulations; or 
b.  Grant the petition, and waive in whole or in part or modify the standard or requirement as it is stated in this Subdivision Ordinance. 
2.  Processing of a Minor Subdivision Waiver Petition 
The Decision-Maker shall deny of grant a petition for a Minor Subdivision Waiver (see Table 10 for a list of Minor Subdivision Waivers) concurrently with the decision of a Preliminary Plat, Construction Plans, Final Plat or Replat, as applicable. 
3.  Processing of a Major Subdivision Waiver Petition 
a.  Recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission 
i.  The Commission shall consider the Major Subdivision Waiver petition at a public meeting no later than thirty (30) calendar days after the date on which the notice of Major Subdivision Waiver is submitted to the Director of Development Services. 
ii.  The Commission shall recommend to the City Council to approve or deny a request for a Major Subdivision Waiver by majority vote of all members. 
b.  Decision by City Council 
i.  After the recommendation from the Commission has been made, the City Council shall consider the Major Subdivision Waiver request at a public meeting no later than thirty (30) calendar days after the date on which the Commission's recommendation was made. 
ii.  The City Council approve or deny a request for a Major Subdivision Waiver by a majority vote of all members. 
iii.  The decision of the City Council is final. 
I.  Notification of Decision on Petition - 14 Days 
The Applicant shall be notified of the decision on the Subdivision Waiver by the applicable Decision-Maker (e.g., the Director of Development Services, Director of Public Works and Utilities, Commission or City Council, as applicable), within fourteen (14) calendar days following the decision. 
J.  Minor Subdivision Waiver Appeal 
1.  Initiation of an Appeal 
a.  The Applicant may appeal a Minor Subdivision Waiver decision. 
b.  The written request to appeal shall be submitted to the Director of Development Services within thirty (30) calendar days following the denial decision. 
2.  Recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission 
a.  The Commission shall consider the appeal at a public meeting no later than thirty (30) calendar days after the date on which the notice of appeal is submitted to the Director of Development Services. 
b.  At this meeting, new information may be presented and considered, if available, that might alter the previous decision to deny the Minor Subdivision Waiver. 
c.  The Commission shall recommend to the City Council to affirm, modify or reverse the previous decision by simple majority vote. 
3.  Appeal to City Council 
a.  The Applicant, the Director of Development Services or four (4) members of City Council may appeal the Commission's decision by submitting a written notice of appeal to the Director of Development Services within thirty (30) calendar days following the Commission's decision. 
b.  After the recommendation from the Commission has been made, the City Council shall consider the appeal at a public meeting no later than thirty (30) calendar days after the date on which the Commission's recommendation was made. 
c.  The City Council may affirm, modify or reverse the decision by majority vote of all members. 
d.  The decision of the City Council is final. 
K.  Effect of Approval 
1.  Submission and Processing 
Following the granting of a Subdivision Waiver, the Applicant may submit or continue the processing of a Plat or Construction Plans, as applicable. 
2.  Expirations 
The Subdivision Waiver granted shall remain in effect for the period the Plat or Construction Plans are in effect, and shall expire upon expiration of either or both of those Applications. 
3.  Extensions 
Extension of the Plat or Construction Plans Applications shall also result in extension of the Subdivision Waiver.  
7.02. - Subdivision Proportionality Appeal 
A.  Purpose and Applicability 
1.  Purpose 
The purpose of a petition for relief from a dedication, construction requirement, or a requirement to pay a fee, other than an impact fee authorized by Chapter 395 of the Texas Local Government Code is to ensure that the imposition of a dedication, construction, or fee standards to a proposed development does not result in an unconstitutionally disproportionate burden on the property owner. 
2.  Applicability 
a.  An Applicant may file a petition for relief under this 7.02 Subdivision Proportionality Appeal to contest a requirement to dedicate land, to construct Public Improvements, or pay a fee as required by this Subdivision Ordinance, other ordinance, or that are attached as a condition to approval of the Application. 
b.  A petition under this 7.02 Subdivision Proportionality Appeal shall not be used to waive standards on grounds applicable to any Subdivision Waiver Application, as outlined in 7.01 Petition for Subdivision Waiver of Modification. 
c.  An appeal hereunder is a prerequisite to the filing of any court action or challenge to proportionality. Exhaustion of administrative remedies shall not be accomplished unless appeals provided for in this section are complete. 
B.  Petition Requirements 
1.  Form of Petition 
The petition for relief from a dedication, construction, or fee requirement shall allege that there is not a rational nexus or rough proportionality between the standards and the impact of the proposed development in public facilities. 
2.  Study Required 
The Applicant shall provide a study in support of the petition along with petition for relief that includes the following information applicable to the standard questioned: 
a.  Capacity Utilized 
i.  Total capacity of the City's water, wastewater, storm drainage, parks or roadway system to be utilized by the proposed development, employing standard measures of capacity and equivalency tables relating the type of development proposed to the quantity of system capacity to be consumed by the development. 
ii.  If the proposed development is to be developed in phases, such information also shall be provided for the entire development proposed, including any phases already developed. 
b.  Capacity Supplied 
i.  Total capacity to be supplied to the City's water, wastewater, storm drainage, parks or roadway system by the proposed dedication of an interest in land or construction of Public Improvements. 
ii.  If the Application is part of a phased development, the information shall include any capacity supplied by prior dedications or construction of Public Improvements. 
c.  Capacity Comparison 
i.  Comparison of the capacity of the City's public facilities system(s) to be consumed by the proposed development with the capacity to be supplied to such system(s) by the proposed dedication of an interest in land, construction of Public Improvements, or payment of a fee. 
ii.  In making this comparison, the impacts on the City's public facilities system(s) from the entire development shall be considered. 
d.  Oversizing 
The effect of any City participation in the costs of oversizing the Public Improvement to be constructed in accordance with the City's requirements. 
e.  Other Information 
Any other information that shows the alleged disproportionality between the impacts created by the proposed development and the dedication or construction requirement imposed by the City. 
3.  Time for Filing Petition and Study 
a.  A petition for relief from a dedication, construction, or fee requirement shall be filed with the Director of Public Works and Utilities within fourteen (14) calendar days following the decision on the related Application. 
b.  The study in support of the petition shall be filed within sixty (60) calendar days following the initial decision, unless the Applicant (petitioner for relief) seeks an extension in writing within such sixty (60) calendar day period. 
c.  The Director of Public Works and Utilities may extend the time for submitting the study for a period not to exceed an additional thirty (30) calendar days. 
4.  Land in Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) 
Where land or facilities to be dedicated are located in the ETJ of the City and are to be dedicated to the County, a petition for relief or study in support of the petition shall be accepted as complete for review by the Director of Public Works and Utilities only when such petition or study is accompanied by verification that a copy has been delivered to and accepted by the County, as applicable. 
C.  Processing of Subdivision Proportionality Appeal Petitions and Decision 
1.  Responsible Official 
The Director of Public Works and Utilities shall be the Responsible Official for processing a petition for relief from a dedication, construction, or fee requirement. 
2.  Review and Recommendation 
a.  The Director of Public Works and Utilities shall review the petition and supporting study and shall make a recommendation to the City Council. 
b.  In response to a petition for relief from a dedication or construction requirement pursuant to 7.02 Subdivision Proportionality Appeal and to achieve proportionality between the demands created by a proposed development on public facilities and the obligation to provide adequate public facilities, the City may participate in the costs of Public Improvements, credit or offset the obligations against payment of impact fees, or relieve the property owner any of the obligations. 
3.  Decision-Maker 
The City Council shall decide the Subdivision Proportionality Appeal petition, after receiving a recommendation from the Director of Public Works and Utilities. 
4.  Public Hearing Held within 60 Days after Receipt of Study 
The City Council shall conduct a public hearing within sixty (60) calendar days after the study supporting the petition (refer to Section 7.02.B) is filed with the Director of Public Works and Utilities. 
5.  Burden of Proof 
The Applicant bears the burden of proof to demonstrate that the Application of a dedication, construction, or fee requirement that is in question imposes a disproportionate burden on the Applicant. 
6.  Decision 
The City Council shall consider the petition for relief from a dedication, construction, or fee requirement based upon the following criteria: 
a.  The City Council shall determine whether the Application of the standard or condition is roughly proportional to the nature and extent of the impacts created by the proposed development on public facilities and whether the Application of the standard or condition reasonably benefits the development. 
b.  In making such determination, the City Council shall consider the evidence submitted by the Applicant, the report and recommendation of the Director of Public Works and Utilities and, where the property is located within the City's ETJ, any recommendations from the County, as applicable. 
7.  Action 
Based on the criteria in 7.02.C.6, the City Council shall take one of the following actions: 
a.  Deny the petition for relief, and impose the dedication, construction, or fee requirement as required by this Ordinance; or 
b.  Grant the petition for relief, and waive any dedication, construction, or fee requirement to the extent necessary to achieve proportionality; or 
c.  Grant the petition for relief, and direct that the City to waiver the fee or participate in the costs of acquiring land for or constructing the Public Improvement and establishing the extent of such participation. 
8.  Notification of Decision on Petition 
The Director of Public Works and Utilities shall notify the Applicant of the decision on the petition for relief within fourteen (14) calendar days following the City Council's decision. 
D.  Expiration or Failure to File Application 
Where an Application was denied based upon the imposition of the standard requiring dedication of land or construction of a required Public Improvement and the City Council's decision is to grant some level of relief, the Applicant shall resubmit the Application within sixty (60) calendar days following the date the petition for relief is granted, in whole or in part, showing conformance with the City Council's decision on the petition. 
1.  If the Application is not resubmitted within the sixty (60) day period, the relief granted by the City Council on the petition shall expire. 
2.  If the re-submittal of the Application is modified in any other way, a new petition for relief may be required by the Director of Public Works and Utilities. 
3.  If the Application for which relief was granted is denied on other grounds, a new petition for relief may be required by the Director of Public Works and Utilities. 
E.  Effect of Relief 
1.  The Director of Public Works and Utilities may require the Applicant to submit a modified Application or supporting materials consistent with the relief granted by the City Council on the petition. 
2.  The relief granted on the petition shall remain in effect for the period the Application is in effect, and shall expire upon expiration or approval of the Application.  
7.03. - Subdivision Vested Rights Petition 
A.  Purpose 
In accordance with the Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 245 or successor statute, the purpose of a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition is to determine whether an Application should be processed under the terms of a previous ordinance, to provide a process for determination of possible vested status, and to determine when certain permits are subject to expiration. 
B.  Applicability of a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition 
1.  Any Application 
A Subdivision Vested Rights Petition may be submitted for any Application authorized by this Subdivision Ordinance. 
2.  Prohibition of Joint Submission 
A Subdivision Vested Rights Petition cannot be submitted by an Applicant along with submission of a request for a text amendment to this Subdivision Ordinance, a Zoning Map amendment, or any other request for a legislative decision by the City Council. 
3.  Prohibition of Submission for Exempt Permits and Regulations 
No Subdivision Vested Rights Petition may be submitted for any permits or regulations that are exempt under Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 245 or successor statute. 
4.  Prerequisite to the Filing of any Court Action 
A petition herein is a prerequisite to the filing of any court action to determine vested rights. Exhaustion of administrative remedies shall not be accomplished unless appeals provided for in this section are complete. 
C.  Petition Submission 
1.  Filing 
A Subdivision Vested Rights Petition shall be submitted to the City's Responsible Official and shall be in accordance with the Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 245 or successor statute. 
2.  Waiver to 30-Day Action Required 
The processing of a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition is not subject to the platting requirement to decide an Application within 30 days. (See Section 3.03.D); however, if a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition is submitted jointly along with a Plat Application or other Application that requires action within 30 days, then a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action shall be required for the joint Application. 
3.  Stay of Further Proceedings 
Submission of a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition shall stay further proceedings on the related Application until a final decision is reached on the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition. 
D.  Time for Filing a Petition and Application 
1.  A Subdivision Vested Rights Petition may be filed jointly with an Application for which a vested right is claimed. 
2.  A Subdivision Vested Rights Petition may be filed without a joint Application if the petition is filed pursuant to Section 7.03.K. Dormant Projects. 
3.  Where more than one Application is authorized to be filed simultaneously by this Subdivision Ordinance, the petition may be filed simultaneously for each Application. 
E.  Petition Requirements 
The Subdivision Vested Rights Petition shall allege in writing that the Applicant has a vested right for some or all of the land subject to the Application under Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 245 or successor statute, or pursuant to Texas Local Government Code, Section 43.002 or successor statute or other applicable law, that requires the City to review and decide the Application under standards that were in effect prior to the effective date of the currently applicable standards. The petition shall include the following information and documents: 
1.  The name, mailing address, phone number and fax number of the property owner (or the property owner's duly authorized agent with proof of such authority). 
2.  Identification of the property for which the person claims a vested right. 
3.  Identification of the project, as that term is defined in Local Government Code Section 245.001(3), and the permit application, permit, or plan for development first filed for review for the project. 
4.  A narrative description of the grounds for the petition, including a statement as to whether the petition asserts a vested right related to a specific standard or to an entire project; 
5.  A copy of each approved or pending Application which is the basis for the contention that the City may not apply current standards to the Application which is the subject of the petition; 
6.  The Official Vesting Date of the Application; 
7.  The date the subdivision for which the Application was submitted was commenced; 
8.  Identification of all standards otherwise applicable to the Application from which relief is sought; 
9.  Identification of any current standards which Applicant agrees can be applied to the Application at issue; 
10.  A copy of any prior vested rights determination involving the same land; and 
11.  Whenever the Applicant alleges that an Application subject to expiration should not be terminated, a description of the events constituting Progress Towards Completion of the subdivision for which the application was approved. 
F.  Decision of a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition 
1.  Reviewing a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition 
a.  The Responsible Official for a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition is the same as that for reviewing and processing the Application with which the petition is associated. 
b.  Where multiple Applications are submitted, and there is more than one Responsible Official, the decision of each Responsible Official shall be coordinated with that of any other Responsible Official on the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition. 
c.  The City Attorney shall also be notified of the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition following its filing and acceptance for processing. 
d.  The Applicant shall reimburse the City for all related legal costs for review of a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition. This reimbursement shall be paid in full prior to filing of the Final Plat. 
2.  Decision by the Responsible Official on a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition 
a.  If the Responsible Official is the Decision-Maker on the original related Application, that official shall determine whether the relief requested in the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition should be granted in whole or in part, and shall formulate a written report summarizing the Decision-Maker's reasoning and recommendation. 
b.  The Applicant shall be notified of the decision within fourteen (14) calendar days following the date the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition was filed at the City. 
c.  The Responsible Official may defer making a decision on the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition and instead forward the petition to the Commission for a decision, in accordance with the process outlined in 7.03.F.3. 
3.  Decision by Commission on a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition 
a.  If the original related Application is to be decided by the Commission, or if the Responsible Official defers making a decision on a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition pursuant to 7.03.F.2.c, the Responsible Official for that type of Application shall submit a report in the form of a recommendation on the petition to the Commission. 
b.  The Commission shall render a decision on the petition within thirty (30) calendar days following the date the petition was filed at the City or deferred by the Responsible Official. 
c.  The Commission's decision on a petition shall be upon a simple majority vote of the full Commission's voting members. 
4.  Decision by City Council on a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition 
a.  Where the City Council is the final Decision-Maker on the related Application, or for any petition submitted pursuant to Paragraph K. Dormant Projects, the Responsible Official for that type of Application shall submit a report in the form of a recommendation on the petition to the City Council. 
b.  The City Council shall render a decision on the petition within thirty (30) calendar days following the date the petition was filed at the City. 
c.  The City Council's decision on a petition shall be upon a majority vote (3/5) of all the City Council members, and shall be final. 
5.  Appeal to the Council of a Decision on Subdivision Vested Rights Petition 
a.  For an Applicant-Initiated Appeal 
The Applicant may appeal the Responsible Official's or Commission's decision on the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition to the City Council by submitting written notice of appeal to the applicable Responsible Official within fourteen (14) calendar days following the date of such decision. 
i.  A letter stating the reasons for the appeal, citing the specific applicable section(s) of the Subdivision Ordinance, shall be submitted by the Applicant. 
b.  For a City Council-Initiated Appeal 
No less than four (4) voting members of the City Council may appeal the Responsible Official's or Commission's decision on the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition to the entire City Council by submitting written notice of appeal to the applicable Responsible Official within fourteen (14) calendar days following the date of such decision. 
i.  The Council shall consider and act on whether it will appeal the decision at its first regular meeting (for which there is time to include such appeal on its posted agenda, as required by State law) that occurs after the date at which the decision was made. 
ii.  Written notice of the City Council's vote to appeal shall be submitted to the Director of Development Services within seven (7) calendar days following the City Council's vote to appeal the decision. 
c.  The City Council shall hear and decide the appeal within thirty (30) calendar days following receipt of the notice of appeal by the City. 
d.  Approval of an appeal by the City Council shall only be upon a favorable vote of a majority vote (3/5) of all City Council members, and shall be final. 
G.  Criteria for Subdivision Vested Rights Petition Approval 
1.  Factors 
The Decision-Maker shall review the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition with regards to the following factors: 
a.  The nature and extent of prior Applications filed for the land subject to the petition; 
b.  Whether any prior vested rights determinations have been made with respect to the property subject to the petition; 
c.  Whether any prior approved Applications for the property have expired or have been terminated in accordance with State law or local ordinances; 
d.  Whether current standards adopted after commencement of the project affect proposed use of the land, landscaping or tree preservation, open space or park dedication, lot size, lot dimensions, lot coverage or building size based upon the proposed Application; 
e.  Whether any statutory exception applies to the standards in the current Subdivision Regulations from which the Applicant seeks relief; 
f.  Whether any prior approved Applications relied upon by the Applicant have expired; and 
g.  Any other applicable provisions outlined in Chapter 245 or Section 43.002 of the Texas Local Government Code, or successor statutes. 
2.  Conditions for a Pending Application 
If the claim of vested rights is based upon a pending Application, subject to standards that have been superseded by current standards of this Subdivision Ordinance, the Decision-Maker may condition any relief granted on the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition on the approval of the pending Application. 
H.  Action and Record of Action on the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition 
1.  Action 
The Decision-Maker may take any of the following actions: 
a.  Deny the relief requested in the petition, and direct that the Application shall be reviewed and decided under currently applicable standards; or 
b.  Grant the relief requested in the petition, and direct that the related Application be reviewed and decided in accordance with the standards contained in identified prior regulations; or 
c.  Grant the relief requested in part, and direct that certain identified current standards be applied to the related Application, while standards contained in identified prior regulations also shall be applied. 
2.  Record 
The Responsible Official's report and the decision on the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition shall be recorded in writing in an order identifying the following: 
a.  The nature of the relief granted, if any; 
b.  The related Application(s) or plan for development upon which relief is premised under the petition; 
c.  Current standards that shall apply to the related Application for which relief is sought, if applicable; 
d.  Prior standards that shall apply to the related Application for which relief is sought, including any procedural standards, if applicable; 
e.  The statutory exception or other grounds upon which relief is denied in whole or in part on the petition; and 
f.  To the extent feasible, subsequent related Applications that are subject to the same relief granted on the petition. 
I.  Effect of the Final Petition Decision on Related Applications 
1.  Petition Decision Required Before Proceeding with Application 
A final decision on the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition must be made prior to further processing, and prior to any consideration of, or decision on, the related Application. 
2.  Revision Made (if necessary) to Related Application After Petition Decision 
Following the City's final decision on a petition, the Applicant shall, if necessary, revise the related Application such that it conforms to the City's decision on the petition. 
3.  Related Applications with Revisions 
After submission of a revised related Application, the Decision-Maker on the related Application shall review and consider the revised Application in accordance with the procedures for deciding that type of Application, as outlined in this Subdivision Ordinance, and in conformance with any relief granted. 
4.  Related Applications without Revisions 
If the relief granted on the petition is consistent with the related Application on file, no revisions shall be necessary, and the related Application shall be deemed submitted at the time of the final decision on the petition. 
J.  Expiration and Extension of a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition 
1.  Expiration 
Relief granted on a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition shall expire on occurrence of one of the following events: 
a.  The Applicant fails to submit a revised Application that is consistent with the relief granted, if any, within sixty (60) calendar days following the final decision on the petition; 
b.  The Application for which relief was granted on the petition is denied; or 
c.  The Application for which relief was granted on the petition expires. 
2.  Extension 
Extension of the date of expiration for the Application for which relief was granted on a petition shall result in extension of the relief granted on the petition for the same time period. 
K.  Dormant Projects 
1.  Definitions 
For purposes of this Section 7.03K only: 
a.  Dormant Project 
A dormant project shall meet the following criteria: 
i.  An Initial Permit (see definition 7.03.K.1.b below) does not have an expiration date; and 
ii.  No Progress Towards Completion has been made within the project. 
b.  Initial Permit 
Initial permit means any of the following types of approvals granted under these Subdivision Regulations, or any predecessor subdivision or development-related regulation or ordinance that was in effect prior to the adoption of this Subdivision Ordinance: 
i.  Preliminary Plat, 
ii.  Construction Plans, 
iii.  Construction Release, 
iv.  Subdivision Waivers to any requirement in these Subdivision Regulations (per 7.01 Petition for Subdivision Waiver of Modification), or 
v.  Any other Application that was approved subject to a schematic drawing illustrating the location, arrangement, orientation or design of development, lots or improvements on a site intended for development. 
c.  Final Permit 
Final permit means a Final Plat approved under these Subdivision Regulations, or any predecessor subdivision or development-related regulation or ordinance that was in effect prior to the adoption of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
2.  Expiration Date Established for an Initial Permit 
Any Application for an Initial Permit that was approved or filed two (2) years prior to the adoption date of this Subdivision Ordinance, and was not subject to an expiration date shall expire on the effective date of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
3.  Reinstatement of an Expired Initial Permit 
a.  The property owner of the land subject to an Initial Permit that expires under 7.03.K.2 (above) may petition the City Council to reinstate such Initial Permit by filing a written petition within one (1) year following the effective date of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
b.  The petition shall clearly state the grounds for reinstatement, and shall be accompanied by documentation the following: 
i.  Within two (2) years prior to the effective date of this Subdivision Ordinance, one of the following events had occurred: 
(a)  A Final Permit to continue toward completion of the project was submitted to the City for all or part of the land subject to the approved Initial Permit and was approved by the City, or was filed and was subsequently approved by the City; 
(b)  An Application for a Final Permit to continue toward completion of the project was submitted to the City for all or part of the land subject to the expired Initial Permit, but such Application was rejected on grounds of incompleteness (consistent with Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 245.005(c)(2)); 
(c)  Costs for development of the land subject to the Initial Permit, including costs associated with roadway, utility and other infrastructure facilities designed to serve the land in whole or in part, but exclusive of land acquisition costs, were incurred in the aggregate amount of five percent (5%) of the most recent appraised market value of the land; 
(d)  Fiscal security was posted with the City to guarantee performance of obligations required under these Subdivision Regulations, including the construction of required improvements associated with the proposed development, for all or a part of the land subject to the approved Initial Permit; or 
(e)  Utility connection fees for all or part of the land subject to the approved Initial Permit were paid to the City. 
4.  City Council Action on Reinstatement of a Dormant Project's Expired Initial Permit 
The City Council may take one of the following actions: 
a.  Reinstate the expired Initial Permit without an expiration date, if it finds that the Applicant has met any one of the criteria listed in 7.03.K.3.b.i. 
b.  Reinstate the Initial Permit for all or part of the land subject thereto, if it finds that the Applicant has met any one of the criteria listed in 7.03.K.3.b.i, subject to expiration dates or other conditions that ensure that the remaining land that is not subject to an approved or pending Final Permit Application will be developed in a timely fashion. 
i.  In granting relief under this provision, the City Council may require that development of such remaining land is subject to standards enacted after approval of the Initial Permit. 
c.  Deny the reinstatement petition, if it finds that the Applicant has failed to meet any of the criteria in 7.03.K.3 Reinstatement of an Expired Initial Permit); or 
d.  Reinstate the permit for only that part of the land subject to a pending Final Permit Application, if it finds that the Applicant has met the criteria in Section 7.03.K.3.b.i and the pending Application subsequently was approved, and deny the reinstatement petition for the remaining land subject to the expired Initial Permit.  
Section 8. - Definitions 
 
8.01. - Usage and Interpretation 
A.  Usage and Interpretation Rules 
For the purpose of this Subdivision Ordinance certain terms or words herein shall be interpreted or defined as follows: 
1.  Words used in the present tense include the future tense; 
2.  The singular includes the plural; 
3.  The word "person" includes a corporation as well as an individual; 
4.  The term "shall" is always mandatory; 
5.  The term "may" is discretionary; 
6.  The male gender shall include the female and the neutral. 
B.  Words and Terms not Expressly Defined 
Words and terms not expressly defined herein are to be construed according to the normally accepted meaning of such words or terms or, where no definition appears, then according to their customary usage in the practice of municipal planning and engineering.  
8.02. - Words and Terms Defined 
For the purpose of this Subdivision Ordinance, certain terms and words are herewith defined and shall have the meaning here applied; any word not defined herein shall be determined by the City Council; to wit: 
1.  Abutting 
Adjacent, adjoining and contiguous to. It may also mean having a lot line in common with a right-of-way or easement, or with a physical improvement such as a street, waterline, park, or open space. 
2.  Access 
A means of approaching or entering a property, or the ability to traverse a property (such as in the use of the phrase "pedestrian access easement"). 
3.  Alley 
A public Right-of-Way, not intended to provide the primary means of access to abutting lots, which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or sides of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
4.  Amending Plat 
An Amending Plat applies minor revisions to a recorded plat consistent with provisions of State law, see Section 4.08 Amending Plat. 
5.  Apartment 
A room or suite of rooms in a multi-family residence arranged, designed, or occupied as a place of residence by a single family, individual, or group of individuals. 
6.  Applicant 
The person or entity responsible for the submission of an Application. The Applicant must be the actual owner of the property for which an Application is submitted, or shall be a duly authorized representative of the property owner. Also see Developer. 
7.  Application 
The package of materials, including but not limited to an Application Form, Plat, completed checklist, tax certificate, Construction Plans, special drawings or studies, and other informational materials, that is required by the City to initiate City review and approval of a development project. 
8.  Application Form 
The written form (as provided by and as may be amended by the Director of Development Services) that is filled out and executed by the Applicant and submitted to the City along with other required materials as a part of an Application. 
9.  Approval 
a.  Approval constitutes a determination by the official, board, commission or City Council responsible for such determination that the Application is in compliance with the minimum provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
b.  Such approval does not constitute approval of the engineering or surveying contained in the plans, as the design engineer or surveyor that sealed the plans is responsible for the adequacy of such plans. 
10.  Arterial Street 
a.  A street (also referred to as a thoroughfare) designated within the Comprehensive Plan. 
b.  A principal traffic way more or less continuous across the City or areas adjacent thereto and shall act as a principal connecting street with highways as indicated in the Comprehensive Plan. 
11.  Barrier Curbs 
Barrier curbs are designed to prevent vehicles from leaving the roadway or pavement. 
12.  Base Flood 
The flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, determined based upon FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency) guidelines and as shown in the current effective Flood Insurance Study. 
13.  Block 
A tract or parcel of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad Right-of-Way, highway, stream, or corporate boundary lines. 
14.  Block Face 
The portion of a Block that abuts a street. 
15.  Block Length 
The length of the Block Face between two intersections. 
16.  Building 
Any structure built for support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, personal property, records or other movable property and when separated in a manner sufficient to prevent fire, each portion of such building shall be deemed a separate building. 
17.  Building Official 
The Building Official of the City or his or her designee. 
18.  Building Permit 
A permit issued by the City before a building or structure is started, improved, enlarged or altered as proof that such action is in compliance with the City code. 
19.  Building Setback Line 
The line within a property defining the minimum horizontal distance between a building or other structure and the adjacent street Right-of-Way/property line. 
20.  Certificate of Occupancy 
An official certificate issued by the City through the enforcement official which indicates conformance with the City's rules and regulations and which authorizes legal use of the premises. 
21.  City 
The City of Fredericksburg, Texas, together with all its governing and operating bodies. 
22.  City Attorney 
The person(s) so designated by the City Council to provide oversight for and have legal responsibility for the City. This term shall also include any designee of the City Attorney. 
23.  City Council 
The duly elected governing body of the City of Fredericksburg, Texas. 
24.  City Engineer 
The Licensed Professional Engineer or firm of Licensed Professional Consulting Engineers that has been specifically designated as such by the City Council. 
25.  City Manager 
The officially appointed and authorized City Manager of the City of Fredericksburg, Texas, or the City Manager's duly authorized representative. 
26.  City Secretary 
The person(s) so designated by the City Manager to provide clerical and official services for the City Council. This term shall also include any designee of the City Secretary. 
27.  Collector Street 
A street which is continuous through several residential districts and is intended as a connecting street between residential districts and Arterial Streets, highways or business districts. 
28.  Commission 
The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City. 
29.  Comprehensive Plan 
a.  The plan, including all revisions thereto, adopted by the City Council as the official policy regarding the guidance and coordination of the development of land in the City. 
b.  The plan indicates the general location recommended for various land uses, transportation routes, public and private buildings, streets, utilities, parks other public and private developments and improvements and population projections. 
c.  The plan may consist but is not limited to the following plan elements: Future Land Use Plan, Mobility, Housing, Livability, and Infrastructure. 
30.  Construction Plans 
A set of drawings and/or specifications, including paving, water, wastewater, drainage, or other required plans, submitted to the City for review in conjunction with a subdivision or a development. 
31.  Council 
See City Council. 
32.  County 
Gillespie County. 
33.  Court 
An open unoccupied space other than a yard, on the same lot with a building which is bounded on three (3) or more sides by the building. 
34.  Crosswalk Way 
A public Right-of-Way, four (4) feet or more in width between property lines, which provides pedestrian circulation. 
35.  Cul-de-Sac 
A short, residential street having but one vehicular access to another street, and terminated on the opposite end by a vehicular turnaround. 
36.  Curb Level 
a.  The level of the established curb in front of the building measured at the center of such front. 
b.  Where no curb has been established, the City Engineer shall establish such curb or its equivalent for the purpose of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
37.  Date of Adoption 
The date of adoption of this Subdivision Ordinance shall be the date this ordinance becomes effective. 
38.  Dead-End Street 
A street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one outlet. 
39.  Decision-Maker 
The City official or group, such as the Director of Development Services, City Council, or Planning and Zoning Commission, responsible for deciding action on an Application authorized by this Subdivision Ordinance. 
40.  Developer 
a.  A person or entity, limited to the property owner or duly authorized representative thereof, who proposes to undertake or undertakes the division, developments, or improvement of land and other activities covered by this Subdivision Ordinance. 
b.  The word Developer is intended to include the terms Subdivider, property owner, and, when submitting platting documents, Applicant. 
41.  Development 
Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings and/or other structures, paving, drainage, utilities, storage, and agricultural activities. 
42.  Development Application 
An Application, developed and updated by the Director of Development Services, for any type of plan, permit, plat or Construction Plans/drawings authorized or addressed by this Subdivision Ordinance. Also may be referred to as a permit within the Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 245. 
43.  Development Review Committee 
The committee created by Section 2.05 Development Review Committee to review plats and to recommend either approval or denial. 
44.  Development Plat 
A plat required prior to development (i.e., any new construction or the enlargement of any exterior dimension of any building, structure, or improvement), in accordance with Local Government Code 212, Subchapter B (212.045), in lieu of other Subdivision Plats (established in LGC 212, Subchapter A) required by this Subdivision Ordinance and in accordance with Section 4.10 Development Plat. 
45.  Director of Development Services 
The person(s) so designated by the City Manager to provide oversight for and have responsibility of the City's Development Services Department. This term shall also include any designee of the Director of Development Services. Also, this term shall be inclusive of any future variations of the term, as deemed appropriate by the City Manager, such as "Development Services Director" or "Planning Director." 
46.  Director of Public Works and Utilities 
The person(s) so designated by the City Manager to provide oversight for and have responsibility of the City's Public Works and Engineering Department. This term shall also include any designee of the Director of Public Works and Utilities or per the City Manager the City Engineer. 
47.  DRC 
See Development Review Committee and Section 2.05 Development Review Committee. 
48.  Dwelling, Multi-Family 
Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased or let to be occupied as three or more dwelling units or apartments, or which is occupied as a home or place of residence by three or more families living in independent and separate housekeeping units. 
49.  Dwelling, Single Family (attached - duplex) 
A building designed for occupancy for two (2) families living independently of each other. A two family attached unit (also known as a duplex) has a lot line dividing the building and separating the building's two (2) dwellings units onto two (2) separate lots. 
50.  Dwelling, Single Family (attached - townhouse) 
A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one or more sides by a party wall or abutting separate wall, and which is designed for occupancy by one family and is located on a separate lot delineated by front, side and rear lot lines. 
51.  Dwelling, Single Family (detached) 
A dwelling designed and constructed for occupancy by one family and located on a lot or separate building tract and having no physical connection to a building located on any other lot or tract and occupied by one family. 
52.  Dwelling Unit 
One or more rooms, which are arranged, designed, used, or intended to be used for occupancy by a single family or group of persons living together as a family or by a single person. 
53.  Easement 
a.  Authorization by a property owner for another to use any designated part of the owner's property for a specified purpose or use and evidenced by an instrument or plat filed with the County Clerk. Among other things, easements may be used to install and maintain utility lines, drainage ditches or channels, or for other City or public services. 
b.  An area established for public purposes on private property upon which the City shall have the right to remove and keep removed all or part of any buildings, fences, trees, shrubs, or other improvements or growths which in any way endanger or interfere with the construction, maintenance, or efficiency of City systems. 
c.  The City shall at all times have the right of ingress and egress to and from and upon the said easements for the purpose of constructing, reconstructing, inspecting, patrolling, maintaining, and adding to or removing all or part of its respective systems without the necessity at any time or procuring the permission of anyone. 
54.  Easement, Common Access 
An easement to provide shared access to and from commercial, and industrial owned and maintained by the owners of the property upon which the easement is located or as otherwise provided by deed restrictions or the terms of the easement instrument. 
55.  Engineer 
A person duly authorized under the provisions of the Texas Engineering Practice Act, as heretofore or hereafter amended, to practice the profession of engineering and who is specifically qualified to design and prepare Construction Plans and specifications for public works improvements. 
56.  Engineering Plans 
See Construction Plans. 
57.  Standard Details and Specification for Public Infrastructure Construction Manual 
A separate and stand-alone document or complication of documents not included within this Subdivision Ordinance, the Standard Details and Specification for Public Infrastructure Construction Manual (Standard Details Manual) details specific engineering requirements for the construction of Public Improvements. The Standard Details Manual is developed and maintained by the Director of Public Works and Utilities. 
58.  Standard Details Manual 
The term Standard Details Manual is an abbreviated name for the Standard Details and Specification for Public Infrastructure Construction Manual. 
59.  ETJ 
See Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ). 
60.  Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) 
The unincorporated area, not a part of any other municipality, which is contiguous to the corporate limits of the City, the outer limits of which are measured from the extremities of the corporate limits of the City outward for the distance as stipulated in Chapter 42 of the Texas Local Government Code, according to the population of the City, and in which area the City may regulate subdivisions and enjoin violation of provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
61.  Fee Schedule 
A listing of fees for various City Applications, which is prepared by the City Manager and approved by City Council and may be amended periodically. The Fee Schedule is approved separately from this Subdivision Ordinance. 
62.  Filing Plat 
See Final Plat. 
63.  Final Acceptance 
The acceptance by the City of all infrastructure improvements constructed by the Developer in conjunction with the development of land. 
64.  Final Plat 
a.  The one official and authentic map of any given subdivision of land prepared from actual field measurement and staking of all identifiable points by a Surveyor or Engineer with the subdivision location referenced to a survey corner and all boundaries, corners and curves of the land division sufficiently described so that they can be reproduced without additional references. 
b.  The Final Plat of any lot, tract, or parcel of land shall be recorded in the Deed Records of Gillespie County, Texas. 
c.  A Final Plat may also be referenced as a Record Plat or Filing Plat. 
65.  Flood Plain 
The area subject to be inundated by water from the Base Flood. 
66.  Floodway 
A natural drainage area which accommodates the design flood for existing creeks and open drainage ways. 
67.  Floor Area 
The habitable area of a building that is served by a conditioned air system, but specifically excluding porches, patios, breeze-ways, automobile storage areas, garages, workshops, attic storage areas and basements. 
68.  Frontage 
All the property abutting on one (1) side of the street, or between two (2) intersecting streets, measured along the street line. 
69.  Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association 
a.  A formal organization operating under recorded land agreements through which: 
i.  Each lot and/or property owner in a specific area is automatically a member; and 
ii.  Each lot or property interest is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share of the expense for the organization's activities, such as the maintenance of common property; and 
iii.  The charge if unpaid, becomes a lien against the nonpaying member's property. 
70.  Improvement 
Any man-made fixed item which becomes part of or placed upon real property, see also Public Improvement. 
71.  Infrastructure 
All streets, alleys, sidewalks, storm drainage, water, and wastewater facilities, utilities, lighting, transportation, and other facilities as required by the City. 
72.  Land Planner 
A person(s) other than Surveyors or Engineers who also possess and can demonstrate a valid proficiency in the planning of residential, commercial, industrial and other related developments; such proficiency often having been acquired by education in the field of landscape architecture or other specialized planning curriculum and/or by actual experience and practice in the field of land planning and who is a member of the American Planning Association. 
73.  Letter of Final Acceptance 
Notification to an Applicant from the Director of Public Works and Utilities that all improvements are completed, inspected, tested (if applicable), and determined by the City to be in conformance with this Subdivision Ordinance and with the City's design/engineering standards and all improvements are accepted by the City or will be accepted contingent to the approval of a Final Plat. 
74.  Local Street 
A Local Street is a street used primarily for access to abutting property especially residential areas. Local streets also provide secondary or minor access and circulation to community facilities (school, parks, etc.) and other traffic generators such a commercial and industrial areas. Local streets will be designated as Type A Local Street, Type B Local Street, Type ETJ Local Street, and Marginal Access Local Street based on the function they serve. 
a.  Type A Local Street 
This type Local Street is used for primary and secondary access to single-family detached residential units or duplex residential units where such residential units comprise 75 percent of the abutting street frontage on both sides of the street of a particular block. 
b.  Type B Local Street 
This type Local Street is used for primary and secondary access to all residential areas except those specified to be served by a Type A Local Street. Also, this street is used for secondary access and circulation to community facilities (schools, parks, etc.) and other traffic generators such as commercial and industrial areas. 
c.  Type ETJ Local Street 
This type Local Street is used for primary and secondary access to all residential areas outside and not adjacent to the city limits, not served by city water and wastewater, and where Type A Local Street and Type B Local Street sections are inappropriate due to the rural character of the neighborhood and/or the lack of storm drainage facilities to tie into curb and gutter design. 
d.  Marginal Access Local Street 
This type of Local Street is used to provide the primary means of access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. Marginal Access Local Streets are typically located parallel to and adjacent to an arterial street. 
e.  PUD Local Street 
Street widths narrower than public Local Street standards may be allowed through the PUD zoning process in the zoning ordinance if adequate off-street parking is provided and emergency access is ensured to the satisfaction of the director. The PUD zoning option is not available in the Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ). 
f.  Type RR Local Street 
Similar in nature to the Type A Local Street, this type of street is associated only with the Rural Residential zoning district and shall be used for primary and secondary access to single family detached residential units, where excessive through traffic is not anticipated. 
75.  Lot 
Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings, together with such open spaces as are required under this Subdivision Ordinance, and having its principal frontage upon a street or officially approved place. 
76.  Lot, Corner 
a.  A lot situated at the junction of two or more streets. 
b.  A corner lot shall be deemed to front on the street on which it has its smallest dimensions, or as otherwise designated by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
77.  Lot, Depth 
The mean horizontal distance from the front street line to the rear line. 
78.  Lot, Interior 
A lot, the side line of which does not abut on any street. 
79.  Lot, Through 
An interior lot having frontage on two streets. Such through lot shall provide a front yard on each street. 
80.  Lot Lines 
The lines bounding a lot as defined herein. 
81.  Lot of Record 
A lot which is part of a subdivision, a map of which has been recorded in the office of the County Clerk. 
82.  Lot Width 
The mean horizontal distance between side lines measured at right angles to the depth. 
83.  Major Subdivision Waiver 
See Waiver, Major Subdivision. 
84.  Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices 
The Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, or MUTCD defines the standards used by road managers nationwide to install and maintain traffic control devices on all public streets, highways, bikeways, and private roads open to public traffic. The MUTCD is published by the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) under 23 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Part 655, Subpart F. 
85.  Minor Plat 
A plat dividing land into no more than four (4) lots that meets the submission and approval requirements of Section 4.06 Minor Plat. Such plat may be approved by the Director of Development Services. Such plat is also considered a Final Plat. 
86.  Minor Replat 
Pursuant to Texas Local Government Code 212.0065, a Minor Replat is a Replat involving four or fewer lots fronting on an existing street and not requiring the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities. See Section for 4.07.G.2 Minor Replat details. 
87.  Minor Subdivision Waiver 
See Waiver, Minor Subdivision. 
88.  Mountable Curbs 
Mountable curbs (also commonly known as sloping or roll-over curbs) have sloping faces allowing vehicles to encroach upon the curb without discomfort or damaging the vehicle. 
89.  Official Submission Date 
a.  A calendar of official submission dates for subdivision related Applications requiring DRC review, Planning and Zoning Commission recommendation/approval, and City Council approval pursuant to Texas Local Government Code Chapter 212 (if applicable) shall be published by the City thirty (30) calendar days prior to the beginning of each calendar year or within six (6) months after the adoption of this Subdivision Ordinance. 
b.  This calendar shall specify two "official submittal dates" for each month. 
c.  All Applications delivered to the City on a date other than a scheduled date shall be dated received on the next official submittal date. 
90.  Official Vesting Date 
a.  Pursuant to Texas Local Government Code Chapter 245, an Application or plan for development is considered filed on the date the Applicant delivers the Application or plan to the City or deposits the application or plan with the United States Postal Service by certified mail addressed to the City. 
b.  A certified mail receipt obtained by the Applicant at the time of deposit is prima facie evidence of the date the Application or plan was deposited with the United States Postal Service. 
c.  Every Application or plan is subject to a determination of completeness by the Responsible Official for processing the Application pursuant to: 
i.  3.03.B Determination of Completeness for Subdivision Related Applications. 
91.  Park Service Zone 
All property within the City and its Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) is within a park service zone as shown on the map on file with the Director of Development Services, as the same may be amended from time to time by the City Council. As stated within Subsection 6.15 (Park Land Dedication), the dedications of land and fees collected from within the various park service zones shall be utilized to create neighborhood parks within such zone. 
92.  Park, Playground, or Community Center, Public 
An open recreational facility or park owned and operated by a public agency such as the City or the school district, and available to the general public. 
93.  Parking Space 
Open space or garage space reserved exclusively for the parking of a vehicle. 
94.  Paved Driveways 
Paved driveways shall be constructed of brick pavers, concrete pavers, hot mix asphaltic concrete, or portland cement concrete. 
95.  Pavement Width 
The portion of a street available for vehicular traffic. Where curbs are laid, it is the portion between the face of the curbs. 
96.  Performance Agreement 
Agreement between the City and a Subdivider, which includes provisions for construction of Public Improvements, City participation, pro rata agreements, escrow deposits, and other provisions for the development of land. (See 5.05 Performance Agreements and Security for Completion for details.) 
97.  Perimeter Street 
A street which abuts a parcel of land to be subdivided on one side. 
98.  Person 
Person means an individual, firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, foundation, company or corporation. 
99.  Planning and Zoning Commission 
The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City. 
100.  Plat 
a.  A map or chart of the subdivision, lot or tract of land. 
b.  It shall include the term plan, plat or re-plat, in both singular or plural. 
101.  Plat, Amending 
See Amending Plat. 
102.  Plat, Development 
See Development Plat. 
103.  Plat, Final 
See Final Plat. 
104.  Plat, Minor 
See Minor Plat. 
105.  Plat, Preliminary 
See Preliminary Plat. 
106.  Preliminary Drainage Plan 
This plan shows the watershed affecting the development and how the runoff from the fully-developed watershed will be conveyed to, through, and from the development see 6.18.I Preliminary Drainage Plan for details. 
107.  Preliminary Plat 
a.  The graphic expression of the proposed overall plan for subdividing, improving and developing a tract shown by superimposing a scale drawing of the proposed land division on a topographic map and showing in plan view existing and proposed drainage features and facilities, street layout and direction of curb flow, and other pertinent features with notations sufficient to substantially identify the general scope and detail of the proposed development. 
b.  The Preliminary Plat shall serve as a means for the City to review and study the proposed division of land and/or improvements. 
c.  See Section 4.04 Preliminary Plat. 
108.  Preliminary Storm Water Management Plan 
The purpose of the Preliminary SWMP is to identify permanent water quality feature opportunities for Subdivision development, see Section 6.18.J Preliminary Storm Water Management Plan for details. 
109.  Preliminary SWMP 
Preliminary SWMP is an abbreviation for Preliminary Storm Water Management Plan. 
110.  Preliminary Utility Plan 
A plan detailing both Water Utility and Wastewater Utility requirements, see Section 6.16.C Preliminary Utility Plan for details. 
111.  Premises 
In referring to a sexually oriented business, premises means the building of the sexually oriented business. 
112.  Private Street 
See Street, Private. 
113.  Progress Towards Completion 
Progress towards completion of the project shall include any one of the following: 
a.  An Application for a Final Plat or plan for development is submitted; 
b.  A good-faith attempt is made to file with the City an Application for a permit necessary to begin or continue towards completion of the project; 
c.  Costs have been incurred for developing the project including, without limitation, costs associated with roadway, utility, and other infrastructure facilities designed to serve, in whole or in part, the project (but exclusive of land acquisition) in the aggregate amount of five percent of the most recent appraised market value of the real property on which the project is located; 
d.  Fiscal security is posted with a regulatory agency to ensure performance of an obligation required by the regulatory agency; or 
e.  Utility connection fees for the project have been paid to a regulatory agency. 
114.  Proportionality/Proportional Share 
The Developer's portion of the costs of an exaction or Public Improvement. 
115.  Public Improvement 
Any Improvement, facility or service together with its associated public site, Right-of-Way or easement necessary to provide transportation, storm drainage, public or private utilities, parks or recreational, energy or similar essential public services and facilities, for which the City ultimately assumes the responsibility, upon a Letter of Final Acceptance being issued, for maintenance, operation and/or ownership. 
116.  Record Drawings 
A group of drawings or plans that depicts the final configuration of the installed or constructed improvements of a development, improvements that have been verified by the contractor as their installation or construction occurs during development. The Record Drawings shall reflect the Construction Plans (or working drawings) used, corrected, and/or clarified in the field. 
117.  Record Plat 
See Final Plat. 
118.  Replat 
The re-subdivision of any or part or all of any block or blocks of a previously platted subdivision, addition, lot or tract, that is beyond the definition of an Amending Plat and which does not require the vacation of the entire preceding plat. Such plat also conforms to Section 4.07 Replat of this Subdivision Ordinance. A Replat can function as a Final Plat for a property. 
119.  Residential District 
Residential district means a single family, patio home, duplex, townhouse, multifamily or mobile home zoning district as defined in the zoning ordinance. 
120.  Residential Street 
A street which is intended primarily to serve traffic within a neighborhood or limited residential district and which is used primarily for access to abutting properties. 
121.  Residential Use 
Residential use means use of a structure as a residence. 
122.  Responsible Official 
The City staff person who has been designated by the City Manager to accept a type of development Application for filing, to review and make recommendations concerning such Applications, and where authorized, to initially decide such Applications, to initiate enforcement actions, and to take all other actions necessary for administration of the provisions of development Applications. Also includes any designee of the designated City staff person. 
123.  Retaining Wall 
A non-building, structural wall supporting soil loads and live and dead surcharge loads to the soil, such as additional soil, structures and vehicles. 
124.  Right-of-Way 
a.  A parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street or alley. 
b.  A Right-of-Way may be used for other facilities and utilities, such as sidewalks, railroad crossings, electrical communication, oil or gas, water or sanitary or storm sewer facilities, or for any other use. 
c.  The use of Right-of-Way shall also include parkways and medians outside of pavement. 
d.  For platting purposes, the term "Right-of-Way" shall mean that every Right-of-Way shown on a Final Plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such Right-of-Way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. 
e.  Presumed to be a fee simple dedication to the City, unless otherwise indicated on the Plat. 
125.  Setback Line 
A line within a lot, parallel to and measured from a corresponding lot line, establishing the minimum required yard and governing the placement of structures and uses on the lot. 
126.  Sidewalk Plan 
The City's adopted plan showing the locations where sidewalks exist or where new sidewalk shall be constructed. The Sidewalk Plan is approved by the City Council and is the City's policy regarding where sidewalks will be located in the City. 
127.  Site Plan 
A Site Plan is a detailed, scaled drawing of all surface improvements, structures, and utilities proposed for development and is associated with the zoning ordinance. 
128.  Sketch Plat 
A sketch or informal plan prepared prior to the preparation of the Preliminary Plat describing the proposed design of the subdivision to be reviewed during the pre-application review process. 
129.  Street 
A public Right-of-Way that provides vehicular traffic access to adjacent lands. 
130.  Street Width 
The shortest distance between the property or easement lines which delineate the Right-of-Way of a street. 
131.  Street, Private 
A privately owned street within a Subdivision for which the private owners assume full responsibility for maintenance and controls and which has not been dedicated to the use of the public. This term is inclusive of related alleys. Private streets are Local Streets allowed in gated planned unit developments (PUDs) with homeowners' associations that maintain them. 
132.  Structure 
Anything constructed or erected, which requires location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground, including, but not limited to advertising signs, billboards and poster panels, but exclusive of customary fences or boundary of retaining walls, sidewalks and curbs. 
133.  Subdivider 
a.  Any person or any agent thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision. 
b.  In any event, the term "subdivider" shall be restricted to include only the owner, equitable owner or authorized agent of such owner or equitable owner, of land to be subdivided. 
134.  Subdivision 
a.  The division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more parts or lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development or transfer of ownership with the exception of transfer to heirs of an estate, and shall include re-subdivision. 
b.  Any other subdivision or re-subdivision of land contemplated by the provisions of Chapter 212, Local Government Code. 
135.  Subdivision Ordinance 
The adopted Subdivision Ordinance of the City, as may be amended in the future, and may be referred as "this Ordinance." 
136.  Subdivision Plat 
A Plat (i.e., Preliminary Plat, Final Plat, Minor Plat, Replat, or Amending Plat) established in LGC 212, Subchapter A involving the subdividing of land in two (2) or more parts or the amending of a recorded Plat. 
137.  Subdivision Regulations 
Any regulations and standards contained within the Subdivision Ordinance. 
138.  Subdivision Waiver 
Either a Minor Subdivision Waiver or Major Subdivision Waiver, see Section 7.01 Petition for Subdivision Waiver of Modification. 
139.  Surveyor 
A licensed State Land Surveyor or a Registered Public Surveyor, as authorized by the State to practice the profession of surveying. 
140.  Thoroughfare 
See Arterial Street. 
141.  Transportation Plan 
The plan that guides the development of adequate circulation within the City, and connects the City street system to regional traffic carriers. Also, referred to as the Thoroughfare Plan or Master Thoroughfare Plan. 
142.  Usable Open Space 
An area or recreational facility that is designed and intended to be used for outdoor living and/or recreation. Usable Open Space may include recreational facilities, water features, required perimeter landscape areas, floodplain areas, and decorative objects such as art work or fountains. Usable Open Space shall not include the following: 
a.  Walks, 
b.  Rooftops, 
c.  Buildings, except those portions or any building designed specifically for recreation purposes, 
d.  Parking areas, 
e.  Landscaped parking requirements, 
f.  Driveways, 
g.  Turnarounds, or 
h.  Rights-of-Way or easements for streets and alleys. 
143.  Utility Easement 
See Easement, definition # 53. 
144.  Vested Right 
A right of an Applicant requiring the City to review and decide the Application under standards in effect prior to the effective date of the standards of this Subdivision Ordinance and/or of any subsequent amendments. 
145.  Vested Rights Petition 
a.  A request for relief from any standard or requirement of the Subdivision Regulations based on an assertion that the Applicant (petitioner for relief) has acquired a Vested Right. 
b.  Such petition is regulated under Section 7.03 Subdivision Vested Rights Petition. 
146.  Vision Clearance 
A space left open and unobstructed by fences, structures, shrubs, trees or other plant life along streets at the corner in front of the building line of lots contiguous to intersecting streets. 
147.  Waiver, Major Subdivision 
a.  A Major Subdivision Waiver is not found in Table 10 and is a significant change to both the standards and intent of the Subdivision Regulations, which involves Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council approval. 
b.  See Section 7.01 Petition for Subdivision Waiver of Modification for details. 
148.  Waiver, Minor Subdivision 
a.  A Minor Subdivision Waiver is a waiver listed in Table 10 and is a minor change to the standards, but not the intent, of these Subdivision Regulations. 
b.  A Minor Subdivision Waiver is approved by either the Director of Development Services or Director of Public Works and Utilities (as applicable). 
c.  See Section 7.01 Petition for Subdivision Waiver of Modification for details. 
149.  Water Treatment Facility 
The facility or facilities within the water supply system which can alter the physical, chemical, or bacteriological quality of the water. 
150.  Yard 
a.  An open space other than a court, on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. 
b.  In measuring to determine the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the least horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used. 
151.  Yard, Front 
A yard across the full width of a lot extending from the front line of the main building to the front street line of the lot. 
152.  Yard, Rear 
A yard extending across the full width of the lot and measured between the rear line of the lot and rear line of the main building, except that area included in the side yard as defined below. 
153.  Yard, Side 
A yard between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the front yard to the required minimum rear yard.  
Section 9. - Figures 
 
  
Chapter 41 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Taxation by municipalities generally, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 302.001 et seq.; taxes to be levied and collected by general laws and for public purposes only, Tex. Const. Art. 8, Sec. 3. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 41-1—41-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PROPERTY TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Power of home-rule municipality to levy general or special property taxes for lawful purposes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 302.001(c). 
 
Sec. 41-19. - Adoption of state property tax code. 
The Texas Property Tax Code is hereby adopted and designated as the applicable body of statutory law for procedures relating to the assessment and rendition of property for taxation purposes, except to the extent that the same conflicts with any provision of the city charter, as amended, so that the provisions of the city charter shall govern and always be controlling in such matters as taxation. 
(Code 1992, § 1.301)  
Sec. 41-20. - Ad valorem tax levy. 
There shall be levied and collected an annual direct ad valorem tax, not to exceed 1½ percentum of the taxable property situated within the city limits on the first day of January of each year; such taxes shall be levied for such purposes and in such amounts as authorized by the Constitution and the laws of the state. 
(Code 1992, § 1.302) 
State Law reference— Authority to levy property taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 302.001(c).  
Sec. 41-21. - Participation in appraisal district. 
The city hereby authorizes participation in the Gillespie County appraisal district. The said appraisal and assessment functions required under the Texas Property Tax Code. The city shall be responsible for the collection of its municipal taxes unless otherwise contracted out. 
(Code 1992, § 1.303)  
Sec. 41-22. - Tax due date. 
The property taxes levied by the city each year shall become due October 1st of each year for which the levy is made and shall become delinquent on the following February 1st. Penalties and interest for delinquent taxes shall incur in accordance with state law. 
(Code 1992, § 1.304)  
Sec. 41-23. - City council to fix tax rates; taxes payable in U.S. money. 
The city council shall fix by ordinance the rate of tax to be levied and collected for each of the several purposes for which the city government may levy and collect such taxes; and shall annually levy the ad valorem taxes to be assessed and collected for such year. All taxes levied and due the city for whatever purpose levied, are payable in lawful money of the United States. 
(Code 1992, § 1.305)  
Sec. 41-24. - Real property defined. 
Real property, for the purpose of taxation, shall be construed to include the land itself, whether laid out in city lots or otherwise, and all the buildings, structures and improvements on same, and all the rights, privileges and appurtenances thereto in any wise belonging or appertaining thereto. 
(Code 1992, § 1.306)  
Sec. 41-25. - Personal property defined. 
Personal property, for the purpose of taxation, shall be construed to include all goods, chattels and effects, and all money, credits, bonds, stocks, and all other evidences of debt owned by any resident of the city, whether such property be located in or out of said city. 
(Code 1992, § 1.307)  
Sec. 41-26. - Assessment to be against property. 
The assessment of real estate, and the tax lien thereon, shall not be illegal if such real estate is not listed in the name of the owner or owners thereof, regardless of the name(s) appearing on the tax assessment rolls. 
(Code 1992, § 1.308)  
Sec. 41-27. - Additional penalty for collection of delinquent taxes. 
In addition to the other penalties and interest authorized by law or levied under this article, a tax that remains delinquent on July 1st of the year in which it becomes delinquent incurs an additional penalty of 15 percent of the amount of taxes, penalty and interest due in order to defray costs of collection. The city may contract with a private attorney or law firm for collection pursuant to V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 6.30(c). In such instance, the additional 15 percent penalty shall be paid to such private attorney or law firm in accordance with the terms of said contract. 
(Code 1992, § 1.309)  
Sec. 41-28. - Tax certificate fee. 
The fee charged for each tax certificate issued by the tax assessor/collector of the City of Fredericksburg shall be as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A to this Code. 
(Code 1992, § 1.310)  
Sec. 41-29. - Tax suits. 
The city council or its designee shall, in the name of the City of Fredericksburg, bring suit in any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the collection of all delinquent taxes in such manner as may be provided by the laws of the state, and the laws of the state, in respect thereto, may be invoked as to the collection of taxes by the city, as if the ordinances of the city provided no means for the collection of taxes by the city. 
(Code 1992, § 1.310) 
State Law reference— Delinquent tax suits, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 33.41.  
Secs. 41-30—41-46. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SALES AND USE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal sales and use tax act, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 41-47. - Local sales and use tax levied. 
An election on May 7, 1988 was duly called and notice thereof given in accordance with law. Said election was held in the manner required by law. Only duly qualified resident electors of the City of Fredericksburg, Texas, voted at said election. Due returns of said election were made by the proper officials on May 9, 1988. Said election resulted favorably to the proposition: For the adoption of an additional one-half of one percent sales and use tax within the city; and that a majority of the qualified voters of the City of Fredericksburg, Texas, voting at said election, have voted in favor of approving and adopting a one-half of one percent local sales and use tax within said city. 
(Code 1992, § 1.312)  
Secs. 41-48—41-67. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to levy hotel occupancy tax, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, § 351.001 et seq., 25 Tex. Admin. Code §§ 3.161—3.163. 
 
Sec. 41-68. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases are, for the purpose of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, defined as follows: 
Consideration. The cost of the room, sleeping space, bed or dormitory space but shall not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant not related to cleaning and readying such room or space for occupancy, and shall not include any tax assessed for the occupancy thereof by any other governmental agency. 
Hotel. In this article, "hotel" means a building in which members of the public obtain sleeping accommodations for consideration. The term includes a hotel, motel, tourist home, tourist house, tourist court, lodging house, inn, rooming house, or bed and breakfast. The term does not including: 
(1)  A hospital, sanitarium or nursing home; or 
(2)  A dormitory or other housing facility owned or leased and operated by an institution of higher education or a private or independent institution of higher education as those terms are defined by section 61.003, education code, used by the institution for the purpose of providing sleeping accommodations for persons engaged in an educational program or activity at the institution; provided, however, that "hotel" shall have the meaning assigned to it by section 156.001(1) of the tax code of the State of Texas as the same may be amended from time to time. 
Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room, space or sleeping facility. 
Occupant. Anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possess, or has the right to use or possess any room or rooms, for sleeping space or facility in a hotel under any lease, access, license, contract or agreement. 
Permanent resident. Any occupant who has or shall have the right of occupancy of any room or rooms or sleeping space or facility in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days during the current calendar year or preceding year. 
Person. Any individual company, corporation, or association owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel. 
Quarterly period. The regular calendar quarters of the year, the first quarter being composed of the months of January, February and March; the second quarter being the months of April, May and June; the third quarter being the months of July, August and September, and the fourth quarter being the months of October, November and December. 
Tax collector. The finance director of the City of Fredericksburg or his or her designee, or in the absence thereof, the city manager of the City of Fredericksburg, or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 11-017, § 1.401, 10-1-2001)  
Sec. 41-69. - Tax levied; amount; exceptions. 
(a)  There is hereby levied a tax upon the cost of occupancy of any room or space furnished by any hotel where such cost of occupancy is at a rate of $2.00 or more per day, such tax to be equal to seven percent of the consideration paid by the occupant of such room to such hotel, exclusive of other occupancy taxes imposed by other government agencies. 
(b)  No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a permanent resident of a hotel. 
(c)  No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a corporation or association that is organized and operated exclusively for a religious, charitable or educational purpose if no part of the net earnings of the corporation or associations inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual. 
(d)  No tax shall be imposed on, or the tax shall be reimbursed for any person or entity as described in state law, the provisions of which shall apply to the City of Fredericksburg as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 11-017, § 1.402, 10-1-2001)  
Sec. 41-70. - Collection of tax. 
Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax imposed by section 41-69 hereof for the City of Fredericksburg. The use of any agent or booking service shall not relieve any person from responsibility for payment of the tax. 
(Ord. No. 11-017, § 1.403, 10-1-2001)  
Sec. 41-71. - Filing of quarterly report. 
On the last day of the month following each quarterly period, every person required in section 41-70 hereof to collect the tax imposed herein, shall file a report with the tax collector showing the consideration paid for all room occupancies, in the preceding quarter, the amount of the tax collected on such occupancies, and any other information the tax collector may reasonably require. Such person shall pay the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing such report. There shall also be furnished to the tax collector of the City of Fredericksburg at the time of payment of said tax a copy of the quarterly report, or all monthly reports for the relevant quarter, filed with the state comptroller in connection with the State of Texas hotel occupancy tax. The quarterly report shall include the name and locations, number of rooms, owner and owner's address of each property included in the report. 
(Ord. No. 11-017, § 1.404, 10-1-2001)  
Sec. 41-72. - Authority to promulgate rules and regulations; access to books and records. 
The tax collector shall have the power to make the tax levied hereby, and shall, upon reasonable notice, have access to books and records necessary to enable him/her to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article and the amount of taxes due under the provisions of this article. The tax collector shall, additionally and specifically, have the authority to perform spot checks. 
(Ord. No. 11-017, § 1.405, 10-1-2001)  
Sec. 41-73. - Reimbursement for cost of collection tax. 
Every person required in section 41-70 to collect the tax imposed by this article, may deduct and withhold from the payment to the tax collector, as reimbursement for the cost of collecting the tax, an amount not to exceed one percent of the amount of tax collected and required to be reported to the tax collector. 
(Ord. No. 11-017, § 1.406, 10-1-2001)  
Sec. 41-74. - Failure to collect tax, make reports and pay tax. 
(a)  If any person required by the provision of this article to collect the tax imposed herein, or make reports as required herein, and pay to the tax collector the tax imposed herein, shall fail to collect such tax, or file such report or pay such tax, or if any such person shall file a false report, such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction be punished by fine not to exceed the fines described in section 1-6 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fredericksburg, and shall pay to the tax collector the tax due, together with a penalty of 15 percent of the tax due and shall forfeit the reimbursement for the cost of collecting the tax. Additionally, such person shall pay to the City of Fredericksburg, reasonable attorney's fees and expenses of collection as demanded by the city, which fees shall be collectable and enforceable in the same manner as the tax and penalties imposed by this chapter. Any penalties, fines or attorneys' fees and expenses of collection shall not be hotel or motel tax revenue but belong to the City of Fredericksburg general fund and shall not be subject to use and allocation of hotel/motel tax revenue restrictions imposed by state law. 
(b)  The remedies of subsection (a) above shall be in addition to other remedies permitted by State law or available to the City of Fredericksburg. 
(Ord. No. 11-017, § 1.407, 10-1-2001)  
Sec. 41-75. - Tax applies to extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
The hotel occupancy tax, as amended, and as may be amended, shall apply, in addition to all territory within the city limits of the City of Fredericksburg, to all territory within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Fredericksburg as the same may exist from time to time, and the same shall be and is hereby imposed on all applicable persons within the said extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Fredericksburg, immediately from and after the date such territory becomes included in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Fredericksburg. 
(Ord. No. 11-017, § 1.408, 10-1-2001)  
Sec. 41-76. - State tax code applicability. 
Administration of this article is to be done in accordance with state law provisions regarding hotel occupancy taxes found at V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.001 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 11-017, § 1.409, 10-1-2001)  
Secs. 41-77—41-95. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - TAXATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES 
 
Sec. 41-96. - Taxation of telecommunications services. 
(a)  A tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunications services sold within the City of Fredericksburg, Texas. For purposes of this article, the sale of telecommunications services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other telecommunications device from which the call or other communication originates. If the point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed. 
(b)  The rate of the tax imposed by this article shall be the same as the rate imposed by the City of Fredericksburg, Texas, for all other local sales and use taxes, as authorized by the Legislature of the State of Texas. 
(Code 1992, art. 1.500) 
State Law reference— Taxation of telecommunications services, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.210.  
Secs. 41-97—41-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FREEPORT GOODS TAXED 
 
Sec. 41-121. - Freeport goods taxed. 
All of that property described in the Texas Constitution, Article VIII, Sec. 1-j, shall be fully taxed by the City of Fredericksburg beginning January 1, 1991. 
(Code 1992, art. 1.600) 
State Law reference— Tangible personal property transported outside the state, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.251.  
Chapter 44 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Powers of local authorities regarding regulation of traffic, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202; limitations on local authorities, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.203; municipal restrictions on use of state highways, 25 Tex. Admin. Code §§ 25.601—25.603; local ordinances concerning pedestrians, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 552.009; local authorities may regulate and license bicycles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(4); local authorities may regulate parades and assemblages on highways, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(3). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 44-1. - State uniform act adopted and violations. 
The provisions of the Texas Transportation Code as such may be amended from time to time, are incorporated herein and are made a part of this Chapter, including the penalty provisions thereof; it being hereby ordained that a violation of such Code shall also be deemed to be a violation of this article. A violation of any official traffic control device, sign, signal, marking, designation, stopping, standing or parking rules or other regulatory control established by or in accordance with this article shall be administered in the courts, tried and punished in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the Texas Transportation Code, the Texas Penal Code, the Rules of Criminal Procedure and up to the maximum fines provided by State of Texas Law for traffic violations, or in the event an applicable fine is not provided, then the provisions of section 1-6 General Penalty for violations of Code shall control. 
(Ord. No. 23-006, 4-15-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 23-006, adopted April 15, 2013, amended § 44-1 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 44-1, pertained to state uniform act adopted and derived from Code 1992, § 10.101.  
Sec. 44-2. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section. 
Alley. A public thoroughfare which ordinarily affords only a second means of access to abutting property. 
Authorized emergency vehicle. Vehicles of the fire department (fire patrol), police vehicles and such ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the chief of police. 
Business district. The territory contiguous to and including a roadway when, within any 600 feet along such roadway, there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes, which occupy 300 feet of frontage on one side or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the roadway. 
Crosswalk. That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the street measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway. The word "crosswalk" also means any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
Curb loading zone. A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
Driver or operator. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
Freight curb loading zone. A space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight. 
Intersection. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines, or if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two streets which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets joining at any other angle may come in conflict. Where a street includes two roadways, 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided street by an intersecting street shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such intersecting street also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing two roadways of such streets shall be regarded as a separate intersection. 
Laned roadway. A roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic. 
Limited-access or control-access highway. Every highway, street or roadway in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting property or lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the same except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such highway, street or roadway. 
Motor vehicle. Every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails. 
Motorcycle. Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor. 
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean standard time or daylight-saving time as may be in current use in this city. 
Official traffic-control devices. All signs, signals, markings, and devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
Park. When prohibited, the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading. 
Passenger curb loading zone. A place adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
Pedestrian. Any person afoot. 
Police officer. The city chief of police and deputy marshals, county sheriffs and deputy sheriffs or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
Private road or driveway. Every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner but not by other persons. 
Railroad. A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than streetcars, operated upon stationary rails. 
Railroad train. A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars. 
Residence district. The territory contiguous to and including a street or highway not comprising a business district when the property on such street or highway, for a distance of 300 feet or more, is, in the main, improved with residences or residences and buildings in use for business. 
Right-of-way. The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway. 
Roadway. That portion of a street or highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively. 
Safety zones. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
Sidewalk. That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Stop. When required, means complete cessation of movement. 
Stop, stopping or standing. When prohibited, means any stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal. 
Street or highway. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
Traffic. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, street cars, and other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street for purposes of travel. 
Traffic-control signal. Any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
Vehicle. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street or highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1992, § 10.102)  
Secs. 44-3—44-22. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 44-23. - General duties of traffic engineer relative to traffic. 
It shall be the duty of the traffic engineer, who or which shall be a person or firm appointed by the City Manager to conduct analysis of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct investigations of traffic conditions and to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by this chapter and other traffic ordinances. Whenever reference is made herein to the traffic engineer, it shall include his or her designated representatives as shall be approved by the City Manager. Any reference in this Article to a duly authorized person shall be to the traffic engineer. 
(Ord. No. 23-006, 4-15-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 23-006, adopted April 15, 2013, repealed the former § 44-23, and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former § 44-23 pertained to general duties of chief of police relative to traffic and derived from Code 1992, § 10.201.  
Sec. 44-24. - Authority of chief of police to enforce traffic regulations. 
(a)  The chief of police is hereby empowered to take all actions as may be necessary or advisable to enforce traffic regulations to make effective the provisions of this chapter and other traffic laws or ordinances and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special events or conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than 90 days, nor shall it be effective until approved by the City Manager. 
(b)  The chief of police is hereby empowered, in addition to the traffic engineer, to close streets for emergencies, special events or other conditions. Street closures which are expected to be for periods in excess of two hours, except for emergencies, shall require approval by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 23-006, 4-15-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 23-006, adopted April 15, 2013, amended § 44-24 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 44-24 pertained to authority of chief of police to make traffic regulations and derived from Code 1992, § 10.202.  
Sec. 44-25. - Duty of police officers to enforce traffic laws. 
It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all street traffic laws of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city. 
(Code 1992, § 10.203)  
Sec. 44-26. - Authority of police officers to direct traffic. 
Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformance with traffic laws. In the event of fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(Code 1992, § 10.204)  
Sec. 44-27. - Obedience to traffic officers. 
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or fire department official given to direct or control traffic as authorized in this chapter. 
(Code 1992, § 10.205)  
Sec. 44-28. - Vehicle equipment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle on any street, alley or other public way in the city, unless such vehicle is equipped in accord with all state laws governing vehicles, Texas Transportation Code, or to fail to use such equipment as required by such laws, or to use any equipment contrary to such laws. 
(Code 1992, § 10.206)  
Sec. 44-29. - Riding on portion of vehicle not intended for passengers. 
No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designated or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to any employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. 
(Code 1992, § 10.207)  
Sec. 44-30. - Riding motorcycles. 
A person operating a motorcycle shall not ride other than upon the permanent and regular seat attached thereto or carry any other person, nor shall any other person ride upon such motorcycle other than upon a firmly attached seat to the rear or side of the operator. 
(Code 1992, § 10.208)  
Sec. 44-31. - Boarding or alighting from moving vehicles. 
No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Code 1992, § 10.209)  
Sec. 44-32. - Clinging to moving vehicles. 
No person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates or any toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself/herself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway. 
(Code 1992, § 10.210)  
Sec. 44-33. - Use of roller skates, coasters, etc., on roadway. 
No person upon roller skates, skateboard, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and when so crossing such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. 
(Code 1992, § 10.211)  
Sec. 44-34. - Glass, nails, etc. not to be deposited in street. 
(a)  No person shall throw or deposit upon any street or alley any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle upon such street or alley. 
(b)  Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any street or alley any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed. 
(c)  Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from any street or alley shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon such street or alley from the vehicle. 
(Code 1992, § 10.212)  
Sec. 44-35. - Accident investigations, studies, etc. 
(a)  The police department is the agency designated to investigate traffic accidents and to arrest and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents in accordance with its policies and procedures. 
(b)  Whenever the accidents at any particular location warrant, the police department shall inform the traffic engineer of such condition and shall aid the traffic engineer in the study of such accidents and in the determination of remedial measures which should be taken. 
(Code 1992, § 10.213; Ord. No. 23-006, 4-15-2013)  
Sec. 44-36. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 23-006, adopted April 15, 2013, repealed § 44-36, which pertained to annual traffic report and derived from Code 1992, § 10.214.  
Sec. 44-37. - Giving false information in promise to appear for traffic violation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, when giving a written promise to appear, or when given a written notice by any police officer to appear before the municipal court to answer for an offense against any traffic law of this state, or any provision of this chapter or other traffic ordinance of the city, to give an assumed or fictitious name or a false place of residence or address, or any other than the true name and the true place of his/her residence or address, upon the request of such officer. 
(Code 1992, § 10.214)  
Sec. 44-38. - Drivers' records to be kept. 
The police department shall maintain a suitable record of all traffic accidents, arrests, convictions and complaints reported for each driver. Such records shall accumulate during at least a five year period and from that time on such records shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five year period. 
(Code 1992, § 10.216)  
Sec. 44-39. - Records of traffic violations. 
(a)  The police department and the recorder of the municipal court shall keep a record of all violations of this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city and of the state vehicle laws of which any person has been charged in accordance with state law, together with a record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such record shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of each. Such record shall accumulate during at least a five year period and, from that time on, the record shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five year period. 
(b)  All such records shall be public records. 
(Code 1992, § 10.217)  
Sec. 44-40. - Use of hand-held communication devices while driving. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases shall be the meaning ascribed to them: 
(1)  Electronic message means a self-contained piece of digital communication that is designed or intended to be transmitted to or from a wireless communication device. An electronic message includes, but is not limited to, a text-based communication, such as electronic mail, a text message, or an instant message, or a command or request to access an internet site. 
(2)  Operate means to drive or be in physical control of a motor vehicle. 
(3)  Wireless communication device means a device that uses a commercial mobile service, as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 332. 
(b)  Offense. It shall be unlawful for a driver or operator of a motor vehicle to use a wireless communication device to view, send, compose an electronic message or other information, or manually engage in the use of other application software while operating a motor vehicle upon any roadway in the city, including when stopped or standing. 
(c)  Exceptions: The following uses of hand-held communication devices shall be exceptions to the application of this Section 44-40: 
(1)  The operator is a law enforcement officer, firefighter, emergency services technician or other public safety employee of a unit of federal, state or local government who is acting in the course and scope of the employee's duties and whose use of these wireless communication device is in compliance with the applicable operating procedures established by the operator's employer; 
(2)  An operator of an authorized government vehicle uses a wireless communication device to respond to an emergency while acting in an official capacity while operating an authorized government vehicle. 
(d)  Affirmative defenses. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution of conduct prohibited by subsection 2 if: 
(1)  An operator of a motor vehicle uses a wireless communication device strictly to engage in a telephone conversation, including dialing or deactivating a phone call; 
(2)  An operator of a motor vehicle uses a wireless communication device while stopped out of the moving lanes of the roadway where parking, standing or stopping in a nonemergency situation is not otherwise prohibited; or 
(3)  An operator of a motor vehicle uses a wireless communication device to: 
a.  Operate only a global position or navigation system; 
b.  Obtain emergency assistance by contacting an emergency response service, including a rescue, emergency medical, or hazardous material response service; a hospital; a fire department; a health clinic; a medical doctor's office; and individual to administer first aid treatment; or a law enforcement office; 
c.  Obtain emergency assistance to prevent a crime about to be committed; 
d.  Report a traffic accident or serious traffic hazard; or 
e.  Communicate with the reasonable belief that a person's life, safety, or property is in immediate danger. 
(e)  Conflicting regulations. To the extent that any clause, phrase, provision, sentence or part of this section conflicts with V.T.C. A., Transportation Code § 545.424, regarding the use of wireless communication devices while operating a motor vehicle by minors, or V.T.C.A., Transpiration Code §545.425, regarding the use of wireless communication devices in school crossing zones, this section does not apply. 
(Ord. No. 21-001, 2-21-2011)  
Secs. 44-41—44-66. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local authority to regulate or prohibit turning, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(7); municipal authority to designate stop intersections, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(8); municipal authority to designate yield intersections, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(8); operation and movement of vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 545.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 44-67. - Duty to drive on right side of street. 
The driver of a vehicle shall drive on the right side of the street, except: 
(1)  When overtaking and passing a vehicle proceeding in the same direction under the rules established in this article, 
(2)  When the right half of the street is closed to traffic by the proper authorities, 
(3)  Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon, 
(4)  Upon a roadway designated and sign posted for one-way traffic. 
(Code 1992, § 10.301)  
Sec. 44-68. - Duty of driver of overtaken vehicle. 
It shall be the duty of the driver of a vehicle, upon signal that he/she is about to be overtaken on the left, to give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle and he/she shall not increase the speed of his/her vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
(Code 1992, § 10.302)  
Sec. 44-69. - Passing vehicle proceeding in opposite direction. 
Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right and, upon streets having width for not more than one line of traffic in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least one-half of the main-traveled portion of the street, as nearly as possible. 
(Code 1992, § 10.303)  
Sec. 44-70. - Turning movements generally. 
The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows: 
(1)  Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(2)  The approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line of the roadway being entered. 
(3)  The approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and by passing to the right of such center line where it enters the intersection. A left turn from a one-way street into a two-way street shall be made by passing to the right of the center line of the street being entered upon leaving the intersection. 
(4)  Where both streets or roadways are one way, both the approach for a left turn and the left turn shall be made as close as practicable to the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(Code 1992, § 10.304)  
Sec. 44-71. - Prohibiting turns at intersections. 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such signs. 
(Code 1992, § 10.305; Ord. No. 23-006, 4-15-2013)  
Sec. 44-72. - U-turns. 
No U-turn shall be made by the driver of any vehicle at any intersection where electric traffic-control devices or stop signs are in operation. U-turns are prohibited between intersections, but may be made at intersections where no such traffic-control devices are in operation, unless such turn is prohibited as provided in section 44-73. 
(Code 1992, § 10.306)  
Sec. 44-73. - Turning left between intersections. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a driver of any vehicle to turn such vehicle so as to drive left of a double yellow center line, unless such turn is into a parking lot, private driveway or alleyway and unless such turn can be made in safety and without retarding or interfering with traffic in either direction. 
(b)  Turns prohibited by the preceding paragraph include, but are not limited to, those made to effect and/or accomplish streetside angle parking. 
(c)  On streets having no double yellow center line, a driver of any vehicle may turn left between intersections only when such turn is not otherwise prohibited and only when such turn can be made in safety without retarding or interfering with traffic in either direction. 
(Code 1992, § 10.307)  
Sec. 44-74. - Right-of-way when turning left. 
The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard, but such driver, having so yielded and having given a signal when and as required by this article, may make such left turn, and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from the opposite direction shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicles making the left turn. 
(Code 1992, § 10.308)  
Sec. 44-75. - Yield right-of-way signs. 
The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield right-of-way sign, shall, in obedience to such sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions, or shall stop if necessary, and shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian crossing the roadway on which he/she is driving and to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(Code 1992, § 10.309; Ord. No. 23-006, 4-15-2013)  
Sec. 44-76. - Limitations on backing. 
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic. 
(Code 1992, § 10.310)  
Sec. 44-77. - One-way streets and alleys. 
(a)  No one-way street regulation shall be effective unless signs giving notice thereof are placed in accordance with the provisions of this code of ordinances. 
(b)  Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys which are designated as one-way streets or alleys, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction where signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1992, § 10.311; Ord. No. 23-006, 4-15-2013)  
Sec. 44-78. - Procedure upon approach of authorized emergency vehicle. 
(a)  Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle equipped with at least one lighted lamp exhibiting red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle, and when the driver of such vehicle is giving audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right hand edge or curb of the roadway, clear of any intersection, and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of any authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway. 
(Code 1992, § 10.312)  
Sec. 44-79. - Obstructing traffic generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, drive or propel a vehicle in such manner as to block or obstruct the traffic on any street or alley of the city except emergency vehicles engaged in an emergency operation. 
(Code 1992, § 10.313)  
Sec. 44-80. - Obstructing intersection or crosswalk. 
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he/she is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication except emergency vehicles engaged in an emergency operation. 
(Code 1992, § 10.314)  
Sec. 44-81. - Following too closely. 
The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicles and the traffic upon and conditions of the street. 
(Code 1992, § 10.315)  
Sec. 44-82. - Following fire apparatus or driving near scene of fire. 
The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet or drive into or park such vehicle within a block where fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm. 
(Code 1992, § 10.316)  
Sec. 44-83. - Driving in processions. 
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practical and safe. 
(Code 1992, § 10.317)  
Sec. 44-84. - Driving between vehicles of procession. 
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously identified. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or police officers. 
(Code 1992, § 10.318)  
Sec. 44-85. - Driving through safety zones. 
No driver of any vehicle shall, at any time, drive through or within a safety zone. 
(Code 1992, § 10.319)  
Sec. 44-86. - Passing around rotary traffic island. 
The driver of a vehicle passing around any rotary traffic island within the city shall drive only to the right of such island. 
(Code 1992, § 10.320)  
Sec. 44-87. - Driving on fresh pavement or repaired roadway. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle upon any portion of the streets in the city that has been freshly paved or repaired or rebuilt, unless all barriers or signal lights have been lawfully removed therefrom indicating that the street is ready for travel. 
(Code 1992, § 10.321)  
Sec. 44-88. - Reckless driving. 
Any person who shall operate a vehicle on a highway at a speed which is greater than is reasonable or prudent under the circumstances then existing or who shall drive a vehicle in such a willful and wanton manner as to endanger other persons or the property of other persons shall be guilty of the offense of reckless driving. 
(Code 1992, § 10.322)  
Sec. 44-89. - Operation of vehicles in parking areas. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person in control or possession of a motor vehicle in a parking area to: 
(1)  Accelerate or race the motor of a vehicle so as to cause a loud noise in a manner calculated to disturb the person or persons present. 
(2)  Bring a motor vehicle to a sudden start or stop or blow the horn of the vehicle when there is no necessity for the protection of a person or property, in such a manner calculated to disturb the person or persons present. 
(3)  Hold a race or contest for speed with another motor vehicle or vehicles, without the written consent of the parking area owner or his/her authorized representative. 
(b)  In this section "parking area" means a privately owned or publicly owned access way or parking area, commonly used by the general public without charge, maintained for the convenience of customers, clients, or patrons of one or more business establishments or public offices. 
(Code 1992, § 10.323)  
Secs. 44-90—44-106. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate traffic by traffic-control devices, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(1). 
 
Sec. 44-107. - Conformity with manual. 
All traffic-control devices including signs, signals, and markings (pavement and/or curb) installed or used for the purpose of directing and controlling traffic within the city shall conform to the "Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways." All signs, signals and markings erected or used by the City of Fredericksburg shall be uniform and be located so far as practicable according to the directions shown in the manual throughout the city. All existing traffic-control devices and those erected in the future by the city being consistent with the manual, state law and this article shall be official traffic-control devices. A list of all signs, signals, and marking erected or in use in the city shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary, provided that failure to keep such list shall not excuse any violation. 
(Code 1992, § 10.401)  
Sec. 44-108. - Authority to install traffic control devices. 
(a)  The traffic engineer of the City of Fredericksburg shall have the authority to install traffic control devices in accordance with this Article, and with other Articles of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fredericksburg. Whenever and wherever the condition of traffic, the frequency of passage of vehicles or pedestrians, or both, the direction and volume of the flow of traffic, the dimensions and conditions of the streets and sidewalks, and the use of property abutting the streets are such that the traffic engineer finds it to be necessary for the free flow and the expeditious handling of traffic and the safety of persons and property, the traffic engineer, in compliance with this chapter, is authorized as follows: 
(1)  To place and maintain traffic-control signs, signals, markings and devices when and as required under this chapter to make effective the provisions of this chapter, and may place and maintain such additional traffic-control devices as the traffic engineer may deem necessary to regulate traffic under this chapter or under state law, or to guide or warn traffic. 
(2)  To designate intersections at which traffic shall be controlled by electric traffic-control signals or lights and shall cause such signals or lights to be installed and maintained at such intersections and supervise the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices. 
(3)  To designate intersections of streets at which drivers operating vehicles approaching the intersection on one or more of the intersecting streets must bring such vehicle to a complete stop before proceeding into such intersection. 
(4)  To designate intersections of streets at which drivers operating vehicles on one or more of the intersecting streets shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian legally crossing the designated roadway and to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching the intersection on another intersecting street so closely as to constitute a hazard. 
(5)  To determine and designate intersections, streets, highways and alleys with exits from properties where particular hazards exist, and to determine whether motor vehicles shall stop at one or more exits from any such property, and to erect a stop sign at every such exit where a stop is required. 
(6)  To conduct studies and investigations of the public streets and highways within the city and study the needs of the public for parking vehicles on public streets, the width and length of public streets where parking is desired, the availability of parking space and frequency, duration and times of parking on the public streets, the needs of business and commercial establishments to have regulated parking on the public streets and, after making such studies, the traffic engineer shall determine when parking, stopping or standing motor vehicles should be prohibited on public streets and highways in the city, and shall install appropriate signs or by curb markings, giving notice that parking, stopping or standing is prohibited. The traffic engineer shall make changes in the parking, stopping or standing prohibitions and regulations from time to time as required by the studies and investigations. 
(7)  To conduct studies and investigations of the public streets and highways within the city and shall study the needs of the public for areas on the public streets for the exclusive use of bicycles during certain hours of the day, the width and length of areas on public streets where bicycle lanes are desired and, after making such studies, the traffic engineer shall designate those areas on public streets and highways of the city where areas for the exclusive use of bicycles are required and should be in effect by means of appropriate signs and street markings, giving notice that only bicycles may use an area of a public street or highway during certain hours of the day. The traffic engineer may change areas designated for the exclusive use of bicycles from time to time as required by studies and investigations. 
(8)  To designate streets on which the operation of bicycles shall be prohibited. 
(9)  To designate and maintain crosswalks. 
(10)  To establish safety zones on any of the streets of the city. 
(11)  To mark lanes for traffic and parking stalls, including parking spaces for disabled parking on the streets of the city. 
(12)  To designate the locations at which the making of right, left U-turns or other complete turns at any intersection of streets, or at median openings on divided streets, in the city is prohibited. 
(13)  To designate the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at or near certain intersections. 
(14)  To designate and mark appropriately those traffic lanes on multilaned streets, drives or driveways to be used by vehicles engaging in turning movements. 
(15)  To determine locations for the prohibition of turns on stop or red signals at intersections controlled by traffic-control devices where such turns would be otherwise permissible by direction of the traffic flow upon the streets. 
(16)  To designate routes directing traffic near public or private schools, parks, public buildings or areas where the normal operation of traffic should be changed. 
(17)  To determine the location of passenger zones, loading zones and zones for the use of disabled persons. 
(18)  To designate locations on the streets of the city for use as public cab or shuttle stands. 
(19)  To designate locations on the streets of the city for use as bus stops. 
(20)  To make such changes as changing conditions may require in any designation, determination or regulation the traffic engineer is authorized to make under this chapter. 
(21)  To designate one-way streets in accordance with the master thoroughfare plan as approved by the City Council, and to designate one-way alleys. 
(22)  Install temporary traffic-control devices for special events or studies. 
(23)  The traffic engineer shall, on the basis of an engineering and traffic survey, designate school traffic zones with appropriate street markings or signs, which street markings or signs shall be placed at the school zones by the traffic engineer. The City Council shall set school zone speeds by ordinance. 
(24)  The traffic engineer or his designated representative shall conduct studies and investigations of the public streets and highways within the city and shall study the quantity and frequency of truck travel on the public streets, the needs of the public to have regulated truck travel on the public streets and, after making such studies, the traffic engineer shall establish no through truck zones in the city. 
(25)  The traffic engineer shall make changes in the no through truck zone designations from time to time as required by the studies and investigations. 
(26)  The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to remove or cause to be removed any trees, plants or other vegetative matter which the traffic engineer determines to be an interference with the safe or efficient flow or operation of the street or utilities located therein or which otherwise are prohibited by City Ordinance. 
(27)  The traffic engineer is hereby authorized to determine time periods when street and utility maintenance may not close a roadway or lane because of peak traffic flow characteristics. 
(b)  The traffic engineer shall keep accurate records of all traffic control devices, signs, signals, markings, designations and all other information used in the carrying out of the traffic engineer's duties hereunder erected or in use in the city. 
(c)  Whenever the traffic engineer has erected and installed any official traffic control device, sign, signal, marking, designation or other regulatory control at any location in the city, or has caused the same to be done under his/her direction, pursuant to this article, the manual, or another ordinance/resolution directing the erection of such device, signal or sign said engineer shall thereafter file a report with the city secretary in writing stating the type of traffic-control device, sign, signal or other control and when and where the same was erected or installed. The city secretary shall file and maintain such report among the official papers of the office of the city secretary, and shall provide notices as appropriate such as notifications to the City Council and the public. Failure to keep such list or provide notices shall not excuse any violation. The installation of such control shall constitute prima facie evidence of its official installation. 
(Code 1992, § 10.402; Ord. No. 23-006, 4-15-2013)  
Sec. 44-109. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 23-006, adopted April 15, 2013, repealed § 44-109, which pertained to designation of crosswalks and safety zones and marking traffic lanes and derived from Code 1992, § 10.403.  
Sec. 44-110. - Obedience to devices. 
The driver of any vehicle, motor vehicle or animal shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device, sign, signal or marking applicable thereto placed in accordance with this article, the manual and any ordinance/resolution directing that such traffic-control device, sign or signal shall be installed or erected unless otherwise directed by a law enforcement officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized vehicle permitted by this article. 
(Code 1992, § 10.404)  
Sec. 44-111. - Necessity of signs. 
No provision of this article for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place. 
(Code 1992, § 10.405)  
Sec. 44-112. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 23-006, adopted April 15, 2013, repealed § 44-112, which pertained to installation of traffic lights and derived from Code 1992, § 10.406.  
Sec. 44-113. - Traffic-control signal legend generally. 
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signs exhibiting the words "Go," "Caution" or "Stop," or exhibiting different colored lights successively one at a time, or with arrows, the following colors only shall be used and such terms and lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows: 
(1)  Green alone or "Go". 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left, unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited. 
b.  Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk. 
(2)  Yellow alone or "Caution" when shown following the green or "Go" signal. 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red or "Stop" signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter and such vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when the red or "Stop" signal is exhibited. 
b.  Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway, and any pedestrian then starting to cross shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles. 
(3)  Red alone or "Stop". 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until green or "Go" is shown alone; provided that, after stopping and yielding to all pedestrians and vehicles, the driver of a vehicle may enter the intersection for the purposes of making a right turn only, if a sign is in place indicating that such turn can be made. 
b.  No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he/she can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic. 
(4)  Red with green arrow. 
a.  Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
b.  No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he/she can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic. 
In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions which, by their nature, can have no application shall not be applied. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal. 
(Code 1992,§ 10.407)  
Sec. 44-114. - Pedestrian walk and wait signals. 
Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words "Walk" or "Wait" are in place, such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(1)  Walk. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles. 
(2)  Wait. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his/her crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the wait signal is showing. 
(Code 1992, § 10.408)  
Sec. 44-115. - Flashing signals. 
Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used they shall require obedience by vehicle traffic as follows: 
(1)  Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated by rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
(2)  Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with caution. 
(Code 1992, § 10.409)  
Sec. 44-116. - Ratification of existing devices. 
All traffic-control devices, signs, signals, markings, designations and other controls placed or erected prior to the adoption of this ordinance on April 15, 2013 by the police department or otherwise by the City and in use for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic are hereby affirmed, ratified and declared to be official traffic-control devices, provided such traffic-control devices are not inconsistent with the provisions of this article or state law. 
(Code 1992, § 10.410; Ord. No. 23-006, 4-15-2013)  
Sec. 44-117. - Unauthorized signs, signals, etc. 
(a)  No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway, street or alley any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official control device or any railroad sign or signal. 
(b)  No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway, street or alley any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising, nor shall any sign be placed on any traffic sign or signal other than official signs placed by authorized persons. 
(c)  This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways, streets or alleys of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs, subject to the provisions of any other sign regulations in the city. 
(d)  Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the chief of police or other authority is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be moved without notice. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any person other than the duly designated individual to install or cause to be installed any signal, sign or device purporting to direct the use of the streets or the activities on those streets of pedestrians, vehicles, motor vehicles, or animals, proof, in any prosecution for a violation of this article or any traffic ordinance/resolution of the city, that any traffic-control device, sign, signal or marking was actually in place on any street shall constitute prima facie evidence that the same was installed by the director of public works pursuant to the authority of this article and of the ordinance/resolution directing the installation of such device, signal or making. 
(Code 1992, § 10.411)  
Sec. 44-118. - Altering, injuring, etc., devices. 
No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic-control device, sign or signal or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any part thereof. 
(Code 1992, § 10.412)  
Secs. 44-119—44-139. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SPEED REGULATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Municipalities may alter speed limits subject to state law requirements, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(12). 
 
Sec. 44-140. - Maximum limits generally. 
(a)  No person shall operate or drive any vehicle on any street within the city at a greater speed than 30 miles per hour, unless signs are erected designating another speed in accordance with this article. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no person shall drive a vehicle on a street at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. In every event, speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or entering the street in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care. 
(c)  The driver of every vehicle shall, consistent with the requirements of subsection (b), drive at an appropriate reduced speed when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, and when a special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or street or highway conditions. 
(Code 1992, § 10.501)  
Sec. 44-141. - Maximum limits on specific streets. 
Speed limits and zones are as designated by ordinance, and as properly identified in accordance with state law. 
(Code 1992, § 10.502)  
Sec. 44-142. - Minimum limits. 
No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law. 
(Code 1992, § 10.503)  
Sec. 44-143. - Speed limit signs. 
Whenever the speed limit of 30 miles per hour, as prescribed by section 44-140, is, by the provisions of this article or other ordinance of the city council, increased or decreased at any intersection or other place or upon any part of a street, the duly authorized person shall erect appropriate signs giving notice of such speed limit, and no such limit shall be effective unless such signs are erected at such intersection or other place or part of such street. 
(Code 1992, § 10.504)  
Sec. 44-144. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this article regulating the speed of vehicles shall not apply to vehicles operated by the fire department of the city responding to calls, nor to police patrols, nor to physicians or ambulances responding to emergency calls. 
(Code 1992, § 10.505)  
Sec. 44-145. - Penalty for violating traffic ordinances; specific offense. 
(a)  All of the streets of this city, and all portions of any such streets, are hereby declared to be public streets, and the driving or operating of any motor vehicle on or along any portion of any street of this city at a rate of speed that is greater than the maximum rate of speed for said portion of said street, as fixed by ordinance shall be a misdemeanor, which is named, "the offense of speeding," and that the said offense is punishable by a fine in any sum not to exceed that established by state law for such offenses. The use of the word "speeding" shall be sufficient to designate the said offense, and shall mean that a motor vehicle has been driven upon a public street, at a greater rate of speed than that fixed by city ordinance for the street and for the zone thereof, that such motor vehicle was so being drive upon, if zoned. 
(b)  In prosecutions under this article, for the offense of "speeding," the complaint, if in other respects sufficient in form, shall, as to the portion thereof seeking to acknowledge the offense, be sufficient if it in substance alleges that the defendant did while driving a motor vehicle in said city commit the offense of "speeding." 
(Code 1992, § 10.506)  
Sec. 44-146. - Ladybird Johnson Municipal Park. 
(a)  It is hereby determined that the prima facie maximum speed limit on the entrance road and all streets and thoroughfares in the Ladybird Johnson Municipal Park lying within the city limits of Fredericksburg is and shall be as hereinafter stated, which prima facie limit shall be effective at all time and signs shall be erected giving notice of the prima facie speed limit so declared, to wit: 
(1)  Entering and leaving park. Park Drive from its intersection with State Highway 16 to its intersection with Campers' Loop, for east and west bound traffic. A maximum prima facie speed limit of 40 miles per hour is hereby established for all westbound traffic entering and all eastbound traffic leaving Ladybird Johnson Municipal Park from the intersection of Park Drive with State Highway No. 16 to the intersection of Park Drive with Campers' Loop. 
(2)  Campers' Loop. The maximum prima facie speed limit of 20 mile per hour shall extend to all traffic on the street designated as Campers' Loop. 
(3)  Park Drive. A maximum prima facie speed limit of 30 miles per hour is hereby designated for Park Drive lying within the Ladybird Johnson Municipal Park. 
(4)  Recreation Loop. A maximum prima facie speed limit of 15 miles per hour is hereby established for Recreation Loop Street lying within Ladybird Johnson Municipal Park. 
(5)  Myra and Alfred Petsch Drive. A maximum prima facie speed limit of 30 mile per hour is hereby established for Myra and Alfred Petsch Drive lying within the Ladybird Johnson Municipal Park. 
(6)  Pavilion Drive. A maximum prima facie speed limit of 15 miles per hour is hereby established for Pavilion Drive lying within the Ladybird Johnson Municipal Park. 
(7)  Golfers' Loop. A maximum prima facie speed limit of 30 miles per hour is hereby established for Golfer's Loop lying within the Ladybird Johnson Municipal Park. 
(b)  All of the streets and entranceway to Ladybird Johnson Municipal Park are hereby declared to be public streets of this city, and all person driving or operating any motor vehicle on or along any portion of any street within the confines of said park at a rate of speed that is greater than the maximum rate of speed for said portion of said street, as fixed by this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, which is named "the offense of speeding," and the said offense is punishable by fine in any sum not to exceed that established by state law for such offenses. The use of the word "speeding" shall be sufficient to designate the said offense, and shall mean that a motor vehicle has been driven upon a public street at a greater rate of speed than that fixed by city ordinance for the street and for the zone thereof, that such motor vehicle was so being driven upon, if zoned. 
(c)  In prosecutions under this article for the offense of speeding, the complaint, if in other respects sufficient in form, shall, as to the portion thereof seeking to acknowledge that offense, be sufficient if it in substance alleges that the defendant did while driving a motor vehicle in said city commit the offense of "speeding." 
(Code 1992, § 10.507)  
Sec. 44-147. - Designation of maximum speed limits on specific City streets. 
(a)  It is hereby determined that the prima facie maximum speed limit on certain portions of State Highway 16 North (SH 16 N) routed within the City limits, is hereby stated as follows, which prima facie maximum speed limit shall be effective at all times, and signs will be erected giving notice of the prima facie maximum speed limit so declared, to wit: 
For northbound traffic: 
Beginning at milepoint 18.799 (121 feet north of E. Trailmoor Dr.) to milepoint 18.020 (375 feet north of Ridgewood Dr.), a distance of 0.779 miles, a prima facie maximum speed limit of 45 miles per hour. 
From milepoint 18.020 (375 feet north of Ridgewood Dr.) to the northern City Limits at milepoint 17.500 (312 feet north of Ellebracht Dr.), a distance of 0.520 miles, a prima facie maximum speed limit of 55 miles per hour. 
For southbound traffic: 
Beginning at the northern City Limits at milepoint 17.500 (312 feet north of Ellebracht Dr.) to milepoint 18.020 (375 feet north of Ridgewood Dr.), a distance of 0.520 miles, a prima facie maximum speed limit of 55 miles per hour. 
From milepoint 18.020 (375 feet north of Ridgewood Dr.) to milepoint 18.799 (121 feet north of E. Trailmoor Dr.), a distance of 0.779 miles, a prima facie maximum speed limit of 45 miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 2019-31 , § 1, 11-18-2019)  
Secs. 44-148—44—160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate standing and parking, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(2). 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 44-161. - Violation of article. 
Each police officer shall attach to any vehicle found parked in violation of this article a notice to the owner or operator thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of this article and instructing such owner or operator to report to the police station in regard to such violation. 
(Code 1992, § 10.601)  
Sec. 44-162. - Unattended vehicles. 
No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine and effectively setting the brakes thereon and, when standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the roadway. 
(Code 1992, § 10.602)  
Sec. 44-163. - Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk. 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway. 
(3)  Within an intersection. 
(4)  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant. 
(5)  On a crosswalk. 
(6)  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection. 
(7)  Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway. 
(8)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the chief of police has indicated a different length by signs or markings. 
(9)  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing. 
(10)  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of such entrance (when properly sign-posted). 
(11)  Alongside or opposite any street excavating or obstruction when stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
(12)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge of curb of a street. 
(13)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel. 
(14)  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his/her control into any prohibited area specified above or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful. 
(Code 1992, § 10.603)  
Sec. 44-164. - Stop intersections. 
Following the erection of stop signs in accordance with this Article, it shall be the duty of the drivers of vehicles approaching the intersection facing the stop sign to bring such vehicle to a complete stop at such sign or at a clearly marked stop line before entering the intersection, except when directed to proceed by a police officer or a traffic control signal. After having so stopped, such driver shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles which have entered the intersection or which are approaching so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard. Such driver, after having so yielded, may proceed and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching on the intersecting street shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle so proceeding into or across the intersection. 
(Code 1992, § 10.604; Ord. No. 23-006, 4-15-2013)  
Sec. 44-165. - Designation and marking of parking spaces and areas where parking is prohibited or limited. 
(a)  The duly authorized person shall cause parking spaces to be maintained and marked off in and on such streets and parts thereof as may be designated by the duly authorized person from time to time and he/she shall cause spaces in which parking is prohibited to be maintained and marked off in and on such streets and parts thereof as may be designated by the duly authorized person from time to time. The duly authorized person shall also cause time limit parking areas to be maintained and marked off in and on such part or parts of streets as may be designated by the duly authorized person from time to time. All such spaces or areas shall be clearly indicated by appropriate signs or markings on the pavement. In areas designated as time limit parking areas, parking may be limited to any period prescribed by the duly authorized person, the same to be designated with clearly distinguishable markings or signs at both ends of the time limit area and at reasonable intervals between the beginning and ending of such time limit area, indicating the time allowed for parking in such area. 
(b)  Any time limit on parking established under this article shall apply on such days and between such hours as prescribed by the duly authorized person. 
(Code 1992, § 10.606)  
Sec. 44-166. - Parking in prohibited areas; overtime parking. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his or her name, or the name of a trust or an entity controlled by him or her, or owned by or operated by him/her or in his/her possession or under his/her control to be or remain in any space or area in which parking is prohibited, or in a time limited parking area for a longer period of time than designated. 
(Code 1992, § 10.606; Ord. No. 23-006, 4-15-2013)  
Sec. 44-167. - Parallel and angle parking. 
(a)  No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within 18 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway, except as otherwise provided in this section. On one-way streets, vehicles may be parked on the left side of the street, with the left-hand wheels within 18 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway, unless signs prohibit such parking. 
(b)  Upon those streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by such signs or markings. Whenever parking spaces are marked by lines on the pavement, whether for parallel or angle parking, a vehicle must be parked entirely within the lines of the parking space. 
(Code 1992, § 10.607; Ord. No. 23-006, 4-15-2013)  
Sec. 44-168. - Parking or standing in alleys. 
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to have available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
(Code 1992, § 10.608)  
Sec. 44-169. - Designation and use of curb loading zones. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zones are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed 15 minutes. 
(b)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pick-up and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes. 
(Code 1992, § 10.609; Ord. No. 23-006, 4-15-2013)  
Sec. 44-170. - Designation and use of bus stops and taxicab stands. 
(a)  The driver of a bus, shuttle, taxicab, limousine or other such transportation vehicle shall not park upon any street in any business district at any time other than at a bus stop or taxicab stand, respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the driver of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers. 
(b)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus or other multi-passenger vehicle which accommodates nine passengers or more in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab or limousine in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any said bus/multipassenger vehicle or taxicab/limousine waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Code 1992, § 10.610; Ord. No. 23-006, 4-15-2013)  
Sec. 44-171. - Presumption that owner of vehicle illegally parked same. 
In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of such parking, the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(Code 1992, § 10.611)  
Sec. 44-172. - No parking designation on Nimitz Parkway. 
(a)  Two signs shall be erected within or along the northwest one-half of the southeasterly bound lane of Nimitz Parkway, in the City of Fredericksburg, Texas at two separate places to be designated by the chief of police of the City of Fredericksburg. Such signs shall bear words substantially as follows: 
No parking between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Mondays and Fridays 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, motor vehicle or animal to cause, allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his or her name or owned or operated by him or her or in his or her possession or under his or her control to park or remain on or along the northeasterly portion of the southeasterly bound land of Nimitz Parkway between such signs during the prescribed hours as they appear on such signs. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under this article that: 
(1)  The driver of a vehicle or motor vehicle was parked in the zone so designated during the proscribed hours while he or she was taking a drivers license test or a drivers permit test or was accompanied by any peace officer of the State of Texas, Gillespie County or the City of Fredericksburg. 
(2)  The driver of a vehicle, or motor vehicle paused his or her vehicle or motor vehicle within said zone in order to permit himself or herself to deposit mail in an official U.S. Post Office receptacle. 
(Code 1992, § 10.612)  
Secs. 44-173—44-192. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PARKING FOR THE DISABLED 
 
Sec. 44-193. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 23-006, adopted April 15, 2013, repealed § 44-193, which pertained to responsibility for establishing parking spaces, passenger loading zones and derived from Code 1992, § 10.701.  
Sec. 44-194. - State law adopted. 
The provisions of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code §§ 681.001—681.012, as such may be amended from time to time, are incorporated herein and are made a part of this Code, including the penalty provisions thereof; it being hereby ordained that a violation of such article shall also be deemed to be a violation of this article. 
(Code 1992, § 10.702)  
Sec. 44-195. - Passenger loading zones. 
(a)  Permitted Parking. When a notice or notices have been erected pursuant to this article that the designated area is for the loading and unloading of handicapped passengers, no person shall park or pause a vehicle in such designated areas, except that any vehicle which displays the special devices provided for by the State Department of Highways and Public Transportation issued for the purpose of identifying motor vehicles regularly operated by or for the transportation of disabled persons, or in which a disabled person identification card as provided for by the State Department of Highways and Transportation is placed in the lower left hand side of the front windshield, when being operated by or for the transportation of a disabled person, shall be allowed to park or pause for loading and unloading in such designated area. 
(b)  Penalty for Violation. 
(1)  A person commits an offense under this section if the person is neither temporarily or permanently disabled nor transporting a temporarily or permanently disabled person and parks or pauses a vehicle with such special device or displaying a disabled person identification card in such designated area. 
(2)  A person commits an offense under this section if the person parks or pauses a vehicle neither displaying the special devices described in subsection (a) of this section nor displaying a disabled person identification card described in subsection (a) in such designated area. 
(3)  A person commits an offense if the person parks or pauses a vehicle so that the vehicle blocks such designated area or a portion thereof. 
(4)  A person commits an offense if he/she lends an identification card issued to him/her under state law, to a person who uses the identification card in violation of this section. 
(5)  In prosecution of an offense under this division, it is presumed that the registered owner of the motor vehicle that is the subject of the prosecution is the person who parked or paused the vehicle at the time and place the offense occurred. 
(6)  Whoever shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be punished in accordance with the general penalty provision in section 1-6. 
(Code 1992, § 10.703)  
Secs. 44-196—44-223. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PARKING OF TRUCKS, TRACTORS, TRAILERS AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 44-224. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to the provisions of Sections 44-224 through 44-227 and to Section 14-19 below: 
Daylight hours: are 7:00 a.m. on one day and 8:00 p.m. on the same day. 
Defense to Prosecution: Except as otherwise set forth in specific sections, it is a defense to prosecution under any provision of the sections to which these definitions apply that a prohibited vehicle is parked: 
(1)  during daylight hours, or 
(2)  for the purpose of construction on the property in question if in front of the property where work is occurring and only for the duration of the work for which it is needed, or 
(3)  for an emergency, or 
(4)  because it is actively being utilized in the loading or unloading of material, goods or passengers, or 
(5)  because the vehicle is disabled and is awaiting tow or repair for no more than 72 hours. 
No Defense to Prosecution shall excuse compliance with any traffic or safety law, specific direction of a peace officer or regulation. 
Emergency: any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage or loss that demands immediate action. 
Publicly Owned Property: property owned by any governmental entity, including but not limited to streets, rights-of-way, alleys or public easements. 
Residentially Zoned Areas: any area which is located in any residential zoning district of the City as described in the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Fredericksburg, and shall include all publicly owned property which borders any residentially zoned property. 
Vehicle: any vehicle as defined in the Transportation Code of the State of Texas, or any equipment, boat, trailer, recreational vehicle or camper whether operative or not, or whether containing all of its parts or not, and any parts thereof. Specific types of vehicles or equipment described in Section 44-227 below shall mean the commonly understood definition of the same. 
(Ord. No. 24-010, 7-21-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 24-010, adopted July 21, 2014, amended § 44-224 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 44-224 pertained to parking regulations concerning trucks, tractors, trailers and recreational vehicles, and derived from Code 1992, art. 10.800.  
Sec. 44-225. - Nuisance declared. 
It is declared to be a nuisance and is unlawful for any person or entity to park, store, allow to remain, or permit another to park, store or allow to remain (referred to herein as Park or Parking) any vehicle, not an emergency vehicle authorized by the City of Fredericksburg, State of Texas or United States, which is not in compliance with Sections 44-226 and 44-227 of this Code of Ordinances. For enforcement purposes, and without limiting the persons or entities against whom or against which enforcement may be had, it shall be a prima facie presumption that the owner of a vehicle as registered with the appropriate agency of the State of Texas has committed the offense. 
(Ord. No. 24-010, 7-21-2014)  
Sec. 44-226. - Parking in approved spaces. 
No vehicle or other trailer or equipment which is listed in Section 44-227 below shall be Parked in any area of the City so as to extend into any sidewalk, public right-of-way or easement unless it is properly parked in approved parking spaces or areas. The only defense to prosecution applicable to this provision is that of emergency. 
(Ord. No. 24-010, 7-21-2014)  
Sec. 44-227. - Parking on public property in residentially zoned areas. 
The following are prohibited from Parking on Public Property within Residentially Zoned Areas: 
(1)  tractor (farm or other), 
(2)  construction or landscape type equipment, 
(3)  semi-tractor/trailer, 
(4)  bus with over fourteen person capacity, 
(5)  truck over 30,000 Gross Vehicle Weight, 
(6)  construction or work type trailer. It is an additional defense to prosecution that a construction or work trailer is parked on the street in front of the property owned or controlled by the owner or user of the trailer and does not have a utility connection crossing or obstructing a sidewalk or other public easement. 
(7)  farm trailer. It is an additional defense to prosecution that a farm trailer is parked on the street in front of the property owned or controlled by the owner or user of the trailer and does not have a utility connection crossing or obstructing a sidewalk or other public easement. 
(8)  boat, jet ski or trailer for either or the like, or 
(9)  recreational vehicle. It is an additional defense to prosecution that a recreational vehicle is parked on the street in front of the property owned, controlled or visited by the occupant of the recreational vehicle, and does not have a utility connection crossing or obstructing a sidewalk or other public easement. 
(Ord. No. 24-010, 7-21-2014)  
Secs. 44-228—44-246. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - JUNKED VEHICLES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Junked vehicles as nuisance, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.072; abatement of nuisance of junked vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code §§ 683.071—683.078. 
 
Sec. 44-247. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed below, except where the context in which the word or phrase is used clearly indicates a different meaning is intended: 
Antique vehicle. Means a passenger car or truck that is at least 25 years old. 
Chief of police. Means the chief of police of the City of Fredericksburg or any duly commissioned police officer of the City of Fredericksburg. 
Code enforcement officer. Means the person designated by the city manager of the City of Fredericksburg as the City of Fredericksburg's code enforcement officer or such officer's delegate, as approved by the city manager. 
Junked vehicle. 
(1)  The term "junked vehicle" means a motor vehicle that is self-propelled and: 
a.  Does not have lawfully attached to it: 
1.  An unexpired license plate; or 
2.  A valid motor vehicle inspection certificate; or 
b.  Is wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or 
c.  Is inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than: 
1.  Seventy-two consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or 
2.  Thirty consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property. 
In the event that the State of Texas amends the definition of junked vehicle, such definition as amended shall automatically be incorporated herein as the definition of junked vehicle. 
(2)  The term "junked vehicle" does not include (a) a vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property, or (b) a vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, provided that the same is maintained and screened from view as required by section (c) following, or (c) an operable or inoperable antique or special interest vehicle, or part thereof, stored by a collector on the collector's property, provided that the vehicle and the outdoor storage area are maintained in an orderly manner, that it does not constitute a health hazard, and is screened from ordinary public view by means of a fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery or other appropriate means. 
a.  Motor Vehicle Collector. Means a person who: (a) owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles; and (b) acquires, collects or disposes of an antique or special interest vehicle or part of an antique or special interest vehicle for personal use to restore and preserve an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest. 
b.  Special Interest Vehicle. Means a motor vehicle of any age that has not been changed from original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist. 
(Code 1992, § 7.101; Ord. No. 10-017, § 7.101, 10-10-2000)  
Sec. 44-248. - Junked vehicles declared a public nuisance; duty of property owners; unlawful to interfere with impounding. 
(a)  Junked vehicles are detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, tending to reduce the value of private property, to invite vandalism, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, and are detrimental to the economic welfare of the city and state by producing urban blight which is adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the City of Fredericksburg, and such vehicles, and parts of such vehicles, are declared to be a public nuisance and subject to penalties for offense and abatement as set out hereunder. 
(b)  The owner or occupant of any real property within the City of Fredericksburg shall keep such property free of and shall not permit or suffer the presence of junked vehicles on such property. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally interfere with or attempt to prevent the physical impounding of any junked vehicle by the chief of police or code enforcement officer or delegates of either, and any such interference may be punishable by fine hereunder or by any other appropriate means. 
(d)  The relocation of a junked vehicle that is a public nuisance to another location within the City of Fredericksburg after a proceeding for the abatement and removal of it has commenced has no effect on the proceeding if the junked vehicle constitutes a public nuisance at the new location. 
(Code 1992, § 7.102; Ord. No. 10-017, § 7.102, 10-10-2000)  
Sec. 44-249. - Notice to owner to abate nuisance - when on occupied premises. 
(a)  Whenever any such junked vehicle is located on premises within the city in violation of subsection 44-248(b) above, the chief of police or code enforcement officer shall order the owner of the premises, if in possession thereof, or the occupant of the premises whereon such public nuisance exists, to abate or remove the same. Such order shall: 
(1)  Be in writing. 
(2)  State the nature of the public nuisance and that it must be removed and abated not later than the 10th day after the date on which the notice was mailed or on which personal service of notice was given, or on which the notice was placed on the nuisance. 
(3)  State that a request for a hearing to determine whether or not the vehicle is a junked vehicle, or part thereof, as defined herein must be made to the clerk of the municipal court of the City of Fredericksburg, either in person or in writing and without the requirement of bond, before expiration of said ten day period. 
(4)  State that, in the event that no request for a hearing is received before the expiration of said ten day period, it shall be conclusively presumed that said vehicle is a junked vehicle as defined under state law and this article. 
The order must be mailed, by certified mail with a five day return requested, to the last known registered owner of the junked vehicle, or part hereof, each lienholder of record, and to the owner or occupant of the premises on which the public nuisance exists. If the post office address of the last known registered owner is unknown, the notice may be placed on the vehicle, or part thereof, or, if the last known registered owner is physically located, the notice may be hand delivered. If any notice is returned undelivered by the United States Post Office, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the 11th day after the date of the return. 
(b)  If the owner or occupant of the premises does not request a public hearing and either fails or refuses to comply with the order of the chief of police or code enforcement officer within the ten day period after service thereof, as provided herein, the chief of police or code enforcement officer shall take possession of such junked vehicle, or any part thereof, and remove it from the premises upon the issuance of an appropriate order of the judge of the municipal court. 
(Code 1992, § 7.103)  
Sec. 44-250. - Notice to owner to abate nuisance - when on unoccupied premises or on public property or public right-of-way. 
(a)  Whenever any such junked vehicle, or part thereof, is located on unoccupied premises within the city in violation hereof, the chief of police or code enforcement office shall order the owner of the premises, as shown on the current tax rolls of the city whereon such public nuisance exists, to abate or remove the same. Such order shall contain the same information as for the order required under section 44-250(a)(1)-(4). The order must be mailed, by certified mail with a five day return requested, to the last known registered owner of the junked vehicle, each lienholder of record, and to the owner of the premises, as shown on the city tax rolls, on which the public nuisance exists. If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the junked vehicle is unknown, notice to the last known registered owner may be placed on the vehicle, or part thereof, or, if the last known registered owner is physically located, the notice may be hand delivered. If any notice is returned undelivered by the United State Post office, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the 11th day after the date of the return. 
(b)  If the owner of the premises does not request a public hearing and either fails or refuses to comply with the order of the chief of police or code enforcement officer within the ten day period after service thereof, as provided herein, the chief of police or code enforcement officer shall take possession of such junked vehicle and remove it from the premises upon the issuance of an appropriate order of the judge of the municipal court. 
(c)  Whenever any such junked vehicle is located on public property or on a public right-of-way within the city in violation hereof, the chief of police or code enforcement officer shall order the owner or occupant of the public premises or the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way whereupon said public nuisance exists, to abate or remove the same. Such order shall contain the same information as for the order required under section 44-250(a)(1)-(4). The order must be mailed, by certified mail with a five day return requested, to the last known registered owner of the junked vehicle, or any part thereof, each lienholder of record, and to the owner or occupant of the public premises or to the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way on which the public nuisance exists. If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the junked vehicle is unknown, notice to the last known registered owner may be placed on the vehicle, or, if the last known registered owner is physically located, the notice may be hand delivered. If any notice is returned undelivered by the United State Post Office, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the 11th day after the date of the return. 
(Code 1992, § 7.104)  
Sec. 44-251. - Visible notice to abate nuisance. 
(a)  At or near the time a junked vehicle, or part thereof, is located by the chief of police or code enforcement officer on either occupied or unoccupied private or public property or public right-of-way, in addition to any other notices required herein, a visible notice, brightly colored but of a color different from that used for notices of abandonment, shall be securely affixed to such vehicle. Such notice shall: 
(1)  State that the vehicle, or part thereof, is a public nuisance and that it must be removed and abated within ten days from the date on such notice. 
(2)  State that a request for a hearing to determine whether or not the vehicle, or part thereof, is a junked vehicle, or part thereof, as defined herein must be made to the clerk of the municipal court, either in person or in writing and without the requirement of bond, before the expiration of said ten day period. 
(3)  Shall state that in the event that no request for a hearing is received before the expiration of said ten day period, it shall be conclusively presumed that said vehicle is a junked vehicle as defined under state law and this article. 
(4)  Shall state the date is was affixed. 
(b)  Affixing the notice set out herein shall not be a condition or requirement precedent to any proceeding or official action to abate such public nuisance and such proceeding or action shall not be rendered void or voidable nor in any way affected by failure to affix the visible notice prescribed herein. 
(c)  In the event the ten day period set out on the visible notice is different from that prescribed in any other notice served as provided for herein, then official action or proceedings to abate such public nuisance shall not be commenced until after the expiration of both periods of time. 
(Code 1992, § 7.105)  
Sec. 44-252. - Public hearing; findings and orders. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of any premises on which a junked vehicle is located or the owner of the vehicle may, within ten days after service of a notice to abate said nuisance, require of the clerk of the municipal court of the city, either in person or in writing, and without the requirement of the bond, that a date and a time be set when he or she may appear before the judge of the municipal court for a public hearing to determine whether or not the vehicle is a junked vehicle. 
(b)  The judge of the municipal court shall hear any case brought before such judge, as set out herein, and shall determine by a preponderance of the evidence whether or not the vehicle, or any part thereof, is a junked vehicle, or part thereof, and in violation of this article. At the hearing, the vehicle is presumed, unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner, to be inoperable. Such hearing shall not be criminal in nature and shall be as informal as due process and orderly procedure allows. Rules of evidence as in civil suits shall be followed. Upon finding that such vehicle, of part thereof, is in violation of this article, the judge of the municipal court of the City of Fredericksburg, shall order such owner or occupant to remove and abate such nuisance within ten days, the same being a reasonable time. If such person shall fail and refuse, within such ten days, to abate or remove the nuisance, the judge of the municipal court may issue an order directing the chief of police or code enforcement officer to have the same removed, and the chief of police or code enforcement officer shall take possession of such junked vehicle and remove it from the premises. Such order shall include a description of the vehicle, or part thereof, and the current identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. 
(c)  Notice of any hearing set under this article shall be delivered to the code enforcement officer, chief of police or other officer initiating the case. 
(Code 1992, § 7.106)  
Sec. 44-253. - Abatement under court order. 
If there is a junked vehicle, as herein defined, on premises that are occupied or unoccupied, or upon a right-of-way; and (a) neither the owner nor the occupant of the premises or vehicle can be found and notified to remove same, or, (b) the notice required above is returned undelivered by the U.S. Post Office and ten days after the return of such notice the nuisance has not been abated, then upon a showing of such facts to the judge of the municipal court, the court may issue an order directing the chief of police or code enforcement officer to have the same removed, and the chief of police or code enforcement officer shall take possession of such junked vehicle and remove it from the premises. 
(Code 1992, § 7.107)  
Sec. 44-254. - Notice to Texas department of transportation. 
Notice shall be given to the Texas Department of Transportation that a junked vehicle has been impounded within five days after the removal of the junked vehicle as provided in this article, identifying the vehicle or part thereof impounded. 
(Code 1992, § 7.108)  
Sec. 44-255. - Disposition of impounded junked vehicles. 
The chief of police or code enforcement officer shall dispose of all impounded junked vehicles in such manner as the city manager may designate, consistent with state law, provided such vehicle shall not be reconstructed or made operable. Disposal may be by removal or sale, with or without competitive bidding, to a scrap yard or demolisher. 
(Code 1992, § 7.109)  
Sec. 44-256. - Proceeds of disposition of impounded junked vehicles. 
All proceeds of such disposition shall belong to the municipality up to the full amount of its costs in administering the particular case. Additional costs incurred by the city in abatement and removal in a particular case shall be paid for by the person or persons owning the junked vehicle, and if such person is an owner of the premises upon which such junked vehicle is found, the city may affix a lien against such property for its costs, less any proceeds of disposition, in the same manner as provided for in the city's ordinance, if any, requiring the cleanup of weedy lots, refuse and junk. 
(Code 1992, § 7.110)  
Sec. 44-257. - Removal with permission of owner or occupant. 
If, within ten days after receipt of notice from the chief of police or the code enforcement officer to abate the nuisance, as herein provided, the owner or occupant of the premises shall give his/her written permission to the chief of police or the code enforcement officer for removal of the junked vehicle from the premises and shall otherwise cooperate with such removal, the giving of such permission shall be considered compliance with the provisions of the article. 
(Code 1992, § 7.111)  
Secs. 44-258—44-269. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - THROUGH TRUCKS 
 
Sec. 44-270. - Operation of certain vehicles; authority to designate alternate routes. 
(a)  No person shall intentionally or knowingly operate any vehicle with a rated capacity in excess of twenty-six thousand pounds GVWR (26,000) according to the manufacturer's classification upon any public street within the city limits of the City of Fredericksburg, except upon such streets as are designated as Truck Routes. Wherever any street designated as a Truck Route is being repaired or is otherwise temporarily out of use, the Chief of Police of the City of Fredericksburg or his/her designee is authorized to designate alternate Truck Routes for such periods as may be necessary. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Recreational vehicles and personal trailers. As used herein, recreational vehicles means a vehicular portable structure designated for a temporary or short-term occupancy for travel, recreational or vacation uses, including vacation travel trailers, converted buses, tent trailers or similar devices used for temporary portable housing. As used herein, personal trailer means a wheeled device made to be hauled by a personal motor vehicle upon a road or highway, and includes a horse trailer, car trailer, motorcycle trailer, boat trailer, lawn equipment trailer, gooseneck trailer, and any other trailer designed and intended to be used to carry animals, boats, large items, or motor-driven means of transportation. 
(2)  Street construction, maintenance and repair vehicles engaged in the construction, maintenance, or repair of City streets. 
(3)  Vehicles used by public services companies engaged in providing or maintaining their services within the City. 
(4)  Authorized emergency vehicles responding to a catastrophe or emergency calls or otherwise are participating in City of Fredericksburg authorized training, displays, parades or the like. 
(5)  Vehicles used or operated by the City of Fredericksburg performing city business, including transit uses, and including any person, partnership, corporation or other entity which undertakes or contracts to construct any public facilities for the City of Fredericksburg. 
(6)  Vehicles used by the City's franchisee for the franchisee's approved activities. 
(7)  Vehicles operating under a valid permit issued by the state department of highways and public transportation under the provisions of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 623.071. 
(8)  Vehicles being operated as part of a permitted parade or other public festival. 
(9)  Vehicles being operated in accordance with instructions from a police officer of the City of Fredericksburg. 
(c)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section for a defendant to prove that the vehicle, which is the subject of the violation, and which was restricted to the streets or roadways designated as Truck Routes: (1) departed from such Truck Routes because it was necessary to load or unload merchandise at locations situated off designated Truck Routes and that such vehicle left a designated Truck Route at a turning-off point that is the shortest distance practical to the ultimate destination of the vehicle which is consistent with the reasonable operation of the vehicle; or (2) departed from Truck Routes for the purpose of traveling to and from a truck terminal and that such vehicle proceeded by the most direct route practical from the Truck Route to the terminal and that the vehicle did not use streets located in or adjacent to areas zoned R-1, R-2 or R-3 Residential by the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Fredericksburg to reach a truck terminal. In no event will such vehicles departing from a designated Truck Route, under the provisions of this exception, operate on streets or roadways otherwise prohibited for truck travel under any other ordinance of the City of Fredericksburg. 
(d)  No person shall intentionally or knowingly operate a vehicle that falls within the criteria set forth in subsection (a) of this section on any street not designated as a Truck Route without having in his or her possession a log book, delivery slip, or other evidence of a destination point of origin for such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 15-010, art. VIII, § 44-270, 9-19-2005)  
Sec. 44-271. - Designated truck routes. 
The following are hereby designated as Truck Routes within the City limits of the City of Fredericksburg: 
(1)  United States Highway 290 (also known as Main Street). 
(2)  Highway Street. 
(3)  Milam Street (also known as FM 965) north of Main Street. 
(4)  Friendship Lane. 
(5)  State Highway 16 North and South. 
(6)  State Highway 87 North and South. 
(7)  FM 2093 (also known as Tivydale Road). 
(8)  FM 1631 (also known as Cave Creek Road) to the City limits. 
(Ord. No. 15-010, art. VIII, § 44-271, 9-19-2005; Ord. No. 15-012, art. VIII, § 44-271(h), 10-17-2005)  
Chapter 47 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Public utilities generally, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 402.001 et seq.; city has exclusive jurisdiction over all water and sewer utility rates, operations, and services provided by a water and sewer utility, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 13.042; authority to operate water and sewer utility system and prescribe rates, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 402.015. 
 
ARTICLE I. - WATER AND SEWER CONNECTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 25-010, adopted June 1, 2015, amended the title of Art. I to read as set out herein. Formerly, Art. I was titled "In General." 
State Law reference— Water systems in home-rule municipalities, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, § 402.017; municipal jurisdiction over water and sewer utility rates, operations and services, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 13.042(a); municipal power regarding sewers and privies, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.002. 
 
Sec. 47-1. - Tampering with fire hydrants prohibited. 
It is unlawful to turn on, or otherwise tamper with, any city fire hydrant except for the purpose of extinguishing a fire. 
(Code 1992, § 11.101)  
Sec. 47-2. - Tampering with water or sewer works prohibited. 
It is unlawful to injure or in any way tamper with any part of the water or sewer works of the city, including willfully or negligently clogging any sewer drain. 
(Code 1992, § 11.102)  
Sec. 47-3. - Private sewers. 
(a)  A private sewer system shall be understood to mean any sewer system emptying into a septic tank or cesspool. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to construct or build a private sewer system on his/her premises within the corporate limits of the city, if such premises are situated within 200 feet of a public sewer line. 
(c)  No person shall install new plumbing units and tie them into an existing private sewer system in the corporate limits of the city. 
(d)  Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1-6. 
(Code 1992, § 11.103)  
Sec. 47-4. - Meters. 
The City will set a water meter at the premises of each consumer, who has applied and made the required deposit, for the registration of the water used by such consumer, without rental or other charge to the consumer other than the connection fee set forth below. The City will supply water only through its own meters. The City must be notified at least five days in advance of a desired connection. Each meter shall be read at least once a month by an authorized employee of the city, or electronically, for billing purposes. 
(Code 1992, § 11.104; Ord. No. 25-010, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 47-5. - Costs to connect to the city's water and sewer systems. 
(a)  All connections, being defined as the installation of all facilities needed to connect to the City's water or sewer system up to the point of the meter for water and up to the right-of-way for sewer, are required to be performed in accordance with all applicable building and plumbing codes as the same may contain local amendments, and in accordance with any other applicable standards or promulgated requirements of the City of Fredericksburg all as the same may be amended from time to time. Plans for connections must be submitted in advance to the Engineering Department of the City and approved before construction by such department. 
(b)  For all connections, the customer will pay all costs for material and labor for all street bores that may be required by the City's Engineering Department within City streets, and shall perform and pay for all street bores required by the Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT). Additionally, all street cuts and repairs required as a result of connections made shall be made to City standards and specifications (see the City's street use ordinances and applicable permits obtained) or TxDOT standards and specifications as applicable. For City streets, bores, in contrast to street-cuts, will be required under newly constructed streets, in cases of utility conflicts or where it is otherwise preferable due to the physical condition of the street unless specifically waived by the City's Engineering Department. 
(c)  All connections will be installed by persons holding a minimum Class D State of Texas Operator's License for water installations and a minimum Class C State of Texas Operator's License for sewer installations. 
(d)  For all connections, any costs imposed by this Article are in addition to any permit fees required for building inspection. 
(e)  For all connections, the customer's private water cut-off valve shall be placed one foot inside the property line, and shall remain accessible at all times. 
(f)  For all connections, the customer's private sewer clean-out shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the International Plumbing Code and shall be accessible at all times. 
(g)  Connections for properties intended for residential use, not in newly constructed subdivisions or which contain four lots or less, will typically be constructed by City crews. The connection fee will be as set forth in Appendix A. The City reserves the right to hire contractors to perform such work, but the fees will remain as set forth in Appendix A. 
(h)  Connections for properties intended for residential use in newly constructed subdivisions, of more than four lots shall be installed by the owner of the property, at no cost to the City, unless the City otherwise agrees to install such connections and the owner agrees to pay therefor. 
(i)  Connections for properties intended for commercial use shall be installed by the owner of the property at no cost to the City. 
(j)  For all connections that require a six inch or larger sewer connection (typically connections for properties intended for commercial use) a manhole shall be installed at the service connection point. The same shall be installed by the owner of the property at no cost to the City. 
(Ord. No. 25-010, 6-1-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 25-010, adopted June 1, 2015, repealed the former § 47-5, and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former § 47-5 pertained to customer to pay installation costs and derived from Code 1992, § 11.105.  
Sec. 47-6. - Fire suppression. 
(a)  All fire suppression water lines and fixtures, as defined and required by the International Fire Code, shall be installed, maintained and repaired by the property owner at no cost to the City. Installation shall meet all City and International Fire Code specifications. 
(b)  All internal fire suppression systems as required by the International Fire Code, or if desired by an owner shall be installed, maintained and repaired by the property owner at no cost to the City. Installation shall meet all City and International Fire Code specifications. 
(Ord. No. 25-010, 6-1-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 25-010, adopted June 1, 2015, repealed the former § 47-6, and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former § 47-6 pertained to charge for connection to water system and derived from Code 1992, § 11.106.  
Sec. 47-6.1. - Tampering prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall tamper with the City's water and sewer system facilities, including meters. 
(b)  No person shall take or utilize water from a service connection not installed for the property upon which it is utilized without specific permission from the City. 
(c)  All damages incurred by the City or by the City's customers, including but not limited to water loss, the cost to repair damage and the cost of damage caused to affected properties shall be paid by the person who does the damage or who is responsible for the same. This requirement is in addition to the general penalties for ordinance violation as are set forth in Section 1-6 of this Code of Ordinances. Additionally, the City shall treat a tampering incident as a service cut off and a reconnect fee, and any applicable deposit, will be required prior to restoration of service. 
(Ord. No. 25-010, 6-1-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 25-010, adopted June 1, 2015, set out provisions intended for use as § 47-7. Inasmuch as said section already exists, and at the city's request, these provisions have been included as a new § 47-6.1.  
Sec. 47-6.2. - How costs are to be paid. 
All costs to connect to the city's water and sewer system shall be paid prior to the connection of water or sewer service to the property to be served. The City's Director of Public Works and Utilities shall have the authority to allow such costs to be paid over no more than the first three billing cycles in cases of hardship. 
(Ord. No. 25-010, 6-1-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 25-010, adopted June 1, 2015, set out provisions intended for use as § 47-8. Inasmuch as said section already exists, and at the city's request, these provisions have been included as a new § 47-6.2.  
Sec. 47-6.3. - Reconnection fee for service cut off. 
(a)  The City may discontinue water and/or sewer service to any property for non-payment of fees, monthly billings, non-compliance with any ordinance requirement, in case of emergency or to repair the system. The City shall not be liable for any damages caused due to interruption of or discontinuation of service, either temporarily or permanently. 
(b)  A reconnection fee, as set forth in Appendix A of this Code of Ordinances shall be paid prior to reconnection of service. 
(Ord. No. 25-010, 6-1-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 25-010, adopted June 1, 2015, set out provisions intended for use as § 47-9. Inasmuch as said section already exists, and at the city's request, these provisions have been included as a new § 47-6.3.  
Sec. 47-7. - Deposits. 
Deposits shall be required, paid and refunded in accordance with the provisions of Appendix A. 
(Ord. No. 23-015, 9-16-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 23-015, adopted Sept. 16, 2013, amended § 47-7 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 47-7 pertained to deposit required, and derived from Code 1992, § 11.107.  
Sec. 47-8. - Water rates. 
The owner or occupant of each residence, commercial business or apartment or other building or unit shall be charged for water service for each month at rates as set forth in the Fee Schedule found in Appendix A to this Code. The reading dates, billing dates, due dates, late charge dates, disconnection dates and other utility billing-related dates shall be the same as those provided for the City's Electric Utility as provided for in section 47-235 of this Code. 
(Code 1992, § 11.108; Ord. No. 22-021, 8-6-2012) 
State Law reference— Authority to operate water and sewer utility system and prescribe rates, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 402.015.  
Sec. 47-9. - Sewer rates. 
The owner or occupant of each residence, commercial business or apartment or other building or unit shall be charged for sewer service for each month at rates as set forth in the Fee Schedule found in Appendix A to this Code. The reading dates, billing dates, due dates, late charge dates, disconnection dates and other utility billing-related dates shall be the same as those provided for the City's Electric Utility as provided for in section 47-235 of this Code. 
(Code 1992, § 11.109; Ord. No. 22-021, 8-6-2012)  
Sec. 47-10. - Free service prohibited. 
No free service shall be rendered by the waterworks and/or sewer system to any customer, including the city and its various departments. 
(Code 1992, § 11.110)  
Sec. 47-11. - Billing; disconnection of service for nonpayment; reconnection fee. 
Billing shall be in accordance with Appendix A. 
(Code 1992, § 11.111; Ord. No. 23-015, 9-16-2013)  
Sec. 47-12. - Reclaimed and bulk potable water service. 
(a)  The City of Fredericksburg will sell potable bulk water and Type I Wastewater effluent (reclaimed water) to any person or entity within or without the City Limits of the City of Fredericksburg, provided that the provision of the same is not to be considered an essential or guaranteed service of the City's Water Utility Service. The City's Director of Utilities or his or her designee (Director), shall determine in his or her sole discretion whether such water is available for sale and the amount of such water which is available for sale at any time. 
(b)  Priority of use: City of Fredericksburg water system customers and other contracted uses have priority over Reclaimed or Bulk potable water customers. After such prior uses, and any other public uses deemed advisable by the Director, the Director shall equitably determine allocations. All usage allocated to each customer and any cutbacks therein by the Director in his/her determination is final. 
(c)  Reclaimed and Bulk water customers shall be responsible for providing receptacles, approved by the Director for such service. The same shall be utilized in accordance with the City's specifications, and the same shall be subject to inspection prior to connection to the City's system or delivery of water. The City is not responsible for determining the condition of receptacles or the presence of contaminants in the same. 
(d)  All Reclaimed water customers of the City are responsible for testing the water received by them to determine if it is suitable for their own purposes at all times. By use of the reclaimed water, all customers understand that the quality of the water and its contents may continually change. The City is not liable for any damages, loss of life or any other thing as a consequence of the provision of reclaimed water. 
(e)  No reclaimed or effluent water may be returned or added to the City's system without approval of the Director. 
(f)  Rates: Each Reclaimed and Bulk potable water on demand customer shall pay for Reclaimed or Bulk potable water at the rates set forth in the fee schedule found in appendix A to this Code. All Reclaimed and Bulk water customers shall be charged for such water service for each month. Failure to pay such rates in a timely manner shall be treated the same as other unpaid City utility bills as set forth in Section 47-11 of this Code of Ordinances. Additionally, the City may refuse to sell additional Reclaimed or Bulk potable water to any customer with an unpaid bill. 
(g)  This on demand reclaimed and bulk potable water service requires no continuing contract with the City, and does not affect reclaimed or bulk water sales provided by the City in connection with contracts approved by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 24-009, 7-7-2014)  
Secs. 47-13—47-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER CONSERVATION MEASURES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 24-002, Att., adopted April 7, 2014, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 47-41—47-50, 47-74—47-80, 47-104, 47-105, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 10-012, §§ I—XII, adopted Aug. 7, 2000; Ord. No. 14-008, §§ 11.201, 11.202, 11.205, adopted June 7, 2004; Ord. No. 19-007, § 47-76(c)(4), adopted June 1, 2009; Ord. No. 21-006, adopted June 20, 2011; Ord. No. 21-007, adopted July 18, 2011; and Ord. No. 22-017, adopted July 16, 2012. 
State Law reference— Public water suppliers required by rule to develop drought contingency plans, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 11.1272; drought contingency plans for municipal uses by public water suppliers, 30 Tex. Admin. Code § 288.20. 
 
Sec. 47-41. - Declaration of policy, purpose, and intent. 
(a)  In order to conserve the available water supply and protect the integrity of water supply facilities, with particular regard for Domestic Water Use, sanitation, and fire protection, and to protect and preserve public health, welfare, and safety and minimize the adverse impacts of water supply shortage or other water supply emergency conditions, the City of Fredericksburg hereby adopts the regulations and restrictions of this article on the delivery and consumption of water. 
(b)  Water uses regulated or prohibited under this Chapter are considered to be non-essential and continuation of such uses during times of water shortage or other emergency water supply condition are deemed to constitute a waste of water which subjects the offender(s) to penalties as defined in section 47-54 of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 24-002, Att., 4-7-2014)  
Sec. 47-42. - Authorization. 
The City Manager of the City of Fredericksburg, is hereby authorized to implement by proclamation, or terminate, any phase of this Drought Contingency Plan (DCP). The decision to implement or terminate any phase of the DCP by the City Manager, may be overturned by a majority vote of the City Council of the City of Fredericksburg at any regular or special meeting of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 24-002, Att., 4-7-2014)  
Sec. 47-43. - Application. 
The provisions of this Article shall apply to all utility customers of the City of Fredericksburg (including water and/or sewer utility customers outside of the City Limits of the City), owners and occupants of property within the City limits of the City of Fredericksburg and any person or entity utilizing water in City of Fredericksburg including those persons or entities owning, having or using water wells within the City Limits not connected to the city Utility system. 
(Ord. No. 24-002, Att., 4-7-2014)  
Sec. 47-44. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aesthetic Water Use. Water use for ornamental or decorative purposes such as fountains, reflecting pools, and water gardens. 
Average Daily Water Demand. The average use of water in a single day expressed in gallons per day calculated by dividing the total volume of water in gallons delivered to the City's water distribution system over a one year period by 365 days. 
Buckets. Containers of not more than five gallon capacity. 
City Manager. Means City Manager of the City of Fredericksburg, and includes his or her designee. 
Commercial and Institutional Water Use. Water use which is integral to the operations of commercial or manufacturing establishments and governmental entities such as retail establishments, hotels and motels, restaurants, and office buildings. 
Conservation. Those practices, techniques, and technologies that reduce the consumption of water so that a supply is conserved and made available for future use. 
Customer. Any person, company, or organization using water supplied by the City of Fredericksburg. 
Domestic Water Use. Water use for personal needs or for household or sanitary purposes such as drinking, bathing, heating, cooking, sanitation, washing clothes, or for cleaning the interior of a residence, business, industry, or institution. 
Drip Irrigation. Means a low volume irrigation system that applies water in gallons per hour and saves water by applying water at low-flow levels directly to the soil and the plant's root zone. Such systems include, but are not limited to, soaker hoses or drip tape hoses which do not exceed one-half inch in diameter. 
Hand-Held. Means used or operated while being held in the hand or hands. 
Hose. Means a common residential garden hose not more than one inch in diameter which includes a positive cut-off nozzle. 
Impervious Surface. Means patios, pathways and other areas where firm footing is desired, constructed in such a way that does not allow water to penetrate the ground. Examples include, but are not limited to, concrete slabs patios, sidewalks, and driveways, asphalt streets or pavers set with mortar. 
Irrigation System. Means any water delivery system which delivers water to grass, trees, plants, or any other landscape, whether on a set schedule or not. 
Landscape Irrigation Use. Water used for the irrigation and maintenance of landscaped areas, whether publicly or privately owned, including residential and commercial lawns, gardens, trees, shrubs, golf courses, parks, and rights-of-way and medians. 
Low-Flow. Emission device flow rates that are typically measured in gallons per hour (GPH). 
Maximum Daily Water Demand. The largest volume of water in gallons delivered to the City's water distribution system in a single day in the preceding 365 days expressed in gallons per day. 
Non-Essential Water Use. Water uses that are not essential or required for the protection of public health, safety, and welfare, including: 
(1)  Irrigation of landscaped areas, including parks, athletic fields, common areas and golf courses except with the use of reclaimed or effluent water by separate contract with the City of Fredericksburg. 
(2)  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle in Stages 1 through 4; 
(3)  Use of water to wash down any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts or other hard-surfaced areas; 
(4)  Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire protection; 
(5)  Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street; 
(6)  Use of water to fill, refill or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools or jacuzzi type pools; 
(7)  Use of water in a fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes except where necessary to support aquatic life without a variance; 
(8)  Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having been given notice directing the repair of such leak(s); and 
(9)  Use of water from hydrants for construction purposes or any other purposes other than fire-fighting and flushing of lines to maintain a potable water supply. 
Outdoor Irrigation. Means supplying water to outdoor areas by any means. Outdoor irrigation may be accomplished only with water from the service/meter on the lot or parcel being irrigated. Wells shall be used to supply water only to the lot or parcel on which they exist. 
Person. Means any individual, corporation (including a governmental corporation organization, state or federal governmental subdivision or agency, political subdivision of a state, interstate agency or body), business, trust, partnership, association, firm, company, joint venture, commission or any other entity. 
Rain Sensor. Means a device designed to stop the flow of water to an Irrigation System when rainfall or moisture has been detected. Devices referred to as soil moisture sensor, relative humidity sensor or rain sensor shall qualify as a Rain Sensor for the purposes of this Article. 
Waste of Water. Means failing to repair a controllable leak, including a broken sprinkler head, a leaking valve, leaking or broken pipes or a leaking faucet. It also includes the following: 
(1)  Operating a permanently installed irrigation system with: 
(a)  a broken head, 
(b)  a head that is out of adjustment where the arc of the spray head is over a street, parking area, or other impervious surface or 
(c)  a head that is misting due to high water pressure, 
(2)  During irrigation: 
(a)  allowing water to run off a property such that there is a trail of water running in a street, parking area, or other impervious surface for a distance of 50 feet or greater or 
(b)  allowing water to pond to a depth greater than one-quarter of an inch in a street, parking area, or other impervious surface. 
Watering Devices. Wherever in this ordinance reference is made to outdoor irrigation, it shall mean any device used for the conveyance of water for the purpose of watering and shall include in any such definition, without limitation, irrigation systems, soaker hoses, drip irrigation or any hose that is hand-held, hand-used whether the same has a nozzle, sprayer, sprinkler device or none. All such devices shall be used only during the days and hours authorized by this Article. 
Well Owners. Any person, company or organization using water supplied by a water well located within the city limits of the City of Fredericksburg. Any reference to "Customer" in this division shall also refer to and be applicable to well owners, except where the requirement or prohibition cannot be applicable to well users. All water use restrictions set out in this division shall apply to those using water supplied by a well located within the City of Fredericksburg. 
(Ord. No. 24-002, Att., 4-7-2014)  
Sec. 47-45. - Permanent requirements and exemptions. 
(a)  The regulations of this Chapter shall apply to all utility customers of the City of Fredericksburg (including water and/or sewer utility customers outside of the City Limits of the City), owners and occupants of property within the City limits of the City of Fredericksburg and any person or entity utilizing water in City of Fredericksburg including those persons or entities owning, having or using water wells within the City Limits not connected to the city Utility system. 
(b)  The restrictions set forth in this Chapter shall not apply to the following uses of water: 
(1)  To alleviate conditions threatening health, safety or welfare of the public; 
(2)  For municipal operations of flushing water lines and fire lines for public health purposes; 
(3)  For the suppression of fires; 
(4)  For watering grass or plants using effluent or reclaimed water under a contract or purchase from the City; and 
(5)  For watering grass and other landscaping at City-owned or operated parks and recreation areas which may occur on any day of the week not exceeding three days per week during the hours of 7:00 p.m. to 11:00 a.m. the following day. Watering between 7:00 p.m. to 11:00 a.m. the following say shall be considered one day. All other restriction of this ordinance [article] will apply to such watering. 
(c)  Except as may be modified in a particular Drought Response Stage, Outdoor Irrigation, including Drip Irrigation, hand held watering and watering with buckets is permitted on any day only between the hours of 5:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 [p.m.] to 11:00 p.m. This provision shall be effective during the calendar months of June, July, August and September of each calendar year regardless of whether any other requirements of drought response stages are in force. 
(d)  All Irrigation Systems shall have a Rain Sensor as part of the system, and the same shall be maintained and operational at all times. This section shall apply to all Irrigation Systems completed after June 21, 2004. 
(e)  Wasting water is prohibited at all times. 
(f)  Except as may be modified in a particular Drought Response Stage, all Aesthetic Water Use is permissible at any stage of drought except that outdoor commercial fountains must have a variance in order to operate during drought stages 4 and 5. 
(Ord. No. 24-002, Att., 4-7-2014; Ord. No. 26-003, 4-18-2016)  
Sec. 47-46. - Other restrictions effective upon declaration. 
The restrictions upon water usage provided in sections 47-48 through 47-52 shall become effective upon declaration by the City Manager of the Drought Response Stage being activated and shall be effective from and after the date provided for in such declaration by the City Manager. Such restrictions shall continue in force until repeal of same by subsequent declaration of the City Manager. Any declaration by the City Manager shall be conclusive of a determination of the existence of a danger to the City's water system. The City Manager's declaration and the measures implemented shall be in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 24-002, Att., 4-7-2014)  
Sec. 47-47. - Triggering criteria for initiation and termination of drought response stages. 
(a)  The City Manager shall monitor water supply and/or demand conditions shall determine when conditions warrant initiation or termination of each Drought Response Stage, and shall issue a proclamation initiating the appropriate stage. Public notification of the initiation or termination of Drought Response Stages shall be posted on the City's Website which shall serve as the official notification, and other public notification may be by means of direct mail, radio ads, publication in a newspaper of general circulation, direct mail to each customer, signs posted in public places, etc. All Drought Response Stage requirements are in addition to those set forth in section 47-45 above. 
(b)  There are five Drought Response Stages for the City of Fredericksburg: 
Stage 1 - Mild Water Shortage 
Stage 2 - Moderate Water Shortage 
Stage 3 - Severe Water Shortage 
Stage 4 - Critical Water Shortage 
Stage 5 - Emergency Water Shortage 
Each stage will be triggered and terminated based upon the City Manager's evaluation of the severity of three criteria: 1) on the Local Drought Index, 2) on high service pumping capacity for pumps that transfer water from the City's well fields or other sources to its distribution system and 3) on the decrease in well field production capacity. 
Various stages are triggered based on the stage of the Local Drought Index, the percentage of time the well fields are being pumped to provide water supply and the loss of pumping capacity from the high service pump stations. The Local Drought Index is comprised of four data points: 1) the average water levels from the two City wells where heaviest pumpage occurs for municipal and irrigation demands, 2) average daily flow from the Pedernales River measured from a consistent designated gauging station, 3) the prior ten-month cumulative rainfall amounts recorded by the City at Lady Bird Johnson Park, and 4) the Palmer Hydrological Drought Index for the Edwards Plateau. The Index values, and generally corresponding, Drought Response Stages are: 
Local Drought Index 	Drought Stage 
-1 	Stage 1 — Mild 
-2 	Stage 2 — Moderate 
-3 	Stage 3 — Severe 
-4 	Stage 4 — Critical 
-5 	Stage 5 — Emergency 
 
A detailed description of the requirements of each Drought Response Stage is below. 
(Ord. No. 24-002, Att., 4-7-2014)  
Sec. 47-48. - Stage 1—Mild water shortage. 
(a)  When required: The requirements of Stage 1 are automatically effective without City Manager Proclamation between June 1 and September 30 of each year, and are voluntary the remainder of the year unless specifically proclaimed by the City Manager. 
(b)  Goal: Five percent reduction in Average Daily Water Demand or ten percent reduction in the Maximum Daily Water Demand. 
(c)  Requirements: Outdoor Irrigation may occur only between the hours of 5:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m. The day of week restrictions do not apply to the irrigation of commercial plant nurseries; however, these establishments shall curtail all Nonessential water use. 
(Ord. No. 24-002, Att., 4-7-2014)  
Sec. 47-49. - Stage 2—Moderate water shortage. 
(a)  When required: When the City Manager determines that Stage 1 conditions and commensurate water reduction goals have not been met or that the reductions in use are not otherwise sufficient based upon the criteria described above. 
(b)  Goal: Ten percent reduction in the Average Daily Water Demand or 20 percent reduction in the Maximum Daily Water Demand. 
(c)  Requirements: 
(1)  All requirements of Stage 1 shall remain in effect during Stage 2 except as set forth in this Section. 
(2)  Outdoor Irrigation may occur only between the hours of 5:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m. on the schedule below based on the last digit of the street address: 
a.  1 or 2 the irrigation day is Monday and Saturday 
b.  3 or 4 the irrigation day is Tuesday and Saturday 
c.  5 or 6 the irrigation day is Wednesday and Sunday 
d.  7 or 8 the irrigation day is Thursday and Sunday 
e.  9 or 0 the irrigation day is Friday and Sunday 
The day of week restrictions do not apply to the irrigation of commercial plant nurseries; however, these establishments shall curtail all Nonessential water use. 
(3)  Washing impervious cover such as parking areas, driveways, streets, sidewalks, tennis courts, patios, or other paved areas, except to alleviate immediate health or fire hazards is prohibited. 
(4)  The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes and other types of mobile equipment is prohibited except such washing may occur on residentially zoned properties once per week on Saturday or Sunday as long as there is no water waste, and further except the washing of vehicles or mobile equipment when conducted on the immediate premises of a commercial carwash or a commercial service station. Furthermore, this restriction does not apply to the washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes and other types of mobile equipment (such as garbage trucks and vehicles to transport food and perishables) when the washing is necessary on a more regular and frequent basis in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. Charity carwashes are prohibited. 
The washing, when allowed, must be done with a hand-held bucket or hand-held hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle for quick rinses. The washing of each individual automobile, truck, trailer, boat, airplane or any other type of mobile equipment in violation of the terms and conditions of this restriction constitutes a separate violation under this article. 
(Ord. No. 24-002, Att., 4-7-2014)  
Sec. 47-50. - Stage 3—Severe water shortage. 
(a)  When required: When the City manager determines that Stage 2 conditions and commensurate water reduction goals have not been met or that the reductions in use are not otherwise sufficient based upon the criteria described above. 
(b)  Goal: Fifteen percent reduction in the Average Daily Water Demand or 25 percent reduction in the Maximum Daily Water Demand. 
(c)  Requirements: 
(1)  All requirements of previous stages shall remain in effect during Stage 3 except as set forth in this section. 
(2)  Outdoor Irrigation may occur only between the hours of 5:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m. on the following schedule below based on the last digit of the street address: 
a.  1 or 2 the irrigation day is Monday. 
b.  3 or 4 the irrigation day is Tuesday. 
c.  5 or 6 the irrigation day is Wednesday. 
d.  7 or 8 the irrigation day is Thursday. 
e.  9 or 0 the irrigation day is Friday. 
The day of week restrictions do not apply to the irrigation of commercial plant nurseries; however, these establishments shall curtail all nonessential water use. 
(3)  The watering of the ground around foundations to prevent foundation cracking is permitted only during times designated for Outdoor Irrigation except when watering to protect foundations is accomplished by a drip irrigation system or a hand-held hose. A drip irrigation system or hand-held hose may be used to water the ground around foundations to prevent foundation cracking at any time. 
(4)  Hotels, motels and other lodging must institute, offer and clearly notify guests of a "linen/towel change on request only" program. 
(Ord. No. 24-002, Att., 4-7-2014)  
Sec. 47-51. - Stage 4—Critical water shortage. 
(a)  When required: When the City manager determines that Stage 3 conditions and commensurate water reduction goals have not been met or that the reductions in use are not otherwise sufficient based upon the criteria described above. 
(b)  Goal: Twenty percent reduction in the Average Daily Water Demand or 40 percent reduction in the Maximum Daily Water Demand. 
(c)  Requirements: 
(1)  All requirements of stage 3 shall remain in effect during stage 4 except as set forth in this section. 
(2)  All Outdoor Irrigation may occur only by any approved watering method between the hours of 7:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m. on the following schedule below based on the last digit of the street address: 
a.  1 or 2 the irrigation day is Monday 
b.  3 or 4 the irrigation day is Tuesday 
c.  5 or 6 the irrigation day is Wednesday 
d.  7 or 8 the irrigation day is Thursday 
e.  9 or 0 the irrigation day is Friday 
The day of week restrictions do not apply to the irrigation of commercial plant nurseries; however, these establishments shall curtail all nonessential water use. 
(3)  Outdoor Irrigation by means of Drip Irrigation, watering with a Handheld Hose or by Buckets may be prohibited, at the discretion of the City Manager if specifically included in his or her declaration. 
(4)  City council may implement further water rationing. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, Fredericksburg City Council may implement a water rationing program if the above actions do not achieve the water reduction goals. The rationing program shall contain specific reduction amounts for each customer class. By way of example, but not by way of limitation, water use for each customer class could be limited as follows: 
Single-family residential customers and master-metered multi-family residential customers: to one-half (or other percentage) of the customer's average usage for corresponding month's billing period for the previous 12 months, or to one-half (or other percentage) of the average residential customer's use for such month. 
Commercial and industrial customers: to 75 percent (or other percentage) of the customer's average usage for corresponding month's billing period for the previous 12 months, or to 75 percent (or other percentage) of the average commercial customer's use for similar businesses for such month. 
(5)  City council may institute water surcharges. 
The City Council may institute in addition or as an alternative to the limitation on water usage described above water surcharges for usage over allocated customer class amounts. Surcharges could be added to customers' bills where usage is more than allocated amounts and shall be cumulative. 
(6)  The filling or refilling of water in privately owned swimming, wading and jacuzzi-type pools is prohibited. Water may be added to pools to replace water lost due to use or evaporation on designated outdoor water use days. 
(7)  The watering of golf course tees and fairways is prohibited unless the golf course utilizes treated wastewater effluent or other water sources than provided by the City of Fredericksburg potable water system. 
(8)  Bulk sales. Bulk sales of water for purposes other than potable consumption and sanitation are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 24-002, Att., 4-7-2014)  
Sec. 47-52. - Stage 5—Emergency water shortage. 
(a)  When required: When the City manager determines that Stage 4 conditions and commensurate water reduction goals have not been met or that the reductions in use are not otherwise sufficient based upon the criteria described above. 
(b)  Goal: Thirty-five percent reduction in the Average Daily Water Demand or 50 percent reduction in the Maximum Daily Water Demand. 
(c)  Requirements: 
(1)  All requirements of stage 4 shall remain in effect during stage 5 except as set forth in this section. The City Manager shall implement one or more of the following water use restrictions: 
(2)  All Outdoor Irrigation, including Drip Irrigation, Hand Held watering and watering with buckets is prohibited at all times. 
(3)  Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle is prohibited at all times. 
(4)  The filling, refilling or adding of potable water to private swimming, wading or Jacuzzi-type pools is prohibited. 
(5)  Aesthetic water use is prohibited. 
(6)  Non-essential water use is prohibited. 
(7)  No applications for new, additional, expanded or increase-in-size water service connections, meters, service lines, pipeline extensions, mains or water service facilities of any kind shall be allowed or approved. 
(8)  In the event of system failure or contamination, the City Manager will manage the City of Fredericksburg limited water supply by requiring such measures as are necessary to maintain public health and safety, including elimination of service to part or all of the water system. 
(Ord. No. 24-002, Att., 4-7-2014)  
Sec. 47-53. - Variances. 
(a)  A review committee may be established annually or as needed by the City Manager. The review committee will be appointed by the City Manager to review hardship and special cases that cannot strictly comply with this Article to determine whether the cases warrant a variance. 
(b)  The review committee shall make its determination no later than the fifth working day after receipt of a request: A variance may be for a period of no longer than one year, subject to the provisions of (e) below, and granted only for reasons of economic hardship. In this section, economic hardship means a threat to an individual's or business' primary source of income, new construction or the like. Inconvenience or the potential for damage to an individual's or business' landscaping, including newly planted lawns may be classified as an economic hardship only under stages 1 through 3. For newly planted lawns, the committee shall use the following watering schedule for new landscape. Watering of newly seeded or sodded lawns or newly planted trees, shrubs or landscape plants will be allowed no more frequently than on the following schedule: 
(1)  Days 1—14 from planting: three times per day every day of such period at any time of day. 
(2)  Days 15—28 from planting: twice per day every day of such period at any time of day. 
(c)  Until the review committee has acted on an application, the applicant must comply with all provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  If the review committee determines that there is an economic hardship or other valid reason for a variance, the committee shall authorize the implementation of equitable water use restrictions by the applicant that further the purposes of this Article. The special water use restrictions authorized by the committee in each special or hardship case must be set forth on the face of the variance. If the variance is granted, the applicant must keep a notice of the variance in a location that is visible to the public. 
(e)  A variance issued by the review committee under one Stage of the restrictions becomes invalid on implementation of a subsequent, more restrictive, stage. A variance expires according to its own terms and conditions or when a more restrictive stage of the restrictions becomes effective, whichever is later. A single variance may be granted with separate conditions applicable to separate stages, and/or with a set expiration date. 
(f)  Any person or entity that is issued a variance must provide proof of the variance on demand by any peace officer, code enforcement officer or other person authorized by the City to enforce this article. On conviction of a recipient of a variance for violating any provision of this Article, the review committee may revoke any variance previously granted. The committee shall notify the recipient of the proposed revocation five working days before taking the action, and a recipient must be given the opportunity to be heard by the committee before it takes action. 
(Ord. No. 24-002, Att., 4-7-2014)  
Sec. 47-54. - Enforcement. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to criminally negligently violate or cause or permit another person or entity to violate any restrictions or provisions of this article. Any person or entity who violates any of said restrictions or provisions shall be subject to penalties as provided in section 1-6 of this Code of Ordinances for health and safety violations. 
(b)  Each day that one or more of the provisions in this Article is violated shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  If a person is convicted of three or more distinct violations of this Article, the City Manager, shall, upon due notice to the customer, be authorized to discontinue water service to the premises where such violations occur. Services discontinued under such circumstances shall be restored only upon payment of a reconnection charge, hereby established at $200.00, and any other costs incurred by the City of Fredericksburg in discontinuing or reestablishing service. In addition, suitable assurance must be given to the City Manager that the same action shall not be repeated. 
(d)  Alternatively, a billing surcharge of 25 percent of the amount of the bill for the month in which violation occurred will be added to the total bill provided for the property upon which the violation occurred but shall not exceed the maximum amount of fines allowable under section (a) above. The City Manager shall provide notice of violation to the City Water utility customer upon whose premises the violation occurred to the name and address listed on the water customer list of the City. Such customer shall have ten days to present evidence contrary to the existence of a violation to the City Manager, and all determinations of the existence or nonexistence of a violation by the City Manager will be conclusive. 
(e)  Any person or entity who or which is convicted of violating this Article, or to whom or to which a surcharge has been charged more than two times in one calendar year shall be fined by the court or charged on the next ensuing utility bill, as applicable, not less than $250.00 or one-half of the maximum fine or surcharge (subject to the limitation stated above) for any subsequent offense, whichever is higher. 
(f)  Any person, including a person who is the customer for City water utility billing, in apparent control of the property where a violation occurs or originates shall be rebuttably presumed to be responsible for compliance with the provisions of this Article; Parents shall be presumed to be responsible for violations of their minor children; and proof that a violation committed by a child occurred on property within the parents' control shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the parent committed the violation, but it is a defense to conviction if such parent proves that he/she had previously directed the child not to use the water as it was used in violation of this Article, and that the parent could not have reasonably known of the violation. 
For the purposes hereof, the person, persons, or entities shown on the Tax Appraisal Rolls of the Gillespie County Central Appraisal District shall be rebuttably presumed to be the owner of the property in his, her or its name and shall be responsible for compliance with the provisions of this Article. The registered agent, according to the records of the Secretary of State of the State of Texas, or other state of incorporation, shall be responsible for compliance with the provisions of this Article for all entities registered with the Secretary of State of the State of Texas or other state of incorporation. 
(g)  Compliance with this Article may also be sought through injunctive relief in the district court. 
(h)  Specific notice from the City to any such person or entity is not required prior to enforcement, and the giving of such notice in any particular case shall not waive this provision. 
(i)  Any code enforcement officer or police officer of the City of Fredericksburg may issue a citation to and/or charge a person he/she reasonably believes to be in violation of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 24-002, Att., 4-7-2014)  
Secs. 47-55—47-123. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - WELL DRILLING 
 
Sec. 47-124. - Permit required. 
No person shall drill a well for water within the city limits without having first obtained a permit from the building official. No person shall drill a well and a permit shall not be issued for a water well within the city limits, if City of Fredericksburg water is available within 200 feet of the property containing the proposed well site. 
(Code 1992, § 11.301; Ord. No. 13-007, § 11.301, 8-4-2003)  
Sec. 47-125. - Application for permit. 
(a)  An application for permit shall be filed with the building official, accompanied by a fee of $25.00 and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name of the owners of the premises and property description. 
(2)  The location of the well in relation to the property line. 
(3)  What buildings, if any, to be constructed. 
(b)  The permit issued shall be for the specific property described in the permit only and the resultant well shall not be used to service any other property. 
(c)  In the event city water becomes available, the property served by the well shall be connected to the city water system within ten years following the availability of water to the property for which the permit was issued. 
(Code 1992, § 11.302; Ord. No. 13-007, § 11.302, 8-4-2003)  
Sec. 47-126. - Building inspector to determine issuance of permit. 
If the building inspector determines that the application and the proposed well complies with this code and all applicable city regulations, he/she shall authorize issuance of the permit. The building inspector may deny a permit if the city agrees to install water lines to reach 200 feet from the property. 
(Code 1992, § 11.303)  
Sec. 47-127. - Building located over well to comply with zoning ordinance. 
Any well drilled or dug in the city shall be located on the lot so that any building erected over the well or to be used in connection therewith can be constructed to comply with the provisions of the zoning ordinance regulating the location of buildings. 
(Code 1992, § 11.304)  
Sec. 47-128. - Private lines not to be connected to public lines. 
Water lines connected to a private source of supply shall not be installed to connect with water lines supplying water from the city municipal water system. 
(Code 1992, § 11.305)  
Sec. 47-129. - Lines to be inspected before covered. 
Water lines connected to a private source of supply shall not be covered or concealed until the same shall have been inspected and accepted by the city plumbing inspector, such inspections to be called for and paid for in accordance with the provisions of the city plumbing code. 
(Code 1992, § 11.306)  
Secs. 47-130—47-156. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - INDUSTRIAL WASTE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Local government authority to control waste discharges and require pretreatment, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 26.176; water pollution control and abatement, city authority, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 26.177. 
 
Sec. 47-157. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abnormal industrial wastewater. Any wastewater discharged into sanitary sewers and in which the average concentration of total suspended solids (TSS) is greater than 250 mg/l and/or the biochemical oxygen demand (B.O.D.) is greater than 250 mg/l. 
Approving authority. The city utilities manager or his/her duly authorized representative. 
B.O.D. (Biochemical Oxygen Demand). The quantity of oxygen by weight, expressed in mg/l, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five days at a temperature of 20 degrees centigrade. 
Building sewer. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal (also called house lateral and house connection). 
City. The City of Fredericksburg, Texas, or any authorized person acting in its behalf. 
C.O.D. (Chemical Oxygen Demand). Measure of the oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in the water or wastewater expressed in mg/l as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test, but not differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter and thus not necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand. 
Control manhole. A manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point before the building sewer discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
Control point. A point of access to a course of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer. 
Garbage. Animal and vegetable wastes and residue from preparation, cooking and dispensing of food; and from the handling, processing, storage and sale of food products and produce. 
Industrial waste. Waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade, or business from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of the waste with water or normal wastewater, or distinct from normal wastewater. 
Milligrams per liter (mg/l). The same as parts per million and is a weight-to-volume ratio; the milligram-per-liter value multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
Natural outlet. Any outlet, not man-made, into a watercourse, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
Normal domestic wastewater. Wastewater excluding industrial wastewater discharged by a person into sanitary sewers and in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than 250 mg/l and B.O.D. is not more than 250 mg/l. 
Overload. The imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered design capacity. 
Person. Includes corporation, organization, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership association, and any other legal entity. 
pH. The reciprocal of the logarithm (base 10) of the hydrogen ion concentration expressed in grams per liter. 
Public sewer. Pipe or conduit carrying wastewater or unpolluted drainage in which owners of other properties shall have the use, subject to control by the City of Fredericksburg. 
Sanitary sewer. A public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which storm water, surface water, ground water, and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed. 
Slug. Any discharge of water, wastewater, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24 hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
Standard methods. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of "standard methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" as prepared, approved, and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation. 
Storm sewer. A public sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage and into which domestic wastewater or industrial wastes are not intentionally passed. 
Storm water. Rainfall or any other forms of precipitation. 
Superintendent. The water and wastewater superintendent of the City of Fredericksburg or his/her duly authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
Surcharge. The additional sewerage service charge levied against any person for discharging abnormal industrial waste into a sanitary sewer. This charge is intended to defray the added cost of sampling, testing, transporting and treating abnormal industrial waste. This charge shall be in addition to the usual monthly charge for sanitary sewer service. 
Suspended solids. Solids measured in mg/l that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration device. 
To discharge. To deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep, or otherwise release or dispose of, or to allow, permit, or suffer any of these acts or omissions. 
Trap. A device designed to skim, settle, or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes or other harmful substances. 
Unpolluted wastewater. Water containing: 
(1)  No free or emulsified grease or oil; 
(2)  No acids or alkalis; 
(3)  No phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in receiving water; 
(4)  No toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state, or solution; 
(5)  No noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases; 
(6)  Not more than ten mg/l each of suspended solids and B.O.S.; and 
(7)  Color not exceeding 50 units as measured by the platinum-cobalt method of determination as specified in standard methods. 
Waste. Rejected, unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous, or solid form resulting from domestic, agricultural, or industrial activities. 
Wastewater. A combination of the water-carried waste from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with any ground, surface, and storm water that may be present. 
Wastewater facilities. All facilities for collection, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater and industrial wastes. 
Wastewater service charge. The charge on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the concentration values established as representatives of normal wastewater. 
Wastewater treatment plant. Any city-owned facilities, devices, and structures used for receiving, processing and treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludges from the sanitary sewers. 
Watercourse. A natural or man-made channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1992, § 11.501)  
Sec. 47-158. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a)  No person may discharge to public sewers any waste which by itself or by interaction with other wastes may: 
(1)  Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes or facilities; 
(2)  Constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or 
(3)  Create a hazard in receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant effluent. 
(b)  All discharges shall conform to requirements of this section. 
(Code 1992, § 11.502)  
Sec. 47-159. - Chemical discharges. 
(a)  No discharge to public sewers may contain: 
(1)  Cyanide greater than one mg/l; 
(2)  Fluoride other than that contained in the public water supply; 
(3)  Chlorides in concentrations greater than 250 mg/l; 
(4)  Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel, oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; or 
(5)  Substances causing an excessive chemical oxygen demand (C.O.D.). 
(b)  No waste or wastewater discharged to public waters may contain: 
(1)  Strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not; 
(2)  Fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (0 and 65;deg;centigrade); 
(3)  Objectionable or toxic substances, exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material receiving in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the approving authority for such materials; or 
(4)  Obnoxious, toxic, or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in quantities sufficient to violate the provisions of section 47-158(a). 
(c)  No waste, wastewater, or other substances may be discharged into public sewers which has a pH lower than six or higher than nine, or any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel at the wastewater facilities. 
(d)  All waste, wastewater, or other substances containing phenols, hydrogen sulfide, or other taste-and-odor producing substances, shall conform to concentration limits established by the approving authority. 
(Code 1992, § 11.503)  
Sec. 47-160. - Hazardous metals and toxic materials. 
(a)  No discharges may contain concentrations of hazardous metals other than amounts specified in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  The maximum allowable concentrations of hazardous metals, in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l), for discharge to inland waters, and determined on the basis of individual sampling in accordance with "standard methods" are: 
Metal 	Maximum Concentration Not To Exceed (mg/l) 
Arsenic 	0.05 
Barium 	5.0 
Cadmium 	0.7 
Chromium 	5.0 
Copper 	4.5 
Lead 	0.1 
Manganese 	1.0 
Mercury 	0.005 
Nickel 	1.0 
Selenium 	0.4 
Silver 	1.0 
Zinc 	5.0 
 
(c)  No other hazardous metals or toxic materials may be discharged into public sewers without a permit from the approving authority specifying conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, volumes, and other applicable provisions. 
(d)  Prohibited hazardous materials include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Antimony 
(2)  Beryllium 
(3)  Bismuth 
(4)  Cobalt 
(5)  Molybdenum 
(6)  Uranylion 
(7)  Rhenium 
(8)  Strontium 
(9)  Tellurium 
(10)  Herbicides 
(11)  Fungicides 
(12)  Pesticides 
(Code 1992, § 11.504)  
Sec. 47-161. - Particulate size. 
(a)  No person may discharge garbage or other solids into public sewers unless it is shredded to a degree that all particles can be carried freely under the flow conditions prevailing in public sewers. Particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension are prohibited. 
(b)  The approving authority is entitled to review and approve the installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower 0.76 ph metric or greater. 
(Code 1992, § 11.505)  
Sec. 47-162. - Storm water and other unpolluted drainage. 
(a)  No person may make any new connections from inflow sources to public sanitary sewers nor discharge to public sanitary sewers any of the following: 
(1)  Unpolluted storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage. 
(2)  Unpolluted cooling water. 
(3)  Unpolluted industrial process waters. 
(4)  Other unpolluted drainage. 
(b)  In compliance with V.T.C.A., Water Code § 26.177, and other statutes, the approving authority may designate storm sewers and other watercourses into which unpolluted drainage described in subsection (a) of this section may be discharged. 
(Code 1992, § 11.506)  
Sec. 47-163. - Temperature. 
No person may discharge liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees centigrade), or any substance which causes the temperature of the total wastewater treatment plant influent to increase at a rate of ten degrees Fahrenheit or more per hour, or a combined total increase of plant influent temperature to 110 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Code 1992, § 11.507)  
Sec. 47-164. - Radioactive wastes. 
(a)  No person may discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into public sewers without the permission of the approving authority. 
(b)  The approving authority may establish, in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations, regulations for discharge of radioactive wastes into public sewers. 
(Code 1992, § 11.508)  
Sec. 47-165. - Impairment of facilities. 
(a)  No person may discharge into public sewers any substance capable of causing: 
(1)  Obstruction to the flow in sewers; 
(2)  Interference with the operation of treatment processes of facilities; or 
(3)  Excessive loading of treatment facilities. 
(b)  Discharges prohibited by subsection (a) of this section include, but are not limited to materials which exert or cause concentrations of: 
(1)  Inert suspended solids greater than 250 mg/l including but not limited to: 
a.  Fuller's earth; 
b.  Lime slurries; and 
c.  Lime residues. 
(2)  Dissolved solids greater than 975 mg/l including but not limited to: 
a.  Sodium chloride; and 
b.  Sodium sulfate. 
(3)  Excessive discoloration including but not limited to: 
a.  Dye wastes; and 
b.  Vegetable tanning solutions. 
(4)  B.O.D., C.O.D., or chlorine demand in excess of normal plant capacity. 
(c)  No person may discharge into public sewers any substance that may: 
(1)  Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog the sewers; 
(2)  Overload skimming and grease handling equipment; 
(3)  Pass to the receiving waters without being effectively treated by normal wastewater treatment processes due to the nonamenability of the substances to bacterial action; or 
(4)  Deleteriously affect the treatment process due to excessive quantities. 
(d)  No person may discharge any substance into public sewers which: 
(1)  Is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the processes and facilities employed; or 
(2)  Is amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(e)  The approving authority shall regulate the flow and concentration of slugs when they may: 
(1)  Impair the treatment process; 
(2)  Cause damage to collection facilities; 
(3)  Incur treatment costs exceeding those for normal wastewater; or 
(4)  Render the waste unfit for stream disposal or industrial use. 
(f)  No person may discharge into public sewers solid or viscous substances which may violate subsection (a) of this section if present in sufficient quantity or size including but not limited to: 
(1)  Ashes 
(2)  Cinders 
(3)  Sand 
(4)  Mud 
(5)  Straw 
(6)  Shavings 
(7)  Metal 
(8)  Glass 
(9)  Rags 
(10)  Feathers 
(11)  Tar 
(12)  Plastics 
(13)  Wood 
(14)  Unground garbage 
(15)  Whole blood 
(16)  Paunch manure 
(17)  Hair and fleshings 
(18)  Entrails 
(19)  Paper products, either whole or ground by garbage grinders 
(20)  Slops 
(21)  Chemical residues 
(22)  Paint residues 
(23)  Bulk solids 
(Code 1992, § 11.509)  
Sec. 47-166. - Compliance with existing authority. 
(a)  Unless exception is granted by the approving authority, the public sanitary sewer system shall be used by all persons discharging: 
(1)  Wastewater; 
(2)  Industrial waste; and 
(3)  Polluted liquids. 
(b)  Unless authorized by the Texas Water Commission, no person may deposit or discharge any waste included in subsection (a) of this section on public or private property in or adjacent to any: 
(1)  Natural outlet; 
(2)  Watercourse; 
(3)  Storm sewer; 
(4)  Other area within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(c)  The approving authority shall verify prior to discharge that wastes authorized to be discharged will receive suitable treatment within the provisions of laws, regulations, ordinances, rules and orders of federal, state and local governments. 
(Code 1992, § 11.510)  
Sec. 47-167. - Approving authority requirements. 
(a)  If discharges or proposed discharges to public sewers may (1) deleteriously affect wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters; (2) create a hazard to life or health; or (3) create a public nuisance, the approving authority shall require: 
(1)  Pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(2)  Control over quantities and rates of discharge; and 
(3)  Payment to cover the cost of handling and treating the wastes. 
(b)  The approving authority is entitled to determine whether a discharge is included under subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  The approving authority shall reject wastes when: 
(1)  It determines that a discharge or proposed discharge is included under subsection (a) of this section. 
(2)  The discharger does not meet the requirements of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1992, § 11.511)  
Sec. 47-168. - Approving authority review and approval. 
(a)  If pretreatment or control is required, the approving authority shall review and approve design and installation of equipment process. 
(b)  The design and installation of equipment and processes must conform to all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances and other laws. 
(c)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring pretreatment, flow-equalizing, or other facilities shall provide and maintain the facilities in effective operating condition at his/her own expense. 
(Code 1992, § 11.512)  
Sec. 47-169. - Discharges requiring traps. 
(a)  Discharges requiring a trap include: 
(1)  Grease or waste containing grease in excessive amounts; 
(2)  Oil; 
(3)  Sand; 
(4)  Flammable wastes; and 
(5)  Other harmful ingredients. 
(b)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring a trap shall at his/her own expense and as required by the approving authority: 
(1)  Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by the approving authority. 
(2)  Locate the trap in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection. 
(3)  Maintain the trap in effective operating condition. 
(4)  Grease and sand trap maintenance notification. Any industry with grease and sand trap pretreatment tanks shall make the most recent waste hauler's trip ticket available to the industrial waste inspector at the service location. The hauler trip ticket shall reflect the date that the tank was emptied, who emptied the tank and where in that county the waste was delivered, reflecting that it was disposed of in a manner and at a location approved by all federal, state and local regulations that pertain to this type and/or class of waste. 
(Code 1992, § 11.513)  
Sec. 47-170. - Requirements for building sewers. 
Any person responsible for discharges through a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall, at his/her own expense and as required by the approving authority: 
(1)  Install an accessible control manhole. 
(2)  Install meters and other appurtenances to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the waste. 
(3)  Install safety equipment and facilities (ventilation, steps, etc.) where needed. 
(4)  Maintain the equipment and facilities. 
(Code 1992, § 11.514)  
Sec. 47-171. - Sampling and testing. 
(a)  Sampling shall be conducted according to customarily accepted methods, reflecting the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and determining the existence of hazards to health, life, limb, and property. (Note: The particular analysis involved will determine whether a 24 hour composite sample from all outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24 hour composites of all outfalls. Where applicable, 16 hour, eight hour or some other period may be required. Periodic grab samples are used to determine pH oil and grease.) 
(b)  Examination and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes required by this section shall be: 
(1)  Conducted in accordance with the latest edition of standard methods; and 
(2)  Determined from suitable samples taken at the control manhole provided or other control point authorized by the approving authority. 
(c)  BOD and suspended solids shall be determined from composite sampling, except to detect unauthorized discharges. 
(d)  The approving authority shall determine which users or classes of users may contribute wastewater which is of greater strength than normal domestic wastewater. All users or classes of users so identified shall be sampled for flow, BOD, TSS and pH, at least annually. 
(e)  The city may select an independent firm or laboratory to determine flow, BOD, and suspended solids, if necessary. Flow may alternately be determined by water meter measurements, if no other flow device is available and no other source of raw water is used. 
(Code 1992, § 11.515)  
Sec. 47-172. - User charge system. 
(a)  Persons making discharges into the city wastewater system shall pay a charge to cover all costs of collection and treatment. 
(b)  When discharges of any waste into the city system are approved by the approving authority, the city or its authorized representative shall enter into an agreement or arrangement providing: 
(1)  Terms of acceptance by city. 
(2)  Payment by the person making the discharge, in accordance with the user charge system as established in subsection (a) of this section. 
(3)  Sewer connection procedures and requirements shall be in accordance with the Standard Plumbing Code as promulgated by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc. 
(4)  A sewer application approved and connection fee shall be paid. 
(5)  Construction of sewer connections shall be approved by city inspectors prior to sewer use. 
(Code 1992, § 11.516)  
Sec. 47-173. - Power to enter property. 
(a)  The superintendent and any duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this article. 
(b)  Anyone acting under this authority shall observe the establishment's rules and regulations concerning safety, internal security, and fire protection. 
(c)  Except when caused by negligence or failure of person(s) to maintain safe conditions, the city shall indemnify the person(s) against loss or damage to their property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the person(s) and growing out of the sampling operation. 
(d)  The superintendent and any other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled to enter all private properties through which the city holds a negotiated easement for the purposes of: 
(1)  Inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, or repair. 
(2)  Maintenance of any portion of the sewerage system lying within the easements. 
(3)  Conducting any other authorized activity. All activities shall be conducted in full accordance with the terms of the negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(e)  No person acting under authority of this article may inquire into any process including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the public sewers. 
(Code 1992, § 11.517) 
Editor's note— Should entry be denied, the superintendent or his designee may obtain entry by a search warrant issued as provided for by state law.  
Sec. 47-174. - Authority to disconnect service. 
(a)  The city may terminate water and wastewater disposal service and disconnect a customer from the system when: 
(1)  Acids or chemicals which may damage the sewer lines or treatment process are released to the sewer, potentially causing accelerated deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater. 
(2)  A governmental agency informs the city that effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge to a watercourse; and it is found that the customer is delivering wastewater to the city's system that cannot be sufficiently treated, or requires treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment. 
(3)  The customer: 
a.  Discharges waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the approving authority. 
b.  Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment system. 
c.  Fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary sewer services when due. 
d.  Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes to public sewers in violation of section 47-158 through section 47-165 as stated herein. 
(b)  If service is discontinued pursuant to subsection (a)(2) of this section, the city shall: 
(1)  Disconnect the customer; 
(2)  Supply the customer with the governmental agency's report and provide the customer with all pertinent information; and 
(3)  Continue disconnection until such time as the customer provides pretreatment, additional pretreatment or other facilities designed to remove the objectionable characteristics from his wastes. 
(Code 1992, § 11.518)  
Sec. 47-175. - Notice. 
The city shall serve persons discharging in violation of this article with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory compliance. 
(Code 1992, § 11.519)  
Sec. 47-176. - Continued prohibited discharges. 
No person may continue discharging in violation of this article beyond the time limit provided in the notice. 
(Code 1992, § 11.520)  
Sec. 47-177. - Penalty. 
(a)  A person who continues prohibited discharges is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable by a fine of not more than $200.00 for each act of violation. Each day of prohibited discharge shall constitute a separate violation. 
(b)  In addition to proceeding under authority of subsection (a) of this article, the city is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes or other ordinances against a person continuing prohibited discharges. 
(Code 1992, § 11.521)  
Sec. 47-178. - Failure to pay. 
In additional to sanctions provided for by this article, the city is entitled to exercise sanctions provided for by the other ordinances of the city for failure to pay the bill for water and sanitary sewer service when due. 
(Code 1992, § 11.522)  
Sec. 47-179. - Penalty for criminal mischief. 
The city may pursue all criminal and civil remedies, to which it is entitled under authority for statutes and ordinances, against a person negligently, willfully or maliciously causing loss by tampering with or destroying public sewers or treatment facilities. 
(Code 1992, § 11.523)  
Secs. 47-180—47-196. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - GAS SERVICE AND GAS SERVICE RATES 
 
Sec. 47-197. - Established. 
Effective with gas bills rendered on and after May 23, 1984, the maximum general service rate for sales of natural gas rendered to residential and commercial consumers within the city limits of Fredericksburg, Texas, by, its successors and assigns, is hereby fixed at the approved current rates in effect, and as amended from time to time by application to and approval by the city council of the City of Fredericksburg. 
(Code 1992, § 11.601)  
Sec. 47-198. - Adjustments. 
(a)  The residential and commercial rates in effect shall be adjusted upward or downward from a base of $4.2762 per MCF by gas cost adjustment factor expressed as an amount per thousand cubic feet (MCF) of natural gas for changes in the intracompany city gate rate charge as authorized by the Railroad Commission of Texas or other regulatory body having jurisdiction for gas delivered to the Fredericksburg distribution system. 
(b)  The company shall also receive tax adjustments at the approved current rates in effect. 
(c)  The residential and commercial rates in effect shall be adjusted upward and downward by a cost of service adjustment factor expressed as an amount per customer for changes in the cost of service over a 12 month period ending December 31. 
(d)  Rate case expense is not included in the calculation of proposed rates. If rate case expense is incurred in this current case, it is the intention of Lone Star Gas Company to recover the current and any prior rate case expense, through a surcharge designed for a six month nominal recovery period. The surcharge per MCF would be calculated by dividing the rate case expense to be recovered by one-half of the adjusted annual sales volume to residential and commercial customers. If there is no current rate case expense, the company will forego recovery of any unamortized prior rate case expense. When a surcharge is applicable, monthly status reports will be provided to account for the collections. 
(e)  In addition to the aforesaid rates, the company shall have the right to collect such reasonable charges as are necessary to conduct its business and to carry out its reasonable rules and regulations in effect. The current service charges in effect are approved. Services for which no charge is set out in Item E may be performed and charged for by the company at a level established by the normal forces of competition. 
(Code 1992, § 11.602)  
Sec. 47-199. - Change of rates. 
The rates set forth by reference in this article may be changed and amended by either the city or company in the manner provided by law. Service hereunder is subject to the orders of regulatory bodies having jurisdiction, and to the company's rules and regulations currently on file in the company's office. 
(Code 1992, § 11.603)  
Secs. 47-200—47-221. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - ELECTRIC LIGHT AND POWER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 47-222. - Definitions. 
Municipality. The City of Fredericksburg and the City of Fredericksburg electric light and power distribution system. 
Customer or customers. All users of electric energy from the City of Fredericksburg electric light and power system. 
Meters. All measuring instruments and devices. 
(Code 1992, § 11.701; Ord. No. 23-015, 9-16-2013)  
Sec. 47-223. - Schedule of rates. 
Shall be charged in accordance with the rate schedule set forth in Appendix A of this Code. 
(Code 1992, § 11.703; Ord. No. 23-015, 9-16-2013)  
Sec. 47-224. - Customer installation costs. 
(a)  Commercial customers. No commercial customer entitled to connect his/her premises to the city electrical distribution system shall be allowed to connect his/her premise to the system unless such customer pays the city for the cost including labor, materials and equipment, of extending and installing the electrical distribution system to such customer's premises. 
(b)  Residential customers. 
(1)  If no primary line extension is required in order to connect the residential customer's premises to the electrical distribution system, the customer shall pay a customer installation charge as set forth in the fee schedule found in appendix A to this Code. 
(2)  If it will be necessary to extend the primary line in order to connect the residential customer's premises to the electrical distribution system, then the customer shall pay the city a fee as set forth in the fee schedule found in appendix A to this Code. 
(c)  Payment. The amount owed by each commercial or residential customer to the city for the extension and/or installation described in this article shall be billed by separate invoice. If such amount is not paid in full within 30 days from the date of said invoice, city utility service to such premises shall not be connected, or shall be disconnected if service has been established, and shall not be reconnected until payment in full has been made. 
(Code 1992, § 11.703)  
Sec. 47-225. - Maintenance of installations. 
All of customer's wiring and electrical equipment shall at all times be maintained by the customer in conformity with the requirements of municipality's electric code and also in conformity with any special requirements outlined in municipality's rate schedules and terms and conditions of service set forth in this article. 
(Code 1992, § 11.704)  
Sec. 47-226. - Access to premises; right to trim trees. 
(a)  The municipality's agents and employees shall have the right of access to the customer's premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of installing, reading, inspecting, testing or repairing any meters, devices and other equipment used in connection with its supply of electricity, or for the purpose of removing its property and for all other purposes. 
(b)  The municipality shall have the right to cut or trim and remove such trees and shrubbery, or parts thereof, as may be reasonably necessary or desirable in connection with extending and furnishing service to the customer's premises. 
(Code 1992, § 11.705)  
Sec. 47-227. - Meters. 
(a)  The electricity furnished shall be measured by a meter or meters to be installed by the municipality upon the customer's premises at a point most convenient for the municipality's service and all bills shall be calculated upon the registration of said meter or meters. Where the customer requires more than one meter to be installed, each meter shall be considered as a separate customer and the proper rate schedule for the class of service rendered shall be applied to each meter separately. When, for the municipality's convenience, more than one meter is installed for the same class of service, the sums of the registration shall be taken as the total registrations. 
(b)  Where a single customer occupies more than one unit of space in the conduct of the same business, each separate unit will be metered separately and considered a distinct customer unless the customer makes the necessary provisions for approved circuits and loops to permit the metering by one meter for each class of service of all energy used for that class of service. 
(Code 1992, § 11.706)  
Sec. 47-228. - Customer responsible for municipality property. 
The customer shall protect the municipality's property on the customer's premises from loss or damage and shall permit no one other than agents of the municipality to remove or tamper with the municipality's property. 
(Code 1992, § 11.707)  
Sec. 47-229. - Only municipality power to be used. 
Except in cases where the customer has a contract with the municipality for reserve or auxiliary service, no other source of electricity or power shall be used by the customer on the same installation in conjunction with the municipality's service, either by means of a throw-over switch or any other connection. 
(Code 1992, § 11.708)  
Sec. 47-230. - Sale of municipality's power by customer prohibited. 
Customer shall not, without the express written permission of the municipality, sell or otherwise dispose of any electricity furnished under an application to or contract with municipality for electric service, but will use the same solely for his/her own use and benefit on the premises referred to or otherwise identified in such application or contract as the premises to be served. Violation of this section of this article by the customer shall entitle the municipality to discontinue service without notice. 
(Code 1992, § 11.709)  
Sec. 47-231. - Customer's tort liability. 
The customer shall assume all responsibility for the electricity upon the customer's premises at and from the point of entry on customer's premises at the property line, and for the wire and equipment used in connection therewith, and shall protect and save the municipality harmless from all claims for injury or damage to persons or property occurring on the customer's premises caused by such electricity, or said wires and equipment, except where said injury or damage shall be shown to have been caused solely by the negligence of the municipality. 
(Code 1992, § 11.710)  
Sec. 47-232. - Municipality not responsible for loss of power. 
The municipality shall not be responsible in damages for failure to supply electricity or for interruptions, inadequacies or reversal of the supply, unless such failure is due to its willful negligence or fault on its part unaccompanied by negligence of the customer. 
(Code 1992, § 11.711)  
Sec. 47-233. - Denial of service; installation of separate equipment. 
(a)  The municipal may refuse to render service to any customer for the operation of any devices which have a detrimental effect upon the service rendered to other customers. 
(b)  Where the customer's use of electricity is intermittent or subject to violent fluctuation, the municipality reserves the right to require the customer to furnish at his/her own expense suitable equipment to reasonably limit such intermittent or fluctuation. 
(Code 1992, § 11.712)  
Sec. 47-234. - Deposits. 
Deposits shall be required, paid and refunded in accordance with the provisions of Appendix A. 
(Ord. No. 23-015, 9-16-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 23-015, adopted Sept. 16, 2013, amended § 47-234 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 47-234 pertained to deposit to ensure payment, and derived from Code 1992, § 11.713.  
Sec. 47-235. - Billing. 
Billing shall be in accordance with Appendix A. 
(Ord. No. 8-061, § 11.714, 3-2-1998; Ord. No. 22-021, 8-6-2012; Ord. No. 23-015, 9-16-2013)  
Sec. 47-236. - Motor installations. 
Unless otherwise agreed upon, all motor installations shall be as follows: 
(1)  Small motors with ratings of less than 1½ horsepower may be connected on circuits for residential service and with ratings of less than five horsepower on circuits for commercial service and electricity used by them will be billed under the rate for residential or commercial service, respectively. 
(2)  All motors of five horsepower rating or less shall be single-phase, unless otherwise permitted by municipality. 
(3)  All motors of more than five horsepower rating shall be three-phase, unless otherwise permitted by municipality. 
(4)  All motors with a rated capacity of 7½ horsepower or more shall be equipped with approved starting equipment having low voltage release attachment. 
(5)  All motors with a rated capacity of 7½ horsepower or more, which are to be automatically started and stopped, will have details of the controlling equipment approved by the municipality before such motors are connected. 
(Code 1992, § 11.715)  
Sec. 47-237. - Special rules for gaseous tube lighting devices. 
With the installation of neon lamps, mercury vapor lamps, fluorescent lamps, and other gaseous tube lamps or lighting devices having low power factor, the customer shall provide, at his/her own expense, power factor corrective equipment which will maintain the power factor of each such device at not less than 90 percent. Corrective equipment will be installed in the circuit between the lighting devices and the switch controlling the devices, in such manner that the corrective equipment will operate only when lighting devices are operated. 
(Code 1992, § 11.716)  
Sec. 47-238. - Authority to modify provisions of article. 
No agent shall have authority to amend, modify, alter or waive any of the provisions of this article, nor bind the municipality by making any promises or representations not contained herein. 
(Code 1992, § 11.717)  
Sec. 47-239. - Distributed generation. 
(a)  General Provisions. 
1.  Intent. This section is intended to provide for the orderly, safe and effective interconnection and parallel operation of Distributed Generation facilities within the City of Fredericksburg electric system by customers of the City of Fredericksburg Electric Utility. 
2.  Authority. The City is authorized to enact this section by the Public Utility Regulatory Act, TEX. UTIL. CODE ANN. § 31.005 (Vernon 1998 & Supp. 2005) (PURA) and successors, which authorizes and encourages electric utilities to establish customer option programs that encourage the reduction of air contaminant emissions including distributed energy generation technology. Additionally, the Public Utility Regulatory Act, TEX. UTIL. CODE ANN § 39.101 (b)(3) (Vernon 1998 & Supp. 2005) (PURA) entitles all Texas electric customers to access to on-site distributed generation. Finally, the Texas Public Utility Regulatory Act, TEX. UTIL. CODE ANN § 39.916 (Vernon 1998 & Supp. 2005) (PURA) and its successors authorizes electric utilities to establish requirements for and allow the interconnection and parallel operation of Distributed Renewable Generation, and requires the Public Utility Commission of Texas to promulgate rules and regulations for the implementation of interconnection and parallel operation of Distributed Renewable Generation. 
3.  Definitions. As applied in this section, the following words and terms shall be used: 
City Manager: the City Manager and/or his/her duly authorized representative. 
Commission: the Public Utility Commission of Texas or its successor organization having jurisdiction over the matters herein contained. 
Customer: a person or entity interconnected or seeking interconnection to the Fredericksburg electric system for the purpose of receiving or exporting electric power from or to the Fredericksburg electric system. 
Distributed Generation: An electrical generating facility located at a customer's point of delivery (point of common coupling) of ten megawatts (MW) or less and connected at a voltage less than 60 kilovolts (kV) which may be connected in parallel operation to the Fredericksburg electric system. 
Interconnection: The physical connection of distributed generation to the utility system in accordance with the requirements of this section so that parallel operation can occur. 
Networked secondary: two or more utility primary distribution feeder sources electrically tied together on the secondary (low voltage) side to form one power source for one or more customers. The service is designed to maintain service to the customers even after the loss of one of these primary distribution feeder sources. 
Parallel operation: The operation of distributed generation by a customer while the customer is connected to the Fredericksburg electric system. 
Point of Interconnection (Point of Service, Point of Common Coupling): The point where the electrical conductors of the City of Fredericksburg utility system are connected to the customer's conductors and where any transfer of electric power between the customer and the City of Fredericksburg utility system takes place, such as switchgear near the meter. 
Pre-certified equipment: A specific generating and protective equipment system or systems that have been certified as meeting the applicable parts of this section relating to safety and reliability by an entity approved by the Commission. 
Stabilized: The Fredericksburg electric system shall be considered stabilized when, following a disturbance, the system returns to the normal range of voltage and frequency for a duration of two minutes. 
4.  Applicability. This section applies to all persons or entities that desire to interconnect or operate in parallel a distributed generation system within the City of Fredericksburg electric system. 
5.  Application and Agreement Required. 
(A)  Before a person or entity may interconnect or operate in parallel a distributed generation system within the City of Fredericksburg electric system, that person or entity must apply with the City on the form provided by the City (an example is attached as Exhibit A) and execute an agreement with the City that establishes the terms and conditions for the interconnection and parallel operation of the distributed generation system. The Agreement shall be in the general form of the Agreement in Exhibit B of this section. 
(B)  The City Council hereby delegates to the City Manager the authority to execute Agreements with Customers for the interconnection and parallel operation of distributed generation within the City of Fredericksburg electric system in accordance with this section, the Public Utility Commission of Texas rules and regulations, and in accordance with all state and federal laws applicable. The Agreement shall not vary substantially in form and intent from Exhibit B of this section. 
(C)  Substantial changes to the form and/or intent of the Agreement in Exhibit B must be approved by the City Council before the execution of the Agreement. 
(D)  The interconnection shall not be energized prior to the execution of the Agreement as required herein, and the fulfillment of the requirements for interconnection. 
(E)  The application, Exhibit A, may be modified from time to time by the City Manager as is required for efficient processing of applications. 
6.  Utility Contact Person. 
(A)  In accordance with P.U.C. SUBST. R. 25.11 (I), the City Manager shall designate the appropriate City staff member or members as contact person or persons for all matters related to distributed generation interconnection. 
(B)  The City Manager shall identify to the Public Utility Commission of Texas the contact person or persons for all matters related to distributed generation interconnection. 
(C)  The City Manager shall cause the City of Fredericksburg internet web site to provide access through the internet web site to the names, telephone numbers, mailing addresses and electronic mail addresses for the distributed generation contact person or persons. 
(D)  The designated contact person or persons shall review applications for distributed generation with attached technical documentation and determine compliance with the City of Fredericksburg technical requirements for interconnection and parallel operation of distributed generation. 
(E)  When satisfied that a customer has complied with the application requirements and that the Customer's system complies with the technical requirements for interconnection and parallel operation of distributed generation, the contact person shall recommend to the City Manager that an Agreement be executed with the Customer for the interconnection and parallel operation of distributed generation. The City Manager shall review the application and technical information submitted, and if the City Manager finds that the Customer has complied with the application requirements and that the Customer's system complies with the technical requirements for interconnection and parallel operation of distributed generation, the City Manager shall execute an Agreement with the Customer substantially in the form attached to this section as Exhibit B. 
(b)  Technical Requirements. 
1.  General Requirements. 
(A)  All interconnections shall comply with P.U.C. SUBST. R. 25.212 and successors. In addition, all interconnections shall comply with applicable state and federal laws and regulations. 
(B)  All interconnections shall comply with local building and electric codes as adopted by the City of Fredericksburg. Installation of all interconnections shall be inspected by the City of Fredericksburg. Inspection and approval of the installation by the City of Fredericksburg is a prerequisite and a continuing condition of interconnection and parallel operation of distributed generation. 
(C)  Variations from the Technical Requirements herein must be reviewed and approved by the City Manager prior to implementation. Variations in the point of interconnection must be approved by the City Manager and included in the Agreement approved by the City Council. 
2.  Manual Disconnect. The customer shall provide and install a manual load break switch that provides clear indication of the switch position at the Point of Interconnection to provide separation between the City of Fredericksburg electrical system and the customer's electrical generation system. The location of the disconnect switch must be approved by the City of Fredericksburg. The disconnect switch shall be easily visible, mounted separately from metering equipment, readily accessible to City of Fredericksburg personnel at all times, and capable of being locked in the open position with a City of Fredericksburg padlock. The City of Fredericksburg reserves the right to open the disconnect switch isolating the customer's electrical generating system (which may or may not include the customer's load) from City of Fredericksburg electrical system for any of the following reasons: 
To facilitate maintenance or repair of the City of Fredericksburg electrical system, or 
When emergency conditions exist on the City of Fredericksburg electrical system, or 
When the customer's electrical generating system is determined to be operating in a hazardous or unsafe manner or is or potentially can unduly affect the City of Fredericksburg electrical system waveform, or 
When the customer's electrical generating system is determined to be adversely affecting other electric consumers on the City of Fredericksburg electrical system, or 
Failure of the customer to comply with applicable codes, regulations and standards in effect at the time, or 
Failure of the customer to abide by any contractual arrangement or operating agreement with the City of Fredericksburg. 
3.  Power Quality. 
(A)  Voltage. The City of Fredericksburg shall endeavor to maintain the distribution voltages on the electrical system but shall not be responsible for factors or circumstances beyond its control. The customer shall provide an automatic method of disconnecting generation equipment from the City of Fredericksburg electrical system within ten cycles should a voltage deviation greater than +5% or -10% from normal be sustained for more than 30 seconds (1800 cycles) or a voltage deviation greater than +10% or -30% from normal be sustained for more than ten cycles. If high or low voltage complaints or flicker complaints result from the operation of the customer's electrical generation, the customer's generating system shall be disconnected until the problem is resolved. 
(B)  Frequency. The City of Fredericksburg shall endeavor to maintain a 60-hertz nominal frequency on the electrical system. The customer shall provide an automatic method of disconnecting generation equipment from the City of Fredericksburg electrical system within 15 cycles should a deviation in frequency of +0.5Hz or -0.7Hz from normal occur. 
(C)  Harmonics. In accordance with IEEE 519, the total harmonic distortion (THO) of voltage shall not exceed five percent of a pure sine wave of 60-hertz frequency or three percent of the 60-hertz frequency for any individual harmonic when measured at the point of interconnection with the City of Fredericksburg electrical system. Also, the total current distortion shall not exceed five percent of the fundamental frequency sine wave. If harmonics beyond the allowable range result from the operation of the customer's electrical generation, the customer's generating system shall be disconnected until the problem is resolved. 
(D)  Flicker. The distributed generation facility shall not cause excessive voltage flicker on the City of Fredericksburg electrical system. This flicker shall not exceed three percent voltage dip, in accordance with IEEE 519 (Section 10.5), as measured at the point of interconnection. 
(E)  Power factor. The customer's electrical generation system shall be designed, operated and controlled at all times to provide reactive power requirements at the point of interconnection from 0.95 lagging to 0.95 leading power factor. Induction generators shall have static capacitors that provide at least 95 percent of the magnetizing current requirements of the induction generator field. The City of Fredericksburg may, in the interest of safety, authorize the omission of capacitors. However, where capacitors are used for power factor correction, additional protective devices may be required to guard against self-excitation of the customer's generator field. 
4.  Loss of Source. The customer shall provide approved protective equipment necessary to immediately, completely and automatically disconnect the customer's electrical generation equipment from the City of Fredericksburg electrical system in the event of a fault on the customer's system, a fault on the City of Fredericksburg system or loss of source on the City of Fredericksburg system. Such protective equipment shall conform to the criteria specified in UL 1741 and IEEE 1547. The customer's generating system shall automatically disconnect from the grid within ten cycles if the voltage on one or more phases falls and stays below 70 percent of nominal voltage for at least ten cycles. The automatic disconnecting device may be of the manual or automatic reclose type and shall not be capable of reclosing until after the City of Fredericksburg service voltage and frequency are restored to within the normal operating range and the system is stabilized. 
5.  Coordination and Synchronization. The customer shall be solely responsible for coordination and synchronization of the customer's electrical generating system with all aspects of the City of Fredericksburg electrical system, and the customer assumes all responsibility for damage or loss that may occur from improper coordination and synchronization of its generating system with the City of Fredericksburg electrical system. 
6.  Metering. The actual metering equipment required, its voltage rating, number of phases and wires, size, current transformers, number of input and associated memory is dependent upon the type, size and location of the electric service provided. The Customer shall pay for the installation of the data recorder (meter) that is capable of measuring the "Delivered KWh" (energy delivered by the City of Fredericksburg); the "Received KWh" (energy delivered to the City of Fredericksburg by the Customer) using a single meter or two-meter configuration. Additionally, for all Customers, The City of Fredericksburg reserves the right to install, at its own expense, a meter to measure the output of the DG system. 
7.  Interconnection Study. The City of Fredericksburg will determine whether an interconnection study is necessary, based on relevant engineering factors including the output of the system, the location of the system and other City of Fredericksburg distribution system factors. If the interconnection study is deemed necessary, the City of Fredericksburg shall perform the study under reasonable terms and conditions agreed upon by both the customer and City of Fredericksburg and at the customer's sole expense. No study fee will be charged if the proposed generation site is not on a networked secondary and if all of the following apply: 
The proposed generation equipment is pre-certified. Generation equipment that are less than 20 kW AC shall be considered pre-certified if a UL 1741 listed inverter that also meets IEEE 1547 specifications is used. For solar PV installations, to be pre-certified system must have UL 1703 listed PV modules, and 
The proposed generation system does not expect to export more than 15 percent of total load on the feeder, and 
The proposed generation system does not contribute more than 25 percent of the maximum possible short circuit current of the feeder. 
8.  Protection. The distributed generation facility must have interrupting devices capable of interrupting the maximum available fault current, an interconnection disconnect device, a generator disconnect device, an over-voltage trip, an under-voltage trip, an over/under frequency trip and a manual or automatic synchronizing check (for facilities with standalone capability). Facilities rated over 10kW, three phase, must also have reverse power sensing and either a ground over-voltage or a ground over-current trip depending on the grounding system. Grounding shall be done in accordance with UL 1741, IEEE 1547 and NEC Article 250. 
9.  Three-Phase Generators. 
(A)  Synchronous machines: 
(1)  The distributed generation facility's circuit breakers shall be three-phase devices with electronic or electromechanical control. 
(2)  The Customer is solely responsible for proper synchronization of its generator with the City of Fredericksburg system. 
a.  The excitation system response ratio shall not be less than 0.5. 
b.  The generator's excitation system shall conform to the field voltage versus time criteria specified in ANSI Standard C50. 13-1989. 
(B)  Induction machines: The induction machines used for generation may be brought up to synchronous speed if it can be demonstrated that the initial voltage drop at the point of interconnection is within the flicker limits specified in this document. 
(C)  Inverters: 
(1)  Line-commutated inverters do not require synchronizing equipment. 
(2)  Self-commutated inverters require synchronizing equipment. 
10.  Standards. The distributed generation equipment shall be designed, installed, operated and maintained in accordance with, but not limited to, ANSI standards, UL standards, IEEE standards, the National Electrical Code, ERCOT Operating Guides and any other applicable local, state or federal codes and statutes. In the case of a conflict between the requirements in this document and any of those standards or codes, this document shall prevail. 
(c)  Penalty and Enforcement. Any person violating this section by interconnecting distributed generation to the Fredericksburg electric system without a complete Application and executed Agreement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined up to $1,000.00 per violation, and each day that a violation continues or each occurrence shall be considered a separate offense and punished accordingly. Any violation of this section can be enjoined by a suit filed in the name of the City of Fredericksburg in court of competent jurisdiction, and this remedy shall be in addition to any penalty provision in this section. 
(Ord. No. 22-031, 12-17-2012)  
Secs. 47-240—47-269. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - DRAINAGE UTILITY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2019-01, § 1, adopted Jan. 21, 2019, amended Art. VII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VII, §§ 47-270—47-278, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the Code 1992, §§ 11.801—11.809. 
Editor's note— Section 5 of Ord. No. 2019-01, adopted Jan. 21, 2019, provides an effective date of Mar. 1, 2020. 
 
Sec. 47-270. - Adoption. 
This Article is hereby adopted and shall be known as the "Drainage Utility Article". 
(Ord. No. 2019-01, § 1, 1-21-2019)  
Sec. 47-271. - Drainage utility. 
(a)  Declaration of purpose and findings. The City Council of the City of Fredericksburg hereby finds, determines and declares that in order to protect the citizenry from the loss of life and property caused by surface water stagnation within the boundaries of the service area established herein, and in order to maintain and improve existing water drainage facilities belonging to the City of Fredericksburg, it is necessary and in the best interest of the public health and safety to establish a drainage utility, as authorized by state law. To this end, the City Council will establish a schedule of drainage charges against all real property in the service area established herein, subject to the limitations of state law, and the City shall provide drainage for all real property in the service area established herein on payment of the drainage charges, except as real property is exempted hereunder. The City of Fredericksburg will offer drainage service on nondiscriminatory, reasonable and equitable terms. 
(b)  Establishment and dedication of drainage utility assets. The City Council hereby establishes the City of Fredericksburg Drainage Utility as a public utility and dedicates to the utility all City-owned property, real and personal, facilities, materials and supplies constituting the City's drainage system as constituted on the effective date of this Article and as may be acquired in the future, to be used for the purpose of the Drainage Utility. 
(c)  Establishment and revisions to drainage utility service area. 
(1)  The City Council hereby establishes the drainage utility service area as all real property in the City limits of the City of Fredericksburg, as the same may be hereafter expanded or amended. 
(2)  Revisions to the drainage utility service area, other than expansion by way of annexation, shall be made only after the publication of notice and public hearing as required by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2019-01, § 1, 1-21-2019)  
Sec. 47-272. - Drainage utility fund. 
(a)  A separate fund shall be created effective as of the effective date of this Article, known as the drainage utility fund, for the purpose of identifying and controlling all revenues and expenses attributable to the drainage utility. All unexpended drainage fees held by the City prior to the effective date of this Article shall be deposited into the drainage utility fund upon the effective date of this Article as the fund beginning balance. All drainage charges collected by the City after the effective date of this Article and such other monies as may be available to the City for the purpose of drainage shall be deposited in the drainage utility fund. Such utility revenues shall be used for the purposes of the creation, operation, planning, engineering, inspection, construction, repair, maintenance, improvement, reconstruction, administration and other reasonable and customary charges associated with the operation of a utility for the drainage utility of the City. It shall not be necessary that the expenses from the drainage utility fund for any authorized purpose specifically relate to any particular property from which the revenues for such purposes were collected. 
(b)  All funds collected pursuant to this Article for creation, operation, planning, engineering, inspection, construction, repair, maintenance, improvement, reconstruction, administration and other reasonable and customary charges associated with the operation of a drainage utility shall be used solely for those purposes unless otherwise directed by the City Council for other drainage and water quality purposes not specified above. In the event a portion of the drainage revenues is pledged to retire any outstanding indebtedness or obligation incurred, or is collected or levied as a reserve or amount in contribution for future construction, repair or extension or maintenance of the utility assets, then such pledged portion of revenues may not be transferred to the general fund. 
(c)  An annual report of the drainage utility revenues, expenses and programs shall be provided to City Council. 
(Ord. No. 2019-01, § 1, 1-21-2019)  
Sec. 47-273. - Assessment and collection of drainage utility fees. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of any real property within the drainage utility service area, that receives any type of utility service (electricity, water and/or sewer) from the City of Fredericksburg, shall be assessed a drainage utility fee based on the property's impact to the drainage utility of the City, as provided for in the fee schedules set forth in Article 21.000 of Appendix A to this Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Drainage utility fees assessed hereunder shall be added to and collected by way of the monthly City utility bill of each applicable owner or occupant, and all funds collected under this Section shall be deposited to the credit of the drainage utility fund of the City of Fredericksburg. 
(Ord. No. 2019-01, § 1, 1-21-2019)  
Sec. 47-274. - Exemptions. 
The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this Article and any rules subsequently adopted pursuant to this Article: 
(1)  Property with proper construction and maintenance of a wholly sufficient and privately owned drainage system; 
(2)  Property held and maintained in its natural state, until such time that the property is developed and all of the public infrastructure constructed has been accepted by the municipality in which the property is located for maintenance; and 
(3)  A subdivided lot, until a structure has been built on the lot and a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the municipality in which the property is located. 
(4)  The State of Texas, and any lot or tract in which the State of Texas holds a freehold interest. 
(5)  A school district, and any lot or tract in which a school district holds a freehold interest. 
(Ord. No. 2019-01, § 1, 1-21-2019)  
Sec. 47-274.5. - Drainage utility fee credits for non-residential property. 
An owner of non-residential real property may petition the City for a drainage utility fee credit based upon on-site storm water management controls that reduce the property's impact to the drainage utility of the City. Any petition under this Section shall be submitted on a form promulgated by the Director of Public Works and Utilities. The Director of Public Works and Utilities, or his/her designee, shall evaluate any petition filed under this Section and determine any appropriate drainage utility fee credit for non-residential property, based upon nondiscriminatory, reasonable and equitable criteria, in accordance with this Article. 
The maximum allowable drainage utility fee credits that may be granted under this Section are set forth in the following table: 
Credit Type 	Maximum Allowable Drainage Utility Fee Credit 	Examples 
1. Vegetated Detention Facility 	15% of total assessed drainage utility fee for subject property 	On-site detention facilities which are designed and constructed to be vegetated which aids in preventing trash, debris, and pollutants from entering the downstream stormwater infrastructure. 
2. Permanent Structural Detention Facility 	10% of total assessed drainage utility fee for subject property 	Detention facilities designed and constructed with concrete walls and/or bottoms. 
3. Detention or Retention Pond Amenity 	20% of total assessed drainage utility fee for subject property 	Detention or retention facilities design in a manner that promotes use of adjacent spaces as open space. 
4. Riparian Zone Preservation 	10% of total assessed drainage utility fee for subject property 	Development designed in such a way to enhance creek/drainage way health by removing invasive species and promoting a buffer zone of diverse, native plants to minimize erosion. 
5. Permanent Best Management Practices ("BMP") 	25% of total assessed drainage utility fee for subject property 	Enhanced drainage swales, sand filtration, inlet trash collection, wet ponds, and stormwater wetlands. 
6. Zero Discharge Credit 	100% of total assessed drainage utility fee for subject property 	Permanent structural controls which are designed to infiltrate, evapotranspirate, or re-use stormwater so that it will not be discharged from the property. 
 
(Ord. No. 2019-01, § 1, 1-21-2019)  
Sec. 47-275. - Administration, rules and regulations. 
The Director of Public Works and Utilities, or his/her designee, shall be responsible for administration of this Article. The Director of Public Works and Utilities, or his/her designee, shall be responsible for developing rules, regulations and procedures for administration and assessment of the drainage utility fee and the consideration of variances; developing maintenance programs; and establishing drainage criteria and standards for operation of the drainage system subject to adoption by ordinance. The Director of Public Works and Utilities, or his/her designee, shall be responsible for developing and administering standards, criteria, rules and procedures for the treatment or prevention of pollution in drainage. 
The Director of Public Works and Utilities, or his/her designee, shall be responsible for determining each property's impact to the drainage utility of the City based on reliable data, including but not limited to, Gillespie County Appraisal District data, GIS database data, aerial photography, information received by the City through the building permit process, or other reliable means for determining impervious area. The Director of Public Works and Utilities, or his/her designee, may request additional information from a property owner or occupant as reasonably necessary to determine each property's impact to the drainage utility of the City. 
(Ord. No. 2019-01, § 1, 1-21-2019)  
Sec. 47-276. - Floods, control, liability. 
Floods from drainage runoff may occasionally occur which exceed the capacity of the drainage system maintained and financed with the drainage charges. In addition, surface water stagnation may occasionally occur which exceed the capability of the drainage system maintained and financed with drainage charges as defined herein. This Article does not imply that properties subject to charges shall always be free from flooding or flood damage, surface water stagnation or pollution or that all flood control and water treatment projects to control the quantity and quality of runoff can or will be constructed cost effectively. Nothing whatsoever in this Article shall be construed as or be deemed to create additional duties on the part of the City of Fredericksburg or hold the City liable for any damages incurred in a flood or from adverse water quality due to drainage runoff. Nothing in this Article shall be deemed to waive the City's immunity under state law or reduce the need or necessity for flood insurance nor shall anything in this Article reduce the responsibility or liability of the property owners for occurrences on their own property under law. 
(Ord. No. 2019-01, § 1, 1-21-2019)  
Sec. 47-277. - Enforcement. 
Any charge due hereunder which shall not be paid when due may be recovered in action at law by the City of Fredericksburg. In addition to any other remedies or penalties provided by this or any other ordinance of the City of Fredericksburg, failure of any user of City utilities within the City of Fredericksburg to pay said charges promptly when due shall subject such user to discontinuance of such utility services and the City Manager of the City of Fredericksburg, or his authorized agent, is hereby empowered and directed to enforce this provision as to any and all delinquent users. The employees of the City of Fredericksburg shall, at all reasonable time, have access to any premises served by the City of Fredericksburg for inspection, repair or the enforcement of the provisions of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 2019-01, § 1, 1-21-2019)  
Sec. 47-278. - Penalty for violations of this Article. 
Any person violating any provisions of this Article shall, upon conviction, be fined as provided for in the general penalty provision found in section 1-6 of this Code and each and every day that the provisions of this Article are violated shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Prosecution or conviction under this provision shall never be a bar to any other remedy or relief for violations of this Article. 
(Ord. No. 2019-01, § 1, 1-21-2019)  
Secs. 47-279—47-304. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - CROSS CONNECTIONS AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION 
 
Sec. 47-305. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Other technical terms used shall have the meanings or definitions listed in the latest edition of the manual of cross connection control published by the Foundation of Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, University of Southern California or in the second edition of the Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and Cross Connection Control Manual M14 published by the American Water Works Association. 
Air gap separation (AG) means a physical separation between the free flowing discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline and an open non-pressure receiving vessel. 
Approved water supply source means the City of Fredericksburg water system. 
Atmospheric vacuum breaker (AVB) means an assembly containing a float check, a check seat, and an air inlet port. Atmospheric vacuum breaker shall not be subjected to a back pressure situation. 
Auxiliary water supply means any water supply other than the City of Fredericksburg approved public water supply, including water from another public water supply or from a natural source including, but not limited to, wells, cisterns, springs, rivers, streams, used waters, or industrial fluids. 
Back pressure means any elevation of pressure in the downstream piping system (by pump, elevation of piping, or steam and/or air pressure) above the supply pressure at the point of consideration which would cause, or tend to cause, a reversal of the normal direction of flow. 
Back siphonage means a form of backflow caused by a reduction in system pressure resulting in the existence of a negative or sub-atmospheric pressure at a site in the water system. 
Backflow means the reversal of flow of water or mixtures of water and other liquids, gases or other substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply from any source(s) other than an approved water supply source. 
Backflow prevention assembly means an assembly which, when properly installed between the city water supply system and the terminus point of ultimate use will prevent backflow. Example of such assemblies include, but are not limited to, reduced pressure backflow assemblies, double check valve assemblies, pressure vacuum breakers, and air gap separation. 
Backflow prevention assembly technician means an individual certified in accordance with the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission rules, as amended for the purpose of testing backflow prevention assemblies. 
Building official means the building official of the City of Fredericksburg, Texas or his designee. 
Chemical injection system means a system which automatically injects fertilizer, pesticide, weed killer, etc., into an irrigation system, while the irrigation system is operating. 
City means the City of Fredericksburg, Texas and its duly authorized representatives. 
Closed system means a piping system that has no space for water to expand. 
Commission means the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission. 
Contamination means an impairment of the quality of the public potable water supply or a private potable water supply by the induction or admission of any foreign substance that degrades the quality and which creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease by sewage, industrial fluids, or waste. 
Cross connection means a physical connection between a public water supply system and either another supply of unknown or questionable quality, any source which may contain contaminating or polluting substances, or any source of water treated to a lesser degree than an approved or auxiliary water supply source in the treatment process. 
Cross connection survey means a detailed inspection of a location and disposition of the water lines, including without limitation, establishing water lines on the premises, the existence of cross connections, the availability of auxiliary or used water supplies, the use of or availability of pollutants, contaminants and other liquid, solid or gaseous substances which may be used industrially for stabilization of water supplies and such other processes necessary to determine degree of hazard. 
Customer means the person, company or entity contracting with the city community-owned utility to receive potable water service. 
Customer's potable water system means that portion of the privately owned potable water system lying between the service connection and the point of use by customer. 
Degree of hazard means either a non-health or health hazard and is determined by the evaluation of the conditions within a system by the director, superintendent, building official or the City of Fredericksburg health official. 
Director means the director of the City of Fredericksburg public utilities department or his authorized representative or designee. 
Double check valve assembly means an assembly composed of two independently acting check valves, including tightly closing resilient-seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located resilient-seated test cocks. 
Health hazard means a cross connection, potential cross connection, or other situation involving any substance that could cause death, illness, spread of disease, or has a high probability of causing such effects if introduced into the potable water supply. 
Industrial fluids means any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically, or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration which would constitute a health, system, pollution, or plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water supply. Examples of industrial fluids include, but are not limited to: polluted or contaminated used water; all types of process waters and used waters originating from the public potable water supply system which may deteriorate in sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid form: plating acids and alkalis; circulated cooling waters connected to open cooling tower and/or cooling waters that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters such as from wells, springs, streams, rivers, bays, harbors, seas, irrigation canals, or systems etc.; and oils gases, glycerin, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions and other liquid and gaseous fluids used industrially, for other processes or for firefighting purposes. 
Non-health hazard means a cross connection or potential cross connection involving any substance that generally would not be a health hazard but would constitute a nuisance, or be aesthetically objectionable, if introduced into the potable water supply. 
Nonpotable water means a water supply, which has not been approved, for human consumption by the commission. 
Pollution means an impairment of the quality of the public water supply to a degree, which does not create a hazard to the public health but does adversely and unnecessarily affect the aesthetic qualities of such water for domestic use. 
Potable water means any public water supply, which has been investigated and approved by the commission as satisfactory for drinking, culinary and domestic purposes. 
Pressure loss means any reduction in the water pressure supplied by the city. 
Process waters means water used to cool any operation or manufacturing process. 
Public potable water supply means any publicly or privately owned water system operated as a public utility under a health permit to supply water for domestic purposes. Such a system includes all sources, facilities and appurtenances between the source and the point of delivery such as valves, pumps, pipes, conduits, tanks, receptacles, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances used to produce, convey, treat, or store potable water for public consumption or use. 
Reduced pressure backflow prevention assembly (RP) means an assembly containing two independently acting approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent pressure differential relief valve located between the check valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The unit includes tightly closing resilient-seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located resilient-seated test cocks 
Service connection means the terminal end of a service connection from the public from the public potable water system (i.e. where the water purveyor loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the customer's water system). If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connection shall mean the downstream side of the meter. 
Superintendent means the utility operations superintendent for the City of Fredericksburg or his designee. 
Supply pressure means the existing pressure in the City of Fredericksburg water system. 
Thermal expansion means heated water that does not have any space to expand. 
Used water means any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public water system to a customer's water system after passing through the service connection and which is no longer controlled by the water purveyor. 
Utility means the City of Fredericksburg utility operations department. 
Utility water service area means all locations within the City of Fredericksburg water system as defined by the city's state certificate of convenience. 
Water purveyor means the operator of a potable water system supplying at least 15 service connections or servicing at least 25 individuals at least 60 days out of the year. 
(Ord. No. 12-012, § 11.901, 9-3-2002)  
Sec. 47-306. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to the utility water service area and all cross connections and installations of backflow prevention assemblies within: 
(1)  The corporate city limits of Fredericksburg, the extraterritorial jurisdiction, or the limited purpose annexed areas where potable water is provided by the utility; 
(2)  Areas where potable water is purchased from the utility for the purpose of resale; and 
(3)  Any plumbing outside the city requiring plumbing inspection pursuant to an interlocal agreement between the city and a political subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 12-012, § 11.902, 9-3-2002)  
Sec. 47-307. - Cross connections prohibited. 
(a)  No installation of potable water supply, piping or part thereof shall be made in such a manner that allows used, unclean, polluted or contaminated water, mixtures, gasses, or other substances to enter any portion of such piping by reasons of back siphonage, back pressure or any other cause. 
(b)  No person shall install any water-operated equipment or mechanism, or use any water treating chemical or substance, if it is found that such equipment, chemical or substance may cause pollution or contamination of the public potable water supply. Such equipment or mechanism may be permitted only when equipped with an approved backflow assembly. 
(c)  No person shall connect to the public potable water system any mechanism(s) or system(s) designed to return used water to the public potable water system through any measures. 
(d)  No person shall connect to the public potable water system an auxiliary water system with out the approval of the commission and the director. 
(Ord. No. 12-012, § 11.903, 9-3-2002)  
Sec. 47-308. - Backflow prevention assemblies required. 
(a)  Each service connection from the public water system to a premise having a auxiliary water supply shall be protected against backflow of water from the premises into the public water system with a reduced pressure backflow prevention assembly. 
(b)  For all newly constructed premises on which a substance is handled so that it may enter the public water system, each service connection from the public water system to such premises shall be protected against backflow of water from the premises into the public water system. This requirement shall apply to each premises on which persons handle process water and water originating from the public water system which has been subjected to deterioration in sanitary quality. 
(c)  For all existing premises on which a substance is handled so that it may enter the public water system, each service connection from the public water system to such premises may be required to be protected against the backflow of water from the premises into the public water system upon the determination of the superintendent. This requirement shall apply to each premises on which persons handle water or waters originating from the public water system which have been subjected to deterioration in sanitary quality. 
(d)  Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed on a service connection to a premises (1) having internal cross-connections that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled in compliance with this article, (2) upon the appropriate city officials determination that an intricate plumbing and piping arrangement exists which makes it impractical to ascertain whether cross-connection therein, or (3) where a portion of the premises cannot be readily accessed for inspection purposes making it impractical or impossible to ascertain whether cross-connection exist. Determinations made by a city official pursuant to this section may be appealed in accordance with section. The customer connected to the public water system shall make all necessary arrangements, at his sole expense, to remove without delay security barriers or other obstacles to access by the superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 12-012, § 11.904, 9-3-2002)  
Sec. 47-309. - Backflow prevention assembly installation requirements. 
All new, replacement, or reconditioned backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance with the plumbing code of the City of Fredericksburg, as amended, and with the following standards, unless otherwise directed or approved by the superintendent. 
(1)  Prior to installation, a plumbing permit must be obtained from the building inspection department of the city. 
(2)  The assembly shall not be located in the same vault or meter box with the city's water meter. Backflow assemblies shall not be installed within three feet of a water meter box. 
(3)  The owner or occupant must prove to the city that no connections or tees are located between the meter and the backflow prevention assembly. The relief valve discharge on a reduced pressure backflow assembly (RP) shall not be solidly piped into a sump, sewer, drainage ditch, etc. Test cocks shall not be used as supply connections. 
(4)  Air gap separation (AG). All piping from the service connection to the receiving tank shall be above grade and be entirely visible. No water shall be provided from any point between the service connection and the air gap separation. The water inlet piping shall terminate at a distance of at least two pipe diameters of the supply inlet, but in no case less than one inch, above the overflow rim of the receiving tank. An "approved air gap separation" shall be at least twice the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the overflow rim of the vessel and in no case be less than one inch. 
(5)  Reduced pressure backflow assemblies (RP) shall be installed above ground level and shall be placed a minimum of 12 inches above finished grade to allow clearance for repair work. A freeze-proof enclosure with a concrete slab at finished grade is recommended. Where it is impractical to install the assembly outside, the installation may be made inside the building in an area not susceptible to flooding. Proper free flowing/gravity drainage must be provided for the relief valve. If the drain line is to drain outside, then the termination point must be a minimum 12 inches above finished grade. 
(6)  Double check valve assemblies (DC) can be installed above finished grade in a freeze-proof enclosure or below grade in a vault. If assembly is installed below grade the test cocks must be plugged with corrosion resistant watertight plugs. Assembly shall be a minimum of 12 inches above the floor. 
(7)  Bypass. If a bypass is installed around any approved backflow prevention assembly, the bypass must be protected from backflow/back pressure with the same type of backflow prevention assembly, that it has bypassed. The backflow prevention assembly on the bypass must be installed according to the same requirements as the service line assembly. 
(8)  Thermal expansion. The installation of a backflow assembly may create a closed system, which may result in thermal expansion. 
(9)  The city is not responsible for any pressure loss created by the installation of a backflow assembly. 
(Ord. No. 12-012, § 11.905, 9-3-2002)  
Sec. 47-310. - Inspection and testing of backflow prevention assemblies. 
(a)  Testing of backflow prevention assemblies. The owner, occupant, manager, or other person in control of any premises on which, or on account of which, backflow prevention assemblies are installed, shall have the assemblies tested by a certified backflow prevention assembly technician. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested annually and shall also be tested immediately after installation, relocation, or repair. However, the city may require a more frequent testing schedule upon ten days prior written notice to the owner, occupant, manager, or other person in control of the premises. In order to properly register a backflow prevention assembly with the utility operations department of the City of Fredericksburg, a backflow prevention assembly test report form shall be completed by a certified technician on each backflow prevention assembly tested. Each completed form, together with the records of such tests, repairs, or replacement, shall be forwarded to the utility operations department of the City of Fredericksburg within ten days after the testing, repair, or replacement. 
(b)  Registration and maintenance of backflow prevention assemblies. Each backflow prevention assembly located on private property subject to this article (except irrigation systems without a chemical injections system) shall be registered with the utility operations department of the City of Fredericksburg. The owner, occupant, manager, or other person in control of private property is responsible for general maintenance and upkeep of an approved backflow prevention assembly located thereon. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested, repaired, or replaced at the expense of the owner whenever such assemblies are determined to be defective by the superintendent, building official or their respective designees. An assembly is defective if it is not a properly installed backflow prevention assembly as required by this article. Determinations made by the superintendent, building official, or their respective designee(s) pursuant to this subsection may be appealed in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  New plumbing or plumbing modifications. The building inspection department shall inspect all new backflow prevention assembly installations, which are subject to this article, and are required by application for a plumbing permit. A service inspection certification form shall be completed by the building inspector on each new plumbing installation or on plumbing remodifications. Each completed form shall be forwarded to the utility operations department within ten days after the inspection. 
(d)  Existing buildings, structures. The superintendent shall inspect all existing commercial and other non-residential buildings, structures, and residential irrigation systems with chemical injection systems connected to the potable water system for the purpose of determining whether a cross connection exists and what type of backflow prevention assembly should be installed pursuant to this article. 
(e)  Utility purchase and installation of backflow prevention assemblies for existing customers. 
(1)  Any retail customer unable to purchase and install a backflow prevention assembly due to financial hardship may request assistance from the utility in order to comply with the intent of this chapter. The customer may submit a written request for financial assistance to the director, granting permission to purchase and install a backflow prevention assembly appropriate to the customer's needs. 
(2)  Installation shall be by a private contractor selected by the utility. The utility's cost to purchase and install the assembly shall be recovered through monthly billing on the customer's utility bill. The director may establish the payable period, but in no case shall the payback period exceed 24 months. 
(f)  Existing backflow prevention assemblies. Customers with existing backflow prevention assemblies, installed in their system (except irrigation systems without a chemical injection system) as of the effective date of this article shall come into compliance with the provisions of this article within 90 days of notification unless the superintendent finds a health hazard exists in which case the superintendent shall determine the appropriate time of compliance. Customers with existing assemblies, which comply with the provisions of this article, shall provide written proof that each such assembly has been properly maintained and serviced by a certified backflow assembly technician. If maintenance and service records are not available, the customer shall have the assembly tested in accordance with the requirements of this article. If the assembly is not testable or cannot be repaired, it must be replaced with an approved assembly in accordance with the requirements of this article. Atmospheric vacuum breakers are exempt from this section. 
(g)  Testing fee. A $15.00 fee shall be submitted to the utility operations department for each backflow prevention assembly tested and shall be paid at the time that the technician files the backflow prevention assembly test report with the city. 
(Ord. No. 12-012, § 11.906, 9-3-2002)  
Sec. 47-311. - Type of backflow prevention assembly required. 
The type of backflow prevention assembly required shall be commensurate with the type of hazard that exists on the customer's premises. The minimum types of backflow prevention assemblies required to protect the approved water supply are set forth in Table 1 below. However, the water user may choose a higher level of protection than required by the city. Spill-resistant vacuum breakers (SVB) are not approved for use in the City of Fredericksburg. 
TABLE 1 
TYPE OF HAZARD 	MINIMUM TYPE OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE 
Fire protection systems utilizing chemicals or additives (new installations only) 	RP 
Stationary construction fire hydrant meters 	RP or AG immediately adjacent of meter and one-way check valve on discharge lines on trucks 
Temporary construction fire hydrant meters 	RP or AG in fill line on the water hauling equipment and one-way check valve on discharge lines on trucks 
Premises where any customer purchasing water for the purpose of resale or distribution 	AG or RP at each service connection 
Premises owned by any state, federal, or foreign government or agency 	RP at each service connection 
Premises where there is a history of cross-connections being established or re-established 	RP 
Non-health hazard 	DC, AVB or PVB at point of connection to hazard or at service connection prior to the first branch line off customer's service line 
Health hazard 	AG or RP at point of connection to hazard and/or at service connection prior to first branch line off customer's service line. PVB not approved where back pressure situations exist 
Carbonated drink machines 	RP assembly and all down stream piping shall be non-corrosive when in contact with CO 2 gas. 
 
Situations which are not covered in Table 1 shall be evaluated on a case-by-case basis by the city, and the required backflow prevention assembly shall be determined by the superintendent. Such determination made by the superintendent may be appealed in accordance with the provisions of section of this article. 
Containment and/or secondary protection may be required on certain health hazard installations in accordance with the following Table 2, in addition to any other protection, identified herein, which is required to isolate equipment within a facility. The superintendent or building official or their respective designee(s) may require backflow prevention assembly to be installed on other facilities with a similar degree of hazard in accordance with the plumbing code of the City of Fredericksburg, as amended, or other applicable law. These backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in the main service line on the building side of the meter or the principle branch serving a single tenant space. The location of the backflow prevention assembly shall be approved by the appropriate city official or his designee(s) in accordance with the provisions contained in section. 
TABLE 2 
HEALTH HAZARD INSTALLATIONS 
	Type of Backflow PreventionAssembly Required 
Car Wash 	RP 
Multi-Story building 3 floors or more 	RP 
Animal Hospital 	RP 
Auxiliary Water Supply 	RP 
Building Containing a reclaimed water system 	RP 
Commercial laundry 	RP 
Cooling Towers 	RP 
Dental Office 	RP 
Doctor's Office 	RP 
Food and beverage processing plants 	RP 
Funeral home and mortuary 	RP 
Green house or nursery (with toxic chemicals) 	RP 
Hospitals (parallel system required) 	RP 
Laboratories (including medical, dental & research labs, and labs at educational facilities) 	RP 
Manufacturing plant (toxic) 	RP 
Meat processing plant 	RP 
Petroleum processing or storage facilities 	RP 
Plants using radioactive materials 	RP 
Plating or chemical plants 	RP 
Premises where inspection is restricted or exempted 	RP 
Rendering plant 	RP 
Sewage lift stations 	RP 
Sewage treatment plants 	RP 
Steam plants 	RP 
 
Determination made by the superintendent, building official, or their respective designee(s) pursuant to this section may be appealed in accordance provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-012, § 11.907, 9-3-2002)  
Sec. 47-312. - Removal of backflow prevention assembly. 
(a)  Approval. Prior written approval must be obtained from the superintendent before a backflow prevention assembly may be removed or relocated. 
(b)  Removal. The use of a backflow prevention assembly may be discontinued, and the assembly removed from service, upon written approval from the superintendent after presentation to the superintendent of sufficient written evidence to verify that a hazard no longer exists and is not likely to be created in the future. 
(c)  Relocation. A backflow prevention assembly may be relocated following written approval from the superintendent after presentation to the superintendent of sufficient written evidence to verify that the relocation will continue to provide the required protection and satisfy installation requirements. An assembly may not be removed for relocation unless water use is discontinued, until the relocation is complete, or until the service connection is equipped with other backflow protection approved by the superintendent and sufficient to prevent backflow during relocation. A retest will be required following the relocation of the assembly. 
(d)  Repair. A backflow prevention assembly may be removed for repair, provided that water use to the service connection is either discontinued until repair is completed and the assembly is returned to service, or the service connection is equipped with other backflow protection approved by the superintendent and sufficient to prevent backflow during repair. A retest will be required following the repair of the assembly. 
(e)  Replacement. An assembly may be removed and replaced provided that water use is discontinued until the replacement assembly is installed, or if the service connection is equipped with other backflow protection approved by the superintendent and sufficient to prevent backflow during replacement. All replacement assemblies must be approved by the superintendent and must be commensurate with the degree of hazard involved. A retest will be required following the replacement of the assembly. 
(f)  Appeals. Determinations made by the superintendent, building official, or their respective designee(s) may be appealed in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-012, § 11.908, 9-3-2002)  
Sec. 47-313. - Certified backflow prevention assembly technician. 
(a)  Registration. Prior to performing any testing of backflow prevention assemblies within the City of Fredericksburg, a certified backflow prevention assembly technician must be registered with the City of Fredericksburg utility operations department. 
(1)  Eligibility for registration shall be established upon certification as a backflow prevention assembly technician from any of the following institutions: American Society of Sanitary Engineers; University of Southern California Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research: University of Florida Training, Research and Learning for Environmental Occupations: University of Texas A&M Engineering Extension; service of the American Backflow Prevention Association; or other backflow prevention certification(s) recognized by the commission. 
(2)  Each applicant certified as a backflow prevention assembly technician shall furnish evidence to show that he/she has available the necessary tools and equipment to properly test and certify such assemblies. Serial numbers of all test gauges shall be registered with the superintendent. Registered serial numbers of test gauges shall be listed on tests and maintenance reports prior to being submitted to the superintendent. Each recorded test kit shall be tested annually for accuracy and calibrated to maintain a two percent accuracy factor. Failure to register the serial number or calibrate gauges annually shall be grounds for temporary suspension of a technician's registration until compliance with this requirement is attained. 
(3)  Registration shall remain in force provided that the technician maintains his/her eligibility for registration by complying with all requirements of this article and applicable state law or registration is not revoked by the superintendent pursuant to this article. When re-certifying through a state-approved certification institution, the technician must renew his/her registration with the superintendent. If a technician's certification remains expired for a period of one year, the technician must re-establish eligibility. A technician shall advise the superintendent if the technician's state certification is ever terminated or suspended within five business days of notice to the technician of such termination or suspension. 
(b)  Registration fee. An annual registration fee in the amount of $20.00 shall be paid by the certified technician or the company employing such certified technician at the time an application for annual registration is submitted to the superintendent. 
(c)  Responsibilities. Certified technicians shall be responsible for performing competent tests, issuing accurate certificates of backflow prevention assemblies tested, filing backflow prevention assembly test reports and test fee to the city. Certified technicians shall not change the design or operational characteristics of a backflow prevention assembly during repair or maintenance without prior written approval of the superintendent. 
(d)  Quality control. Upon notification or discovery of possible deficiencies in a technician's test results, the city may exercise any one or all of the following: 
(1)  Re-test any backflow prevention assembly certified as operational; 
(2)  Notify the technician certifying the operation of a backflow prevention assembly of test discrepancies; and 
(3)  Take enforcement action against the certified technician for three testing or reporting discrepancies verified within a two-year period, commencing with the first discrepancy, including without limitation: 
a.  False, incomplete, or inaccurate reporting of test completion or certification of a backflow prevention assembly; 
b.  Use of inaccurate gauges; or 
c.  Improper operational certification method. 
(e)  Appeals. Determinations made by the superintendent or his designee(s) under this section may be appealed in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-012, § 11.909, 9-3-2002)  
Sec. 47-314. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Authority. The superintendent, building official, or their respective designee(s) are hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this article by any one or more of the enforcement mechanisms set forth in this section. 
(b)  Right of entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this article, or whenever the superintendent, building official, or their respective designee(s) have reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any cross-connection or violation of this article, the superintendent, building official, or their respective designee(s) shall first request entry and receive consent from the owner, occupant, manage, or other person in control of the building or premises. If consent is refused or if the building or premises is unoccupied, the superintendent, the building official or their respective designee(s), may use all means legally available to gain entry, including but not limited to, obtaining a proper inspection warrant. 
(c)  Notice of violation. In the event that any person violates the provisions of this article, the superintendent, building official, or their respective designee(s) shall issue a notice of violation directed to the owner, occupant, manager, or other person in control of the property on which the violation has occurred. 
(1)  Contents of notice of violation. The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  Identity of the owner, occupant, manager, or other person in control of the property; 
b.  A street address sufficient for the identification of the property upon which the alleged violation has occurred; 
c.  A description of the alleged violation and a copy of the section of this article that has allegedly been violated; 
d.  A statement of the action required to be taken to correct the alleged violation and the deadline for completion of the corrective action; 
e.  Statements advising that failure to take the required action within the time specified may result in (1) a criminal penalty or up to $2,000.00 per day for each violation upon conviction in municipal court, (2) a lawsuit to enforce this article being filed against the owner in state court and possible recovery of a civil penalty of up to $1,000.00 per day for each violation, and (3) discontinuation of water service. 
(2)  Service of notice of violation. Service of the notice of violation, and any amendments thereto, shall be made upon the owner, occupant, manager, or person in control of the property either personally or by mailing a copy of such notice of violation by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner, occupant, manager, or person in control of the property at their address as it appears on the utility's most current water service account listing. If the utility does not have a current address for the owner, occupant, manager, or person in control of the property, and after a diligent search the superintendent is unable to find a current address, then a copy of the notice of violation shall be mailed to the owner, occupant, manager, or person in control of the property at the address of the property involved in the proceedings. The neglect or refusal of the owner, occupant, manager, or person in control of the property to accept such notice shall not affect the validity of any enforcement proceedings taken under this section. Service by certified mail in the manner provided in this section shall be effective two days after the date of mailing. 
(Ord. No. 12-012, § 11.910, 9-3-2002)  
Sec. 47-315. - Enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Criminal penalties. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions or terms of this article shall be deemed guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine not exceeding $2,000.00 for each offense. Each and every day or portion thereof that such violation shall continue shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Civil penalties. The city may file a civil lawsuit to enforce this article and may seek civil penalties up to $1,000.00 per day for each offense of this article as authorized by subchapter B of chapter 54 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, or any other applicable law. 
(c)  Discontinuance of water service. Water service to the location where the alleged violation exists may be discontinued or refused by the utility if violations are not corrected within the time period indicated in the notice of violation provided by the superintendent, building official, or their respective designee(s). Decisions by the superintendent, building official, or their respective designee(s) to discontinue or refuse water service made under this section may be appealed in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Damage to city. Through civil action, the city may collect all costs associated with damages to city, including damages to city property, as a result of a violation of this article. 
(e)  Remedies cumulative. All remedies authorized under this article are cumulative of all others unless otherwise expressly provided. Accordingly, the filing of a criminal action shall not preclude the pursuit of a civil or administrative action for violation of this article nor shall the filing of a civil action preclude the pursuit of any other action or remedy, administrative or criminal. 
(Ord. No. 12-012, § 11.911, 9-3-2002)  
Sec. 47-316. - Appeals. 
(a)  Applicability. Appeals may be filed pursuant to this section for decisions of the superintendent, building official or their respective designee(s) and for discontinuation of water service as specifically provided in this article. However, the appeal process provided by this section shall not be available for criminal violations of this article. 
(b)  Appeal to director. An owner, occupant, manager, or other person in control of private property may appeal decisions made by the superintendent, building official, or their respective designee(s) pursuant to this article by filing a written appeal to the director within seven days of city's written notice of violation. An appeal filed pursuant to this section shall specifically state the basis for the aggrieved party's challenge to the city's authority under this article. 
(c)  Standard for appeals. When reviewing an appeal filed pursuant to this section, the director shall evaluate all evidence submitted. The burden of proving that the necessity existed for the action taken by the city official shall be on the city. The city shall provide evidence sufficient to reasonably support a determination that the owner, occupant, manager, or other person in control of the property failed to comply with the requirements of this article as alleged by the city. 
(d)  Issuance of decision by director. Decisions of the director of public works shall be issued within ten calendar days of city's receipt of the written appeal, decisions of the director of public works shall be final. 
(Code 1992, § 11.911; Ord. No. 12-012, § 11.911, 9-3-2002)  
Chapter 50 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Federal law references— Federal law preempts local government regulation relating to price, route or service of any motor carrier respecting transportation of property, 49 USC § 14501(c)(1); safety regulations by local governments are not preempted, 49 USC § 14501(c)(2)(A); regulation of price of for-hire tows performed without prior consent of owner, exempt from preemption, 49 USC § 14501(c)(2)(C). 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to regulate vehicles for hire, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.073; tow truck regulation by political subdivisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 643.201 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 50-1—50-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - GROUND TRANSPORTATION SERVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 24-007, adopted June 19, 2014, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 50-19—50-36, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to taxicabs and derived from Code 1992, §§ 4.401—4.418. 
State Law reference— Municipal regulation of taxicabs, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.004. 
 
Sec. 50-19. - Definitions. 
City means the City of Fredericksburg, Texas. 
Driver or chauffeur means every person in actual charge of operation of a GTS vehicle whether as owner or agent, servant or employee of the owner. 
Ground Transportation Service (GTS) means a transportation service using any taxicab, any and every automobile or motor-propelled vehicle including limousines and all other motor propelled vehicles however classified (whether as a shuttle, airport shuttle, jitney etc,) used for the transportation of passengers for hire over the public streets of the City, and shall include Pedicabs. The same shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter irrespective of whether the operation extends beyond the City limits, or whether the service charges rates for distance traveled or for waiting time, or for both, or for the trip, or at rates per hour, per day, or per month, or whether such vehicle is routed to predetermined destinations, regular or irregular routes or destinations under the direction of such passenger or passengers, or such person or persons hiring the same, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Motor buses transporting to or from school or college, 
(2)  Ambulances or other emergency vehicles operating under permit from this City or another City or governmental entity, 
(3)  Vehicles rented or leased for operation by the person actually driving the same, unless such vehicle is transporting for compensation persons other than the one who actually rented or leased the same, 
(4)  Courtesy vehicles operated to or from the airport to hotels, motels, parking lots, or car dealerships or rental agencies by the owners of such entities for their patrons for no compensation, 
(5)  Any vehicle being operated pursuant to a franchise or permit legally issued by the Texas Railroad Commission or the Interstate Commerce Commission (example: Greyhound Grey-line busses), 
(6)  Vehicles operated for a funeral home in the performance of funeral services, 
(7)  Vehicles used in a ride-share/carpool, operated by individual employees or employers to transport a person or persons on a prearranged basis between their homes and places of employment or other places of common destination if free or if only a fee calculated to reasonably cover expenses is charged, or 
(8)  Vehicles used by or funded by governmental agencies for transit systems (examples: City bus system or Alamo Area Council of Governments). 
Pedicab shall mean a device with three or four wheels propelled by human power exerted through a belt, chain, or gears capable of carrying a driver and one or more passengers, with a maximum of four on a platform made as part of the device. A pedicab may have an electric assist motor to help the driver move the pedicab. 
Taxicab means a chauffeured motor vehicle having a rated passenger capacity of eight or less which typically operates on irregular routes and schedules and on a call-and-demand basis. 
(Ord. No. 24-007, 6-19-2014)  
Sec. 50-20. - Offenses and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to own or operate a GTS when not incompliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Each violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense and each offense shall be punishable as a Class C misdemeanor. Each day the violation exists shall be considered a separate violation for the purpose of punishment. Punishment is governed by Section 1-6 of this Code of Ordinances as set forth for health, safety and welfare violations. 
(Ord. No. 24-007, 6-19-2014)  
Sec. 50-21. - Sign regulations. 
Each Taxicab and Pedicab shall have the business name and phone number affixed to both front doors with lettering clearly visible and readable. 
(Ord. No. 24-007, 6-19-2014)  
Sec. 50-22. - Insurance required. 
(a)  Each GTS shall have and maintain insurance and a certificate of insurance reflecting insurance coverage as herein prescribed. The GTS shall keep in full force and effect while providing GTS service a policy of public liability insurance, issued by an insurance company fully authorized to do business in this state and performable in Gillespie County, Texas, insuring the public against any loss or damage that may result to any person or property from the operation of such service, vehicle or vehicles. 
(b)  The minimum amounts of public liability and property damage insurance required for the operation of a GTS, shall be as follows: 
(1)  One Million Dollars Combined Single Limit or 
(2)  Five Hundred Thousand Dollars per person with $1,000,000.00 each accident bodily injury and $250,000.00 property damage. 
The coverage required may carry a deductible of no more than $5,000.00. 
Passenger liability exclusions are expressly prohibited. 
Each driver shall be specifically listed as an approved driver on such policy of insurance. 
(c)  In the event that any insurance policy is canceled the GTS service shall be terminated until the required insurance is reinstated. GTS service may not be operated at any time the insurance required hereby is not in effect. 
(d)  Every policy of insurance issued to comply with the provisions hereof shall be issued by an insurance company with a minimum "A. B. Best" rating of at least B+. 
(e)  All GTS drivers shall maintain a copy of the required insurance within the GTS vehicle at all times and display the same to any peace officer upon request. 
(f)  No person shall drive a GTS vehicle with passengers without being then covered by the insurance required herein and listed thereon as an approved driver. 
(Ord. No. 24-007, 6-19-2014)  
Secs. 50-23—50-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - HORSE DRAWN CARRIAGES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to regulate vehicles for hire, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 215.073. 
 
Sec. 50-61. - Definitions. 
Whenever used in this article the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Annual permit means permission granted by the city council to operate a horse-drawn carriage service within the city for a period of one year from date of issuance and renewable under the provisions of this article; provided, however, that permission granted is neither expired nor revoked. 
Carriage means a wheeled passenger vehicle pulled by a horse. 
Carriage horse means any horse which is used by its owner or other person to carry or pull any person or carriage, in exchange for a fee. A horse rented or leased by its owner to another for any of the foregoing purposes shall be deemed to be a carriage horse for the purposes of this article. 
City manager means the person, his authorized representative or his designated representative. 
Holder means a person who is granted an annual permit under this article. 
Horse-drawn carriage driver means any individual duly licensed as a driver by the state, if required by the state, who has been duly employed to operate a horse-drawn carriage by the holder of a horse-drawn carriage permit. 
Passenger means an individual, other than the driver, being transported by horse-drawn carriage. 
Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, company, association, or a joint stock association owning, driving, controlling, or operating any horse-drawn carriage as defined and regulated herein. 
Street means and includes any street, alley, avenue, boulevard, drive, public way or highway commonly used for the purpose of public travel within the incorporated limits of the city. 
(Code 1992, § 4.501)  
Sec. 50-62. - Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly do or perform any act prohibited hereby and it shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly fail to do or perform any act required hereby. Upon conviction of any violation hereof a person shall be subject to punishment as provided by section 1-6 of this Code. 
(Code 1992, § 4.502)  
Sec. 50-63. - Permit required. 
A person shall not operate a horse-drawn carriage for hire nor hire any horse for transportation within the city without first securing operating authority granted under this article. 
(Code 1992, § 4.503)  
Sec. 50-64. - Transferability of permit. 
A permit may not be transferred to another unless the holder files a written application as required for a permit for the transfer and the transfer is reviewed and approved by the city council. 
(Code 1992, § 4.504)  
Sec. 50-65. - Prerequisites to issuance of permit. 
Before a permit is granted under this article, the application for the permit must be approved by the city council. The granting of the permit is at the discretion of the city council upon a finding by the council that issuance of such a permit is in the interest of public convenience and necessity, but will not be granted unless the applicant is fit, willing, and able to operate the horse-drawn carriage service in accordance with the requirements of this article, rules and regulations of the city manager, provisions of the permit, or other applicable law. 
(Code 1992, § 4.505)  
Sec. 50-66. - Grant or denial of permit; scope. 
The authority to grant or deny an annual permit, to renew or deny renewal of annual permit, or to revoke an annual permit shall be vested exclusively with the city council. Upon approval of an application for a permit by the city council, the permit holder is authorized to operate horse-drawn carriages carrying passengers for hire on certain public streets of the city for a period of one year beginning on the date as stated on the permit and upon the terms and conditions contained in this article, as may be amended or as contained in the annual permit. 
(Code 1992, § 4.506)  
Sec. 50-67. - Application for permit. 
To obtain an annual permit, a person shall make application to the city council in the manner prescribed by this article. The applicant must be the person who will own, control, or operate the proposed horse-drawn carriage service. An applicant shall file with the city secretary a written, sworn application containing the following: 
(1)  The form of business of the applicant. If the business is a corporation, association or other entity, a copy of the documents establishing the business and the name, address, and citizenship of each person with a direct interest in the business. 
(2)  Name, address, and verified signature of the applicant. 
(3)  The driver's license numbers of all horse drawn carriage drivers to be employed and evidence of current state license, if required by the state. 
(4)  A statement or other evidence of ownership of all horses and equipment which must be the same as the applicant. 
(5)  Description of any past business experience of the applicant, particularly in providing passenger transportation services, including identification and description of any revocation or suspension of a permit held by the applicant or business before the date of filing the application. 
(6)  Number and description of the horses and carriages the applicant proposes to use in the operation of the horse-drawn carriage service; description of the operations of the proposed horse-drawn carriage service and location of the fixed facilities to be used in the operation. 
(Code 1992, § 4.507)  
Sec. 50-68. - Renewal of permit. 
(a)  An annual permit shall be automatically renewed unless the city manager notifies the holder prior to the renewal date of his intention to recommend denial of the permit renewal based on his determination that: 
(1)  The holder has demonstrated a history of noncompliance with permit provisions, horse-drawn carriage regulations, or other law; or 
(2)  The holder has demonstrated it is not fit, willing, or able to continue to operate the horse-drawn carriage service in accordance with permit provisions, drivers or other license requirements, applicable provisions of this article, or other law; or 
(3)  Public convenience or necessity do not require the continued operation of the horse-drawn carriage. 
(b)  If the city manager determines that a denial of a permit renewal or material change in the terms or conditions of the permit is required for the public convenience and necessity, or if a holder requests a material change in the terms or conditions of the permit, the city manager shall submit a written report to the city council for consideration. The city manager shall notify the permit holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, of his intent to submit a written report, pursuant to this subsection, along with a summary of his recommendation. The written report shall contain his recommendations for denial of permit renewal or his recommendations on the proposed or requested change together with supporting findings of fact. Upon action taken by the city council, the city manager shall incorporate such changes in the annual permit as may be authorized by the city council. 
(c)  If the permit holder receives notice of the city manager's intent to recommend denial of renewal or request for material changes to an existing permit, the permit holder shall have 15 days after such receipt within which to request a formal hearing. Such request shall be made to the city manager care of the city secretary who will set the same for hearing by the city council at the next regular meeting thereof. 
(d)  The holder shall cease operation of the horse-drawn carriage service immediately upon denial of the request for renewal by the city council. 
(Code 1992, § 4.508)  
Sec. 50-69. - Permit fee. 
A holder of an annual permit shall pay the city, in advance, a permit fee, as set forth in the fee schedule found in appendix A to this Code, for each carriage authorized by the permit. 
(Code 1992, § 4.509)  
Sec. 50-70. - Numbers of carriages. 
A permit holder shall not operate more than the approved number of carriages authorized by the annual permit. 
(Code 1992, § 4.510)  
Sec. 50-71. - Public liability and property damage insurance required. 
(a)  The permit holder shall provide and maintain, at the holder's own expense, the following type and amount of insurance for the term of this permit: 
(1)  Type. Comprehensive general (public) liability to include but not be limited to the following: 
a.  Premises/operation; 
b.  Independent contractors; 
c.  Personal injury; 
d.  Products/completed operations; 
e.  Contractual liability; and 
f.  Operation of horse-drawn carriages. 
(2)  Amount. Combined single limit for bodily injury and property damage per occurrence: $300.00. 
(b)  The permit holder further agrees that with respect to the above required insurances, the city shall: 
(1)  Be named as additional insured. 
(2)  Be provided with a waiver of subrogation. 
(3)  Be provided with 30 days advance notice, in writing, of cancellation or material change. 
(4)  Be provided with certificates of insurance evidencing the above-required insurances, prior to the issuance of the permit. 
(Code 1992, § 4.511)  
Sec. 50-72. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  A person may operate a carriage every day only during the hours 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m. (midnight). 
(b)  No horse being used for hire is permitted to be outside the stable grounds except during specified hours. 
(Code 1992, § 4.512)  
Sec. 50-73. - Routes. 
(a)  A permit holder shall operate carriage tours only within the area as determined by the city council which shall be uniform for all permit holders. 
(b)  Subject to city council's approval, additional restrictions may be imposed to promote the public safety. Additionally, the director of public works and the police department may impose temporary restrictions during periods of heavy traffic congestion resulting from construction, holiday activities, or special events. 
(Code 1992, § 4.514)  
Sec. 50-74. - Establishment of stand and picking up passengers. 
(a)  A permit holder shall provide adequate watering and feeding facilities at a location or locations designated in the permit and maintain them in a clean and sanitary manner. These shall not be within the public property or rights-of-way. 
(b)  Picking up or dropping off passengers is permitted upon public rights-of-way provided that the same is accomplished out of the lanes for traffic and does not block access in alleys or other public rights-of-way. 
(c)  Waiting for passengers shall occur only at locations which will not interfere with other vehicular traffic flow, which will provide adequate safety visibility, which is not on Main Street and which is approved in writing in advance by the traffic control officer of the police department. 
(Code 1992, § 4.514)  
Sec. 50-75. - Maintenance of stands and routes. 
A permit holder shall at his own expense keep routes and carriage stands clean and free of animal excrement. The carriages shall use an attached diaper device on carriage shafts, enclosed on three sides to ensure compliance. Disposal of manure shall be the responsibility of the carriage company and must be removed from the city. 
(Code 1992, § 4.515)  
Sec. 50-76. - Slow-moving vehicle emblem and lighting. 
(a)  Every animal-drawn vehicle shall display a "slow-moving vehicle emblem" as prescribed by state law on the rear and center of the vehicle. 
(b)  Every animal drawn vehicle shall be equipped with lamps and reflectors that are visible at night for a distance of not less than 1,000 feet, or shall not operate past dusk. 
(Code 1992, § 4.516) 
State Law reference— Distinctive emblems required on slow moving vehicles, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St., art. 6701d, § 139B.  
APPENDIX A - FEE SCHEDULE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Appendix A Fee Schedule, as adopted by the city council. Amendments to the Fee Schedule are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Fee Schedule. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
 
ARTICLE 1.000. - TAX CERTIFICATE FEE 
A tax certificate fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be charged for each tax certificate issued by the City of Fredericksburg. 
(Code 1992, app. A, art. 1.000)  
ARTICLE 2.000. - CERTIFIED COPIES FROM DUPLICATES 
Certified copies may be provided from photographic duplicates of public records, even when the original of such record has not as yet been destroyed. A charge of one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) for each page or part thereof shall be made for certified copies produced from a photographic duplicate of the original record; provided, however, where a specific charge is elsewhere provided by this article or other ordinance for certified copies of particular records, then such specific charge shall be controlling over the charge provided for in this article. 
(Code 1992, app. A, art. 2.000)  
ARTICLE 3.000. - COPYING CHARGES 
The following schedule of charges for reproduction and copying of public records is hereby adopted: 
Size (Inches) 	Cost Per Copy 
Up to 8½"×14" 	
50 pages or less of readily available information 	$0.10 each 
50 pages or more of readily available information: 	
First page 	$0.85 
Additional pages 	$0.15 each 
For any quantity of information deemed to be not readily available: 	
First page 	$0.70 
Additional pages 	$0.15 each 
Plus actual labor costs incurred in providing the requested information. 	
14"×18" 	$0.50 
 
Costs for copying of any other materials and documents (i.e., maps, oversized documents, colored copies, blue line prints, etc.) shall be determined by the city secretary at the time such request is made. 
(Code 1992, app. A, art. 3.000)  
ARTICLE 4.000. - ANIMAL FEES AND CHARGES 
 
Sec. 4.100. - Fees for Impoundment. 
(a)  Quarantine at City owned facilities: $10.00 per day. 
(b)  Impoundment for any reason other than quarantine: $5.00 per day after the first twenty-four-hour period plus a flat fee of $25.00. 
(24-017, 9-2-2014) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 24-017, adopted Sept. 2, 2014, amended § 4.100 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 4.100, pertained to impoundment fees for dogs and cats running at large; adoption fees, and derived from Code 1992, app. A, § 4.100; and Ord. No. 16-001, §§ 4.100, 4.200, adopted Jan. 23, 2006.  
Sec. 4.200. - Registration of Dangerous Dogs. 
(a)  The animal control officer shall formally register a dangerous dog if the owner pays an annual fee of $50.00. 
(b)  If an owner of a registered dangerous dog sells [the dog] or moves the dog to a new address within the city, he/she shall notify the animal control officer not later than the 14th day after the sale or move. On presentation of a fee of $25.00, the animal control officer shall issue a new registration tag to be placed on the dog's collar. 
(Code 1992, app. A, § 4.200)  
Sec. 4.300. - Annual registration fees. 
(a)  If the animal is spayed or neutered: $5.00 or $25.00 for the life of the animal. 
(b)  If the animal is not spayed or neutered: $10.00. 
(c)  Dangerous animals: $50.00. 
(d)  Change in address for dangerous animals: $25.00 for each address change. 
(e)  Animals adopted from city-owned facilities: the first year of registration is free. 
(Ord. No. 16-001, § 4.300, 1-23-2006)  
ARTICLE 5.000. - CONSTRUCTIONS PERMITS AND FEES 
 
Sec. 5.100. - Fees for Building Permits. 
No building shall be in any manner constructed, altered, repaired, remodeled, or moved within the city limits unless a building permit is obtained. The following fees shall be paid for building permits prior to the issuance thereof: 
(a)  Carport, storage sheds, accessory buildings, and detached garages: $0.07 per square foot of floor space, with a minimum fee of $25.00. 
(b)  Residences and additions to residences: $0.15 per square foot of floor space, with a minimum fee of $25.00. 
(c)  Commercial buildings: $0.18 per square foot of floor space for the first 2,500 square feet, plus $0.10 per square foot for the next 2,500 square feet, plus $0.07 per square foot for the amount of floor space in excess of 5,000 square feet, with a minimum fee of $50.00. 
(d)  Industrial buildings: $0.15 per square foot of floor space for the first 2,500 square feet, plus $0.05 per square foot for the next 2,500 square feet, plus $0.03 per square foot for the amount of floor space in excess of 5,000 square feet, with a minimum fee of $100.00. 
(e)  Moving of buildings or structures: $50.00. 
(f)  Erection of fences: $25.00. 
(g)  Demolition of buildings: $50.00. Demolition of accessory buildings: $25.00. 
(h)  Alterations or repairs without addition of floor space. In the event that alterations or repairs are made to a commercial building without the addition of any additional floor space, the fees provided in Appendix "K" of the Standard Building Code shall be required. In the event that alterations or repairs are made to a residential building without the addition of any additional floor space, the fees set forth in the table below shall be required: 
Residential floor space affected by alteration of repair 	Permit fee 
= 500 sq. ft. 	$200.00 flat fee 
>500 sq. ft. but =1000 sq. ft. 	$400.00 flat fee 
>1000 sq. ft. 	$600.00 flat fee 
 
(h-1)  Swimming pools and hot tubs The permit fees set forth in the table below shall be required: 
Effective Drought 
Response Stage 
for 
the City of Fredericksburg 
at the time of 
permit application, 
per Sec. 47-47 
of this Code of Ordinances 	Permit Fee 
Drought Response 
Stages 1, 2, or 3 	$300.00 flat fee 
Drought Response 
Stage 4 	$400.00 flat fee 
Drought Response 
Stage 5 	No 
permits 
issued 
 
(i)  Signs: $30.00, plus $2.00 per square foot of sign area. 
(j)  Temporary signs: 
(1)  Banners or Temporary Signs: $35.00. 
(2)  Over-street or other Banners to be erected by the City: 
Signs for Civic Use (generally non-profit organizations): $150.00; 
Other (generally for-profit organizations): $300.00. 
No additional permit fee is required. 
(k)  Technology Fee (Residential and Commercial): $6.00. 
(l)  Certificate of Occupancy (Residential and Commercial): $25.00. 
The building inspector shall determine, for each application for building permit received, which of the above rates will apply. 
(m)  Mechanical Permit Fees. 
Permit fee, $15.00 plus the following, as applicable: 
New or Replacement Air Conditioning Units: 	$15.00 each 
Air Handling Units: 	$15.00 each 
Floor Handling Units/Wall Heaters: 	$15.00 each 
Commercial Exhaust Hoods: 	$15.00 each 
Refrigeration Units: 	$15.00 each 
Boilers: 	$15.00 each 
Duct Outlets: 	$1.00 each 
Ventilation Fan: 	$5.00 each 
Work started without permit double permit price 	
Re-inspection Fee: 	$20.00 each 
 
(n)  Fee for Design Standards or Design Guidelines review: 
Per application 	$100.00 
 
(Ord. No. 13-014, § 5.100, 10-20-2003; Ord. No. 23-016, 9-16-2013; Ord. No. 24-021, 10-6-2014; Ord. No. 25-016, 9-8-2015; Ord. No. 28-019, § 1, 10-1-2018; Ord. No. 2019-25, §§ 1, 2, 8-5-2019)  
Sec. 5.200. - Electrical Permit Fees. 
Each application for permit shall be remitted to the electrical inspector with the appropriate fee, as determined from the schedule of fees below, which fees shall be inclusive of normal inspection fees. In the event the scope of work is increased during the construction period, the electrical inspector shall require the permit holder to file an amended permit application, prior to final inspection, setting forth the proper fee calculations based on the increase in scope, and paying the increased fee amount: 
Fee Schedule 	
Three (3) phase loop 	$20.00 
Single-phase loop 	$20.00 
Above includes house service panel not to exceed six (6) disconnects. 	
Distribution panel (up to twenty (20) circuit) 	$25.00 
Over twenty (20) circuits, per circuit 	$2.00 
Additional Circuits to existing panels, per circuit 	$2.00 
Well motor 	$10.00 
Motor less than five (5) hp (not including appliances) 	$10.00 
Motors five (5) hp or greater 	$10.00 
X-Ray Equipment 	$10.00 
Welding machine 	$10.00 
Signs (electric) 	$10.00 
Air Conditioning circuit (heat and/or cool) 	$10.00 
Minimum charge 	$20.00 
 
(a)  Repairs, replacements or additions to existing electrical systems shall be charged at the above rate according to the portion of the existing system which is being repaired. 
(b)  Moving or otherwise relocating of any electrical equipment for which a permit fee is not otherwise provided for shall require a minimum inspection fee of $20.00. 
(c)  In the event work is commenced before a permit is obtained without the specific approval of the building official, the permit fee shall be doubled but in no case shall the doubled fee be less than $60.00. 
(d)  In the event it becomes necessary, in the sole discretion of the electrical inspector, to make a reinspection of work authorized under this code, the person to which the permit was issued shall pay a reinspection fee of $25.00. Said fee shall be paid prior to the reinspection. 
(Ord. No. 6-038, 9-26-1994)  
Sec. 5.300. - Fee for Electrical Inspections. 
All new facilities and modified, changed, enlarged or reconstructed facilities are subject to inspection by the city, in which event a reasonable inspection fee not exceeding $10.00 for each pole inspection shall be paid to the city by the utility. 
(Code 1992, app. A, § 5.300)  
Sec. 5.400. - Permit Fee for Sidewalk Construction. 
A permit fee of five cents for each of the first 100 lineal feet and two cents per foot for each additional foot, with a minimum of $1.00 fee, shall be paid before such a permit shall be granted for repairs of sidewalks, driveways, etc. 
(Code 1992, app. A, § 5.400)  
ARTICLE 5.500. - [APPLICATION FEES][2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 23-016, adopted Sept. 16, 2013, amended Art. 5.500 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. 5.500 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 8-072B, adopted Nov. 2, 1998. 
 
Sec. 5.501. - Historic Review. 
An application fee of $10.00 shall be paid for all applications. An additional $40.00 shall be paid for applications requiring Historic Review Board review and consideration for a Certificate of Appropriateness or General Review of Appropriateness-Advisory Function of the Board. 
(Ord. No. 23-016, 9-16-2013)  
Sec. 5.502. - Filing Fees for Plats and other recordings. 
(a)  Preliminary plats of subdivisions and resubdivisions shall be accompanied by a filing fee of $400.00, plus $20.00 per lot. 
(b)  Final plats of subdivisions and resubdivisions shall be accompanied by a filing fee of $500.00, plus $10.00 per lot. 
(c)  Plat vacations shall be accompanied by a filing fee of $100.00 per [lot]. 
(d)  There shall be required for minor plat changes or corrections a fee of $200.00 plat. 
(e)  Replat: $300.00, plus $20.00 per lot. 
(f)  Minor Plat or amendment to Minor Plat: $300.00. 
(g)  Application for variance to Subdivision Ordinance to be paid at the time of original plat application: $100.00. 
(h)  In addition to the filing fee for the application for subdivision approval, replats or any other documents which are to be recorded in the plat or deed records of Gillespie County, the applicant shall also pay to the city the amount of the recording fee for necessary recording as is then being charged by the clerk of Gillespie County for the recording prior to the filing of any of such plats or other documents. No plat or other document will be filed without the payment of the recording fee. 
(Ord. No. 23-016, 9-16-2013; Ord. No. 28-019, § 2, 10-1-2018)  
Sec. 5.503. - Filing fee for Zoning application. 
(a)  Rezoning application initiated by the property owner, or other person seeking a zoning change: $400.00. 
(b)  Land Use Plan change application initiated by the property owner, or other person seeking a Land Use Plan change: $300.00. 
(c)  Rezoning application initiated by the City Staff, Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Council: no fee. 
(d)  Zoning Board of Adjustment Variance request: $250.00. 
(e)  Conditional use permit fee: $400.00. 
(f)  Site Plan Approval fee: Administrative approval $300.00; Planning and Zoning Commission approval $400.00. 
(Ord. No. 23-016, 9-16-2013; Ord. No. 28-019, § 3, 10-1-2018)  
Sec. 5.504. - Administrative Appeal to Zoning Board of Adjustment. 
Application fee ..... $100.00 
(Ord. No. 23-016, 9-16-2013)  
Sec. 5.505. - Rights-of-Way Construction Permit Application Fee. 
Construction Permit Application Fee ..... $300.00 
(Ord. No. 27-011, § 1, 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 5.506. - Application Fee for Network Providers. 
Up to five network nodes ..... $500.00 
Each additional node ..... $250.00 
Each pole ..... $1,000.00 
(Ord. No. 27-011, § 1, 8-7-2017) 
State Law reference— V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.0156.  
Sec. 5.507. - Public Right-of-Way Rates for Network Providers. 
(a)  Public right-of-way rate: Annual rate of $250.00 multiplied by number of network provider's network nodes in public rights-of-way. (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.053) 
(b)  Annual adjustment to public-right-of-way rate: One-half the annual change to the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers for Texas, as published by the federal Bureau of Labor Statistics as published in February for the preceding 12 months. (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.054) 
(c)  Network provider's installation of its own transport facilities: In addition to public right-of-way rate, the sum of $28.00 multiplied by number of network provider's network nodes in public rights-of-way until time payment exceeds monthly aggregate per node compensation. (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.055) 
(Ord. No. 27-011, § 1, 8-7-2017)  
Sec. 5.508. - Collocation on service poles by network provider. 
(a)  Twenty dollars per year per service pole. (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 284.056) 
(Ord. No. 27-011, § 1, 8-7-2017)  
ARTICLE 6.000. - FEE FOR GENERAL CONTRACTOR LICENSE AND BOND 
The annual license fee shall be $400.00 for the initial license and $200.00 for renewal on January 1 of each succeeding year. 
(Code 1992, app. A, art. 6.000; Ord. No. 28-019, § 4, 10-1-2018)  
ARTICLE 7.000. - FEES FOR ELECTRICAL LICENSES 
 
Sec. 7.100. - Fee for Duplicate Copy of Electrical Licenses. 
In the event that license or permit issued is lost or destroyed, the person to whom it was issued may obtain a duplicate upon furnishing proof satisfactory to the electrical enforcement official that the permit or license was lost or destroyed, and upon payment of a fee of $5.00. 
(Code 1992, app. A, § 7.100)  
Sec. 7.200. - Fees for Licenses and Examinations. 
The fees required for licensing shall be as follows: 
License 	Original 	Renewal 
Master Electrician 	$300.00 	$50.00 
Journeyman Electrician 	$40.00 	$20.00 
Maintenance Electrician 	$40.00 	$20.00 
 
The total fee is payable for a full period or any portion of a period, and shall be paid prior to issuance of a license or a renewal. 
(Code 1992, § 7.200)  
ARTICLE 8.000. - FEE FOR PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS PERMIT[3] 
(a)  For each Peddlers and Solicitors Permit: $20.00. 
(b)  For each Canvasser requesting a Permit: No fee. 
(Ord. No. 25-008, 6-1-2015) 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 25-008, adopted June 1, 2015, amended Art. 8.000 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. 8.000, pertained to fees for itinerant merchants' and vendors' permit, and derived from Code 1992, app. a, art. 8.000. 
 
ARTICLE 9.000. - LICENSE FEE FOR SALES OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
Before any person shall be permitted to manufacture, sell or distribute beer, wine or mixed beverages, as hereinbefore defined, within the corporate limits of the city, he/she shall present to the tax collector of the city his/her license or permit to manufacture, sell or distribute beer, wine or mixed beverages, as the case may be, within the State of Texas or in the County of Gillespie, and pay said tax collector an annual license fee as follows: 
(a)  Wholesaler ..... $937.50 
(b)  General Class B wholesaler ..... 150.00 
(c)  Local Class B wholesaler ..... 37.50 
(d)  Package store ..... 150.00 
(e)  Local distributor ..... 50.00 
(f)  Wine only package store ..... 37.50 
(g)  Wine and beer retailer ..... 87.50 
(h)  Wine and beer retailer off-premise ..... 30.00 
(i)  Mixed beverage ..... 376.00 
(j)  Mixed beverage late hours ..... 76.00 
(k)  Caterer ..... 250.00 
(l)  Private club late hours ..... 376.00 
(m)  Beverage cartage ..... 10.00 
(n)  Bonded warehouse ..... 76.00 
(o)  Manufacturer ..... 376.00 
(p)  General distributor ..... 150.00 
(q)  Local distributor ..... 37.50 
(r)  Retail dealer on-premise ..... 76.00 
(s)  Retail dealer on-premise late hours ..... 126.00 
(t)  Retail dealer off-premise ..... 30.00 
(u)  Temporary license ..... 16.00 
(Code 1992, app. A, art. 9.000)  
ARTICLE 10.000. - LICENSE FEE FOR TAXICABS 
The fee for a license required by this article shall be $25.00 for the first taxicab and $10.00 for each additional taxicab. Such fees shall be paid annually in advance on or before March 31st. The license fees provided for herein shall be used to defray the expenses incurred in administering and enforcing this article. 
(Code 1992, app. A, art. 10.000)  
ARTICLE 11.000. - PERMIT FEE HORSE DRAWN CARRIAGES 
A holder of an annual permit shall pay the city, in advance, a permit fee of $25.00 a year for each carriage authorized by the permit. 
(Code 1992, app. A, art. 11.000)  
ARTICLE 11.701. - UTILITY DEPOSITS AND BILLING 
(a)  Deposits. 
(1)  Each customer shall pay to the City, at the time of making application for connection to the applicable system an amount as is set forth in Appendix A to this Code as security for the payment of the bills for utility service. This deposit is a combined deposit for any or all utilities for each customer. In lieu of a deposit, the City may accept a letter from another City or utility company which states that the customer has not defaulted or was late on payment for its services for a minimum period of the two most recent years, or, the City may accept a credit report from a national credit reporting service similarly showing no late payments for a period of the most recent two years. 
(2)  In the event a customer is delinquent in payment for regular monthly bills by more than 30 days, the City may apply the deposit to the payment of the delinquency along with any other fees such as late fees, unpaid connection fees and the like, and may require the customer to place an additional deposit up to two times the original deposit in order to continue its service. The City's right to apply the deposit and collect an additional fee is in addition to any other remedies the City has to collect payment and/or discontinue service. 
(3)  Utility deposits will be returned at such time as a customer has paid on time for twelve consecutive months upon request by the customer. Deposits, or any portion thereof remaining and not previously applied to a delinquent bill will be returned to the customer following payment of the final bill when service is terminated. 
(b)  Billing. 
(1)  Meters shall be read, as nearly as practical, at 30-day intervals, and bills rendered to customers as soon thereafter as practical. 
(2)  If a meter is not able to be read for any reason, the customer will be billed the average of the three previous months' bills and the billing adjusted when the meter is read. If the customer does not have a three month history, the customer will be billed at the rough average of similar properties as determined by the City. 
(3)  All accounts shall be payable at the designated City office. Failure to receive a bill does not exempt a customer from payment for service. 
(4)  Monthly billing for all utility services, as applicable, shall appear on one statement, and payment in full of the entire combined amount is required. 
(5)  All accounts not actually received by the City by the close of business on the 22nd day of the month shall have a ten percent penalty added to the current amount due. 
(6)  All accounts not actually received by the City by the close of business on the second day of the month following the issuance of the statement shall be subject to disconnection unless a payment agreement, satisfactory to the City, is made prior to such date. 
(7)  Any account for which a check is not paid or is returned, or for which an electronic or automatic withdrawal is denied for any reason, shall have a return check/denial fee added to it. The amount of such returned/denied payment fee shall be in accordance with the fee schedule in this Appendix A. 
(8)  For purposes of payment, penalties, fees and disconnection, if the due date falls upon a day when the City offices are closed, the following business day will be the due date. 
(9)  Following disconnection, it shall be unlawful for any person to reconnect said service or attempt to reconnect said service without a permit from the City. 
(10)  The City shall charge a reconnection fee as set forth in the fee schedule set forth in this Appendix A. 
(Ord. No. 23-015, 9-16-2013)  
ARTICLE 11.702. - ELECTRIC RATES[4] 
The following schedule of rates is adopted and fixed as the rates which shall be charged, commencing with the October 2015 bills to customers, for electric service furnished by the City Electric Department: 
(a)  Residential service electric rate: Schedule R. Rate 1. The City shall charge and collect for residential electric energy on the basis of the availability, application, character of service, monthly rate, power cost recovery, minimum charge, tax adjustment, and payment clauses of this tariff. 
(1)  Availability. This schedule is available throughout the entire territory served by the City. 
(2)  Application. This schedule is applicable to all electric service for domestic residential purposes to individual single-family private residences and multifamily residences or apartments served through a single meter, and which have not more than three living units. Any residential use containing more than three living units shall be billed under the commercial rate classes unless each unit has a separate rate meter. 
(3)  Character of service. 
A.  Service under this schedule shall be alternation current, 60 hertz, single phase, at the City's operation of standard available voltages. Where more than one meter is utilized for this service, each shall be computed separately for building services. 
B.  Where, in the opinion of the City, a customer's usage characteristics of service under this schedule do not conform with usual residential service characteristics due to customer's installation of demand intensive equipment including, but not limited to, electric motors and nonstandard water heating devices, demand meters may be installed by the City on any installation served under this schedule. 
(4)  Monthly rate. 
Customer charge: 	$11.03 PLUS 
	
Energy charge 	
Distribution charge: 	$0.0140 (all kWh per month) 
	
PCRF: 	See subsection (f) of this section (all kWh per month) 
	
 
(5)  Power cost recovery. The Power Cost Recovery Factor (PCRF) shall be calculated in accordance with the formula specified in the City's purchase power cost recovery factor clause, which is incorporated by reference as part of this rate schedule in subsection (f) below. 
(6)  Tax adjustment. The amount computed at the above monthly rate, as adjusted by the application of the monthly purchase power cost adjustment clause, shall be subject to taxes, assessments and surcharges imposed by any governmental authority, these charges being assessed on the basis of meters or customers or the price of or revenues from electric energy or service sold or volume of energy generated or purchased for sale or sold. 
(7)  Interruption of service. 
A.  The City will make reasonable provisions to ensure satisfactory and continuous service, but does not guarantee a continuous supply of electrical energy and shall not be liable for damage occasioned by interruptions of service or failure to commence delivery caused by an act of God, or the public enemy, or for any cause reasonably beyond its control including, but not limited to, the failure or breakdown of generating or transmitting facilities, floods, fire, strikes, or action or order of agency having jurisdiction in the premises, or for interruptions which are necessary for inspection, repair, or changes in generation equipment or transmission and distribution systems. 
B.  The customer shall notify the City immediately of any defects, troubles or accident which may in any way affect the delivery of power by the City to the customer. 
(b)  General service nondemand electric rate: Schedule Commercial/Secondary, Rate 2. The City shall charge and collect for Secondary with less than 300 kw demand electric energy on the basis of the availability, application, character of service, monthly rate, power cost recovery minimum charge, tax adjustment, and payment clauses of the tariff. 
(1)  Availability. This schedule is available throughout the entire territory served by the City of Fredericksburg. 
(2)  Application. This schedule is applicable to all business, commercial and income producing electric service (including residential with one meter and over three living units) exclusively for lighting, power, and any other purpose served through a single meter with a maximum annual demand which has occurred during the most recent 12-month period of less than 300 kw for which no other specific rate schedule is applicable. 
(3)  Character of service. Service under this schedule shall be single phase or three phase, 60 hertz, alternation current as the City's option of standard voltages. Where more than one meter is utilized for this service, each shall be computed separately for billing purposes. 
(4)  Monthly rate. 
Customer charge: 	$33.12 PLUS 
	
Energy charge 	
	
Distribution: 	$0.011742 (All kWh per month) 
	
PCRF: 	See subsection (f) of this section (all kWh per month) 
	
 
(5)  Power cost recovery. The Power Cost Recovery Factor (PCRF) shall be calculated in accordance with the formula specified in the City's purchase power cost recovery factor clause, which is incorporated by reference as a part of the rate schedule in subsection (f) below. 
(6)  Tax adjustment. The amount computed as the above monthly rate, as adjusted by the application of the monthly purchase power cost adjustment clause, shall be subject to taxes, assessments and surcharges imposed by any governmental authority, these charges being assessed on the basis of meters or customers or the price of or revenues from electric energy or service sold or volume of energy generated or purchased for sale or sold. 
(7)  Interruption of service. 
A.  The City will make reasonable provisions to ensure satisfactory and continuous service, but does not guarantee a continuous supply of electrical energy and shall not be liable for damage occasioned by interruptions of service or failure to commence delivery caused by an act of God, or the public enemy or for any cause reasonably beyond its control including, but not limited to, the failure or breakdown of generating or transmitting facilities, floods, fire, strikes, or action or order of agency having jurisdiction in the premises, or for interruptions which are necessary for inspection, repair, or changes in generation equipment or transmission and distribution systems. 
B.  The customer shall notify the City immediately of any defects, trouble or accident which may in any way affect the delivery of power by the City to the Customer. 
(c)  Large power electric/large secondary rate: Schedule LP, Rate 3. The City shall share and collect for large power electric energy on the basis of the availability, application, character of service, monthly rate, adjustment, minimum charge, determination of billing demand, power factor adjustment, primary service discount, tax adjustment, and payment clauses of this tariff. 
(1)  Availability. This schedule is available throughout the entire territory served by the City. 
(2)  Application. This schedule is applicable to all business, commercial and incoming producing electric service (including residential with one meter and over three living units) required for lighting, power, any other purpose served through a single meter with a maximum annual demand which has occurred during the most recent 12-month period of 300 kw or greater for which no other specific rate schedule is applicable. 
(3)  Character of service. Service under this schedule shall be single phase or three phase, 60 hertz, alternating current at standard available voltages. Where more than one meter is utilized for this service, each shall be computed separately for billing purposes, unless installed by the City for reliability and/or capacity requirements. 
(4)  Monthly rate. 
Customer charge: 	$1,324.58 PLUS 
	
Energy charge: 	
	
Distribution: 	$0.008961 
	
PCRF: 	See subsection (f) of this section (all kWh per month) 
	
 
(5)  Power cost recovery. The Power Cost Recovery Factor (PCRF) shall be calculated in accordance with the formula specified in the City's purchase power cost recovery factor clause, which is incorporated by reference as a part of this rate schedule in subsection (f) below. 
(6)  Tax adjustment. The amount computed as the above monthly rate, as adjusted by the application of the monthly purchase power cost adjustment clause, shall be subject to taxes, assessments and surcharges imposed by any governmental authority, these charges being assessed on the basis of meters or customers or the price of or revenues from electric energy or service sold or volume of energy generated or purchased for sale or sold. 
(7)  Interruption of service. 
A.  The City will make reasonable provisions to ensure satisfactory and continuous service, but does not guarantee a continuous supply of electrical energy and shall not be liable for damage occasioned by interruptions of service or failure to commence delivery caused by an act of God, or the public enemy or for any cause reasonably beyond its control including, but not limited to, the failure or breakdown of generating or transmitting facilities, floods, fire, strikes, or action or order of agency having jurisdiction in the premises, or for interruptions which are necessary for inspection, repair, or changes in generation equipment or transmission and distribution systems. 
B.  The customer shall notify the City immediately of any defects, trouble or accident which may in any way affect the delivery of power by the City to the Customer. 
(d)  Security lighting electric rate: Schedule SL. The City shall charge and collect for private security lighting electric energy on the basis of the availability, application, character of service, monthly rate, adjustment, minimum charge, determination of billing demand, power factor adjustment, Primary service discount, tax adjusted, and payment clauses of this tariff. 
(1)  Availability. This schedule is available throughout the entire territory served by the City. 
(2)  Application. Power under this schedule is available for service to security lights installed and maintained by the City for customers at their request. Customers will be required to contract for this service for a period to be determined by the City. 
(3)  Character of service. Alternating current service, either series or multiple system or in combination at option of distributor. 
(4)  Monthly rate. 
Customer Charge: 	
	
175 Watts or smaller 	$9.38 
	
175 Watts and less than 400 Watts 	$22.07 
	
Over 400 Watts 	$27.32 
	
 
(5)  Interruption of service. 
A.  The City will make reasonable provisions to ensure satisfactory and continuous service, but does not guarantee a continuous supply of electrical energy and shall not be liable for damage occasioned by interruptions of service or failure to commence delivery caused by an act of God, or the public enemy or for any cause reasonably beyond its control including, but not limited to, the failure or breakdown of generating or transmitting facilities, floods, fire, strikes, or action or order of agency having jurisdiction in the premises, or for interruptions which are necessary for inspection, repair, or changes in generation equipment or transmission and distribution systems. 
B.  The customer shall notify the City immediately of any defects, trouble or accident which may in any way affect the delivery of power by the City to the Customer. 
(e)  Street lighting electric rate: Schedule STL. The City shall charge and collect for street lighting electric energy on the basis of the availability, application, character of service, monthly rate, adjustment, tax adjustment, and payment clauses of the tariff. 
(1)  Availability. This schedule is available throughout the entire territory served by the City. 
(2)  Application. Power under this schedule is available for service to lights installed, owned and maintained by the City. 
(3)  Character of service. Alternating current service, either series or multiple system or in combination at option of distributor. 
(4)  Monthly rate. 
Energy charge: 	
	
Distribution: 	$0.004532 (All kWh per month) 
	
PCRF: 	See subsection (f) of this section (all kWh per month) 
	
 
(5)  Power cost recovery. The Power Cost Recovery Factor (PCRF) shall be calculated in accordance with the formula specified in the City's purchase power cost recovery factor clause, which is incorporated by reference as a part of this rate schedule in subsection (f) of this section. 
(6)  Tax adjustment. The amount computed as the above monthly rate, as adjusted by the application of the monthly purchase power cost adjustment clause, shall be subject to taxes, assessments and surcharges imposed by any governmental authority, these charges being assessed on the basis of meters or customers or the price of or revenues from electric energy or service sold or volume of energy generated or purchased for sale or sold. 
(7)  Interruption of service. 
A.  The City will make reasonable provisions to ensure satisfactory and continuous service, but does not guarantee a continuous supply of electrical energy and shall not be liable for damage occasioned by interruptions of service or failure to commence delivery caused by an act of God, or the public enemy or for any cause reasonably beyond its control including, but not limited to, the failure or breakdown of generating or transmitting facilities, floods, fire, strikes, or action or order of agency having jurisdiction in the premises, or for interruptions which are necessary for inspection, repair, or changes in generation equipment or transmission and distribution systems. 
B.  The customer shall notify the City immediately of any defects, trouble or accident which may in any way affect the delivery of power by the City to the Customer. 
(f)  Purchase power cost recovery factor. 
(1)  Application. The power cost recovery factor applies to all rate tariffs. This formula shall be used to calculate the monthly rate component PCRF. 
(2)  Monthly rate. The monthly purchase power cost recovery factor (PCRF) shall consist of several components to be calculated as follows: 
Power Cost Recovery Factor 
 
LCRATAD = Lower Colorado River Authority monthly wholesale billing total amount due 
AEPTAD = AEP Energy Partners, Inc monthly wholesale billing total amount due 
LCRAKWH = Lower Colorado River Authority monthly wholesale total adjusted meter consumption 
AEPTAD = AEP Energy Partners, Inc monthly wholesale total adjusted meter consumption 
CFT = City of Fredericksburg total monthly transmission cost from non-LCRA providers. 
L = City's lost unaccounted for energy factor as most recently determined by the City. 
(g)  Vehicle Charging. 
Rate: $2.00 per hour. 
Maximum Charging Time: Four hours per charging session. 
(Ord. No. 23-015, 9-16-2013; Ord. No. 24-003, 4-7-2014; Ord. No. 24-020, 9-2-2014; Ord. No. 25-023, 9-21-2015) 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 23-015, adopted Sept. 16, 2013, amended Art. 11.702 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. 11.702 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for a detailed history of derivation. 
 
ARTICLE 12.000. - FEES FOR GARBAGE HAULING SERVICE 
No permit shall be issued to any applicant unless and until such applicant has paid the City of Fredericksburg an application fee of $25.00. 
(Code 1992, app. A, art. 12.000)  
ARTICLE 13.000. - ANNUAL FEE FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS 
The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license is five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Code 1992, app. A, art. 13.000)  
ARTICLE 14.000. - GARBAGE AND TRASH FEES 
 
Sec. 14.100. - Garbage Collection Rates. 
(a)  Each commercial customer participating in the automated garbage collection, and each owner or occupant of each residence within the city limits, shall be charged the following sum per month for each automated bulk garbage container: 
(1)  Thirty-two gallon bulk container shall be $11.00 per container. 
(2)  Sixty-four gallon bulk container shall be $12.50 per container. 
(3)  Ninety-six gallon bulk container shall be $14.00 per container. 
(b)  Occupants of apartment or multi-tenant complexes within the city limits whose individual units are billed for any other city utilities shall be charged $12.50 per individual dwelling unit per month. 
(c)  Apartments or multi-tenant complexes within the city limits whose individual units are not billed for any other city utilities and, at the discretion of the Director of Public Works or his designee, require the use of a City of Fredericksburg dumpster, shall be charged the following sum per dumpster per month, based upon collection service of four times per month: 
(1)  Ninety-six-gallon bulk container shall be $28.00 per container. 
(2)  Three-yard dumpster shall be $72.30 per container. 
(3)  Four-yard dumpster shall be $85.50 per container. 
Any additional collection shall be charged at the rate of $28.00 for a ninety-six-gallon bulk container, $72.30 for a three-yard dumpster, and $85.50 for a four-yard dumpster for each container for each pick-up. 
(d)  Businesses within the city limits that require the use of a City of Fredericksburg container, shall be charged the following sum per container per month, based upon collection service of four times per month: 
(1)  Ninety-six-gallon bulk container shall be $28.00 per container. 
(2)  Three-yard dumpster shall be $72.30 per container. 
(3)  Four-yard dumpster shall be $85.50 per container. 
Any additional collection shall be charged at the rate of $28.00 for a ninety-six-gallon bulk container, $72.30 for a three-yard dumpster, and $85.50 for a four-yard dumpster for each container for each pick-up. 
(e)  Each owner or occupant of each residence or business lying outside the corporation limits of the city receiving the automated garbage collection service shall be charged double the amount of the above rates. 
(f)  Each customer is provided one (1) bulk container, or a combination of bulk containers (as specified in section 6.206b) free of charge, and shall be replaced free of charge, when in the discretion of the Director of Public Works or his designee, the above container(s) is/(are) no longer serviceable. In cases of abuse or neglect, the customer will be charged a replacement fee which will be equal to the city's cost of the container. In the discretion of the Director of Public Works or his designee, the replacement fee may be waived in the case of theft, an accident or vandalism following a police report. 
(g)  Rates for brush clipping, leaf collection, drop-off and special yard-waste removal services. 
(1)  There shall be no charge for brush chipping, leaf collection or drop-off of material which complies with the terms of Section 32-9 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fredericksburg. 
(2)  Charges for brush chipping, leaf collection or drop-off of material which is placed for collection and non-compliant with the terms of Section 32-9 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Fredericksburg shall be $100.00 for each dump truck size[d] load of part thereof. 
(3)  Charges for special plant and tree pick-up service shall be based on a cost of $50.00 per man-hour or part thereof charged in 30-minute increments, and the City may require a deposit or prepayment of the same. 
(Code 1992, app. A, § 14.100; Ord. No. 6-017, 10-19-1993; Ord. No. 8-065, § 14.100, 7-20-1998; Ord. No. 15-011, § 14.100(a)(1)—(3), 10-3-2005; Ord. No. 22-001, 1-16-2012; Ord. No. 24-020, 9-2-2014; Ord. No. 25-025, 9-21-2015)  
ARTICLE 15.000. - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 23-016, adopted Sept. 16, 2013, repealed Art. 15.000, which pertained to filing fees for plats and derived from Code 1992, app. A, art. 15.000. Similar provisions were codified in App. A, § 5.502.  
ARTICLE 16.000. - WATER AND SEWER RATES AND FEES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 23-015, adopted Sept. 16, 2013, amended Art. 16.000 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. 16.000, pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for a detailed history of derivation. 
 
Sec. 16.100. - Charge for water and/or sewer connections and reconnections. 
(a)  Connection fees for properties intended for residential use, or which are otherwise installed by the City for residential use properties, utilizing a three-fourths inch meter are $1,500.00 for a maximum of 40 feet. Additional feet will be $37.50 per foot. 
(b)  Connection fees for properties intended for residential use, or which are otherwise installed by the City for residential use properties, utilizing a one inch meter are $1,550.00 for a maximum of 40 feet. Additional feet will be $38.75 per foot. 
(c)  Connection fees for properties intended for residential use, or which are otherwise installed by the City for residential use properties, utilizing a two-inch meter are $1,750.00 for a maximum of 40 feet. Additional feet will be $43.75 per foot. 
(d)  Connection fees for properties utilizing a four-inch sewer connection, typically for residential use properties, are $1,025.00 for a maximum of 40 feet. Additional feet will be $25.60 per foot. 
(e)  In addition to connection fees, a per meter charge of $30.00 shall be made for connections and reconnections to the City water system made during posted City business hours, and $50.00 at all other times including holidays. Such connection fee shall be payable at the time of application for service, or prior to reconnection as applicable. 
(f)  The rates provided for in this Section shall become effective on July 15, 2015. 
(Ord. No. 23-015, 9-16-2013; Ord. No. 25-010, 6-1-2015)  
Sec. 16.200 - Deposit for Water and Sewer Service. 
The deposit for water and sewer service is a combined deposit and is applicable whether the customer applies for one or both services. 
A deposit of a sum of money equal to two average monthly bills, and in no instance less than $75.00, shall be deposited with the City by each customer for each meter/service, at the time of making application for connection to the City's distribution system, with the express understanding that said deposit shall be held by the City as security for the payment of amounts owing or to become owing for water and sewer or other utility service furnished by the City to the customer. The City shall have the right to increase the amount of deposit if the customer's bills for any two consecutive monthly billing periods of normal operation actually prove to exceed the amount of the original deposit by more than 125 percent. For the purposes hereof, two average monthly bills shall mean the City's estimate of a similar class service with average usage for the type of property applied for. 
(Ord. No. 23-015, 9-16-2013)  
Sec. 16.300. - Water Department Utility Rates. 
(Effective November 1st, 2019) 
Class 	Unit Measure 	Gallon Usage 	Rate per thousand 
Residential 	Minimum 	0 	$11.60 
5/8 " meter* 	PLUS 		
	Per 1,000 	1—6,000 	$2.45 
		6,001—12,000 	$3.92 
		12,001—18,000 	$6.37 
		18,001—25,000 	$9.31 
		25,001—50,000 	$10.42 
		Over 50,000 	$14.09 
			
Residential 	Minimum 	0 	$19.34 
1" meter 	PLUS 		
	Per 1,000 	1—6,000 	$2.45 
		6,001—12,000 	$3.92 
		12,001—18,000 	$6.37 
		18,001—25,000 	$9.31 
		25,001—50,000 	$10.42 
		Over 50,000 	$14.09 
			
Residential 	Minimum 	0 	$61.87 
2" meter 	PLUS 		
	Per 1,000 	1—6,000 	$2.45 
		6,001—12,000 	$3.92 
		12,001—18,000 	$6.37 
		18,001—25,000 	$9.31 
		25,001—50,000 	$10.42 
		Over 50,000 	$14.09 
			
Residential 	Minimum 	0 	$386.67 
6" meter 	PLUS 		
	Per 1,000 	1—6,000 	$2.45 
		6,001—12,000 	$3.92 
		12,001—18,000 	$6.37 
		18,001—25,000 	$9.31 
		25,001—50,000 	$10.42 
		Over 50,000 	$14.09 
			
Commercial 	Minimum 	0 	$11.60 
5/8 " meter 	PLUS 		
	Per 1,000 	1—10,000 	$2.40 
		Over 10,000 	$3.81 
			
Commercial 	Minimum 	0 	$19.34 
1" meter 	PLUS 		
	Per 1,000 	1—10,000 	$2.40 
		Over 10,000 	$3.81 
			
Commercial 	Minimum 	0 	$61.87 
2" meter 	PLUS 		
	Per 1,000 	1—10,000 	$2.40 
		Over 10,000 	$3.81 
			
Multi-family ** 	Minimum 	0 	$11.60 
5/8 " meter 	PLUS 		
	Per 1,000 	1—10,000 	$2.40 
		Over 10,000 	$3.81 
			
Multi-family ** 	Minimum 	0 	$19.34 
1" meter 	PLUS 		
	Per 1,000 	1—10,000 	$2.40 
		Over 10,000 	$3.81 
			
Multi-family ** 	Minimum 	0 	$61.87 
2" meter 	PLUS 		
	Per 1,000 	1—10,000 	$2.40 
		Over 10,000 	$3.81 
			
Industrial 	Minimum 	0—2,000 	$294.40 
	Per 1,000 	2,001—2,000,000 	$2.12 
		2,001,001—6,500,000 	$2.43 
		Over 6,500,000 	$3.29 
 
* This category shall include Manufactured Home Parks wherein one or more common meter(s) serves the entire development. The amount of the bill shall be determined as follows: The total number of gallons used for all meters divided by the total number of homes in the development each month shall be used to calculate the usage and this shall be added to the number of minimum fees times the said number of homes. Example for 20 homes with 200,000 gallons of usage: results in 10,000 gallons attributable to each home at $2.45 per thousand up to 6,000 ($14.70) and $3.92 for 6,001 to 10,000 ($15.68) or $30.38 per home plus the $11.60 minimum times 20 units, or $232.00 for a total bill of $839.60. The rates for Manufactured Home Parks in this category are effective November 1, 2019. 
** Multi-family—Four or more dwelling units on one property or four or more dwelling units on one meter. 
Rates for all Categories of services for all properties lying outside the City limits shall be double those rates listed above, including minimum charges. 
(Ord. No. 23-015, 9-16-2013; Ord. No. 24-013, 7-21-2014; Ord. No. 2019-08, § 1, 2-4-2019; Ord. No. 2019-30 , § 1, 10-21-2019)  
Sec. 16.301. - Charge for Reclaimed and Bulk Potable Water Sales. 
(a)  Reclaimed water: A minimum rate of $20.00 for each customer for each calendar month in which reclaimed water is purchased plus $ 1.50 per 1,000 gallons for unlimited amounts, as available. 
(b)  Bulk potable water: A minimum rate of $61.87 for each customer for each calendar month in which potable water is purchased plus $2.40 per 1,000 gallons for one to 10,000 gallons per month and $3.81 per 1,000 gallons for over 10,000 gallons. 
(Ord. No. 24-009, 7-7-2014; Ord. No. 2019-08, § 2, 2-4-2019; Ord. No. 2019-30 , § 2, 10-21-2019)  
Sec. 16.400. - Sewer Department Utility Rates. 
Class 	Unit Measure 	Rate 
Residential 
5/8 " meter 	Minimum PLUS 	$11.55 
$3.84 per Gallon usage, per 1,000 
1" meter 	Minimum PLUS 	$19.25 
$3.84 per Gallon usage, per 1,000 
2" meter 	Minimum PLUS 	$61.60 
$3.84 per Gallon usage, per 1,000 
Commercial 
5/8 " meter 	Minimum PLUS 	$11.55 
$4.69 per Gallon usage, per 1,000 
1" meter 	Minimum PLUS 	$19.25 
$4.69 per Gallon usage, per 1,000 
2" meter 	Minimum PLUS 	$61.60 
$4.69 per Gallon usage, per 1,000 
Multi-family* 
5/8 " meter 	Minimum PLUS 	$11.55 
$4.69 per Gallon usage, per 1,000 
1" meter 	Minimum PLUS 	$19.25 
$4.69 per Gallon usage, per 1,000 
2" meter 	Minimum PLUS 	$61.60 
$4.69 per Gallon usage, per 1,000 
 
Rates for all Categories of services lying outside the City limits shall be double those rates listed above, including minimum charges. 
* Multi-family—Four or more dwelling units on one property or four or more dwelling units on one meter. 
FLAT RATES FOR SEWER 
ONLY CUSTOMERS 
Residential customers inside limits ..... $27.65 
Residential customers outside limits ..... $41.49 
Commercial customers inside limits ..... $37.34 
Commercial customers outside limits ..... $74.68 
(Ord. No. 23-015, 9-16-2013; Ord. No. 24-013, 7-21-2014; Ord. No. 24-020, 9-2-2014; Ord. No. 25-023, 9-21-2015; Ord. No. 2019-08, § 3, 2-4-2019; Ord. No. 2019-30 , § 3, 10-21-2019)  
Sec. 16.500. - Impact Fees. 
(a)  Effective July 1, 2019, the impact fee for each service unit is: 
	Maximum Allowed Assessment 	Amount to be Collected 
Water Facilities 	$3,707.00 	$2,575.00 
Wastewater Facilities 	$3,480.00 	$2,425.00 
Total Fee 	$7,187.00 	$5,000.00 
 
(b)  Effective July 1, 2020, the impact fee for each service unit is: 
	Maximum Allowed Assessment 	Amount to be Collected 
Water Facilities 	$3,707.00 	$3,075.00 
Wastewater Facilities 	$3,480.00 	$2,925.00 
Total Fee 	$7,187.00 	$6,000.00 
 
(c)  Effective July 1, 2021, the impact fee for each service unit is: 
	Maximum Allowed Assessment 	Amount to be Collected 
Water Facilities 	$3,707.00 	$3,575.00 
Wastewater Facilities 	$3,480.00 	$3,425.00 
Total Fee 	$7,187.00 	$7,000.00 
 
(Ord. No. 23-015, 9-16-2013; Ord. No. 2019-15, § 1, 4-15-2019)  
ARTICLE 17.000. - APPLICATION FEE FOR WELL-DRILLING PERMIT 
A permit fee of $25.00 shall accompany each application for a well-drilling permit. 
(Code 1992, app. A, art. 17.000)  
ARTICLE 18.000. - FEES FOR SANITARY LANDFILL 
(Effective October 1, 2014) 
Each individual, corporation or other entity, or member of a partnership using the public dumping grounds belonging to the City shall be assessed and shall pay to the attendant at such public dumping grounds, for the privilege of dumping or depositing garbage or other material at the said public dumping grounds, the following charges or fees for each load which shall be applied alternatively as applicable: 
(a) Minimum fee 	$10.00 
	
(b) Per ton 	$55.00 
	
(c) Appliances with compressors 	$30.00 each 
	
(d) No large animals (calf or larger) shall be accepted 	
	
(e) Oil filters and batteries 	$1.00 each 
	
(f) Passenger tires (20 inches or less) 	$2.00 each 
	
(g) Tires (greater than 20 inches) 	In accordance with the fee scheduleposted at the landfill 
	
(h) Paint 	$1.00 per gallon can 
	
(i) No hazardous waste shall be accepted 	
	
(j) Grass and leaves (not branches or brush) 	No charge 
	
(k) Purchase of compost from landfill 	$20.00 per pickup load 
	
(l) Metal, appliances without compressors 	No charge 
	
(m) No vacuum trucks allowed without first obtaining permit from the City of Fredericksburg 	
	
 
(Code 1992, app. A, art. 18.000; Ord. No. 6-018, 10-19-1993; Ord. No. 15-011, art. 18.000(b), (e)—(m), 10-3-2005; Ord. No. 22-001, 1-16-2012; Ord. No. 24-020, 9-2-2014)  
ARTICLE 19.000. - ELECTRIC LIGHT AND POWER RATES AND FEES 
 
Sec. 19.108. - Charge for electric connections and reconnections. 
A per meter charge of $30.00 shall be made for connections or reconnections to the City electric system made during posted business hours, and $50.00 at all other times including holidays. Such connection fee shall be payable at the time of application for service. 
(Ord. No. 23-015, 9-16-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 23-015, adopted Sept. 16, 2013, amended § 19.108 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 19.108 pertained to connections and reconnections, and derived from Ord. No. 8-053, § 19.108, adopted November, 1997.  
Sec. 19.200. - Proposed electric line extension policy. 
GENERAL: 
All service routes shall be determined by City 
If different service route chosen by customer, customer will pay 100% of extra costs 
All work shall be done by City crews or City contractor 
All materials shall be supplied by City 
COMMERCIAL: 
Customer pays all costs 
RESIDENTIAL: 
0 - 200 amp service = $300.00 Installation Fee 
201 - 320 amp service = $600.00 Installation Fee 
> 320 amp service = Same as Commercial 
Fees include up to 250 ft. of primary extension 
UPGRADES OF SERVICE (LARGER SERVICE NOT DIFFERENT TYPE OF SERVICE): 
City pays all costs 
Change of ownership does not qualify as upgrade of service 
SUBDIVISIONS 
Developer pays all costs except for 
Transformer, service drops, disconnect for service, not required to be installed by developer (streets, alleys and easements adjacent to subdivision are classified ON SITE) 
TEMPORARY SERVICE: 
Customer pays all costs 
CUSTOMER REQUESTED WORK: 
Customer pays all costs 
UNDERGROUND 
Customer pays all costs  
Sec. 19.300. - Deposit for electric service. 
A deposit of a sum of money equal to two average monthly bills, and in no instance less than $125.00, shall be deposited with the City by each customer for each meter/service, at the time of making application for connection to the City's distribution system, with the express understanding that said deposit shall be held by the City as security for the payment of amounts owing or to become owing for electric service furnished by the City to the customer. The City shall have the right to increase the amount of deposit if the customer's bills for any two consecutive monthly billing periods of normal operation exceed the amount of the original deposit by more than 125 percent. For the purposes hereof, two average monthly bills shall mean the City's estimate of a similar class service with average usage for the type of property applied for. 
(Ord. No. 23-015, 9-16-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 23-015, adopted Sept. 16, 2013, amended § 19.300 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 19.300 pertained to deposit for electrical service, and derived from Code 1992, app. A, § 19.300.  
Sec. 19.400. - Returned Check Fee. 
See Appendix A, § 26.100. 
(Code 1992, app. A, § 19.400; Ord. No. 23-015, 9-16-2013)  
ARTICLE 20.000. - INSPECTION FOR ELECTRICAL TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION FACILITIES 
All new facilities and modified, changed, enlarged, or reconstructed facilities are subject to inspection by the city, in which a reasonable inspection fee not to exceed $10.00 for each pole inspection shall be paid. 
(Code 1992, app. A, § 20.000)  
ARTICLE 21.000. - DRAINAGE UTILITY FEES 
(a)  The following drainage utility fees are hereby established and shall be collected pursuant to Sec. 47-273 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  The owner or occupant of any residential lot or tract within the drainage utility service area, that receives any type of utility service (electricity, water and/or sewer) from the City of Fredericksburg, shall be assessed a monthly drainage utility fee as follows, based on the Main Building Area upon the lot or tract: 
Residential Tier 	Main Building Area 
(sq. ft.) 	Monthly Fee 
1 	= 1,000 	$3.00 
2 	>1,000 but =1,300 	$4.00 
3 	>1,300 but =1,600 	$5.00 
4 	>1,600 but =2,000 	$6.00 
5 	>2,000 but =3,000 	$7.00 
6 	>3,000 	$9.00 
 
(c)  The owner or occupant of any non-residential lot or tract within the drainage utility service area, that receives any type of utility service (electricity, water and/or sewer) from the City of Fredericksburg, shall be assessed a monthly drainage utility fee as follows, based on the Total Impervious Area of the lot or tract: 
Non- 
Residential Tier 	Total Impervious Area (sq. ft.) 	Monthly Fee 
1 	=1,800 	$3.00 
2 	>1,800 but =2,800 	$5.00 
3 	>2,800 but =5,500 	$9.00 
4 	>5,500 but =12,000 	$18.00 
5 	>12,000 but =50,000 	$50.00 
6 	>50,000 	$200.00 
 
(d)  Property owned by a religious organization that is exempt from taxation pursuant to V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 11.20 shall be exempt from any monthly drainage utility fee. 
(e)  Property used for cemetery purposes, if the cemetery is closed to new interments and does not accept new burials, shall be exempt from any monthly drainage utility fee. 
(f)  The Director of Public Works and Utilities, or his/her designee, shall be responsible for determining the Main Building Area and/or Total Impervious Area for all lots or tracts, based on reliable data, including but not limited to, Gillespie County Appraisal District data, GIS database data, aerial photography, information received by the City through the building permit process, or other reliable means for determining Main Building Area and/or Total Impervious Area. The Director of Public Works and Utilities, or his/her designee, may request additional information from a property owner or occupant as reasonably necessary to determine each property's impact to the drainage utility of the City. 
(Code 1992, app. A, art. 21.000; Ord. No. 7-006, 8-14-1995; Ord. No. 8-037, 10-21-1996; Ord. No. 23-015, 9-16-2013; Ord. No. 2019-01, § 2, 1-21-2019)  
ARTICLE 22.000. - [EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES] 
 
Sec. 22.101. - Fees and Charges for Emergency Medical Services. 
The fees and charges to the person or entity utilizing or receiving services rendered by the City's Emergency Medical Services ("EMS") are as follows: 
(A)  Basic Life Support, Non-Emergency (BLSN). Transportation by emergency medical technicians when no drugs or oxygen is administered: $800.00. 
(B)  Basic Life Support Emergency (BLSE). Transportation by emergency medical technicians when no drugs are administered. Oxygen may be administered: $850.00. 
(C)  Advanced Life Support Emergency (ALS-1). Transportation by paramedics when no drugs are administered. Oxygen may be administered and monitors may be used and an IV solution may be started: $950.00. 
(D)  Advanced Life Support Emergency, Major Trauma (ALS-2). Transportation by paramedics when at least one invasive procedure is administered (examples: defibrillation or cardiac pacing) and when at least one drug other than an IV solution is administered: $1,200.00. 
(E)  Aid only. City EMS is dispatched to a patient, but provides no patient transportation: 
1-5 calls dispatched to provide services to the same person within any 12-month period: no charge. 
6-10 calls dispatched to provide services to the same person within any 12-month period: $90.00 per EMS response. 
11-20 calls dispatched to provide services to the same person within any 12-month period: $180.00 per EMS response. 
21 or more calls dispatched to provide services to the same person within any 12-month period: $250.00 per EMS response. 
(F)  Mileage. $18.50 per loaded mile. This transportation charge shall be in addition to any other charges or fees set forth in this Section 22.101. 
(G)  Dedicated Standby. City EMS provides staffed ambulance for on premises standby at a private or for-profit special event. $100.00 per hour. This charge shall be in addition to any other charges or fees set forth in this Section 22.101. 
(H)  A Medical Records Fee in the amount of $45.00 shall be collected in advance of the issuance of any medical records. 
(I)  Medications and Supplies. Drugs administered by EMS to patients and disposable medical supplies utilized by EMS in treatment of patients shall be charged at the "list price" included in a catalog, price list, schedule, or other form that is regularly maintained by the manufacturer or vendor, and states prices at which sales are currently available, or were last made available to the City. This charge shall be in addition to any other charges or fees set forth in this Section 22.101. 
(J)  The Fire Chief, or his or her designee, shall determine which of the above rate categories apply to the services rendered by the City's Emergency Medical Services. The Fire Chief, or his or her designee, is hereby authorized to make any judgments with regard to per procedure cost in the application of the above rates, and his or her decision is conclusive. 
(Ord. No. 12-025, art. 22.000, 12-16-2002; Ord. No. 16-004, art. 22.00, § 22.101, 3-20-2006; Ord. No. 17-011, art. 22.00, § 22.101, 5-7-2007; Ord. No. 2018-32, § 1, 9-17-2018)  
ARTICLE 23.000. - [MUNICIPAL COURT TECHNOLOGY FUND] 
 
Sec. 23.100. - Establishment of Municipal Court Technology Fund. 
A.  There is hereby created and established a Municipal Court Technology Fund, hereinafter known as the Fund, pursuant to Article 102.0172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
B.  The Fund may be maintained in an interest bearing account and may be maintained in the general revenue account. 
(Ord. No. 17-010, art. 23.000, § 23.100, 4-2-2007; Ord. No. 21-010, 9-6-2011) 
Editor's note— Ord. No.21-010, adopted Sept. 6, 2011, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 22.100—22.102. These provisions have been included as an amendment to §§ 23.100—23.102, in which similar provisions are already codified.  
Sec. 23.101. - Establishment of Amount of the Fee and Assessment and Collection. 
A.  The fee shall be the maximum permitted by Texas State Law from time to time, and if not provided by Texas State Law then shall be in the amount of $4.00. 
B.  The fee shall be assessed and collected from the Defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense, or for violation of any City Ordinance, whether or not considered a misdemeanor, in the Municipal Court as a cost of court. A Defendant is considered convicted if: 
(1)  judgment, sentence, or both are imposed on the person; 
(2)  the person is placed on deferred disposition; or 
(3)  the court defers final disposition or imposition of the judgment and sentence. 
C.  The fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed after September 6, 2011. 
D.  The Clerk of the Court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the municipal treasurer or other official who discharges or performs the duties of the treasurer of the City of Fredericksburg, Texas, who shall deposit the fee into the Municipal Court Technology Fund. 
(Ord. No. 17-010, art. 23.000, § 23.101, 4-2-2007; Ord. No. 21-010, 9-6-2011) 
Note— See editor's note to § 23.100.  
Sec. 23.102. - Designated Use of the Fund and Administration. 
The Fund shall be used only for the purpose of financing the purchase of or to maintain technology enhancements for the Municipal Court of the City of Fredericksburg, Texas. 
"Technology enhancements" shall include any and/or all items described in Article 102.0172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
The Fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the City Manager of the City of Fredericksburg, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 17-010, art. 23.000, § 23.102, 4-2-2007; Ord. No. 21-010, 9-6-2011) 
Note— See editor's note to § 23.100.  
Sec. 23.103. - Automatic termination. 
The collection of the court technology fund under this ordinance shall automatically terminate at such time as the City has collected the sum of $18,500.00. The Chief Financial Officer of the City shall certify to the Municipal Court Clerk the termination of the collection hereunder, and shall also notify the City Secretary who shall add such certification to the original of this ordinance in the ordinance records of the City. 
(Ord. No. 17-010, art. 23.000, § 23.103, 4-2-2007)  
ARTICLE 24.000. - RECREATIONAL FEES 
Weekday rates will apply on Mondays through Thursdays, and Weekend rates will apply on Fridays through Sundays. The following rates are maximum rates which are subject to the provisions of subsection (l) below. 
 
Sec. 24.100. - Fees for use of Lady Bird Johnson Municipal Golf Course. 
All fees and rates are plus applicable sales tax. 
(a)  GUEST RATES FOR RESIDENTS OF GILLESPIE COUNTY. 
Available to book seven days in advance. 
Weekday 18 Holes - Green Fee - $27.00/Cart fee - $14.00 = $41.00 
Weekend 18 Holes - Green Fee - $33.00/Cart fee - $14.00 = $47.00 
Weekday 9 Holes - Green Fee - $19.50/Cart fee - $7.50 = $27.00 
Weekend 9 Holes - Green Fee - $22.50/Cart fee - $7.50 = $30.00 
Twilight Rate - Green Fee - $18.00/Cart fee - $14.00 = $32.00 - Monday thru Thursday 
Twilight Rate - Green Fee - $22.00/Cart fee - $14.00 = $36.00 - Friday thru Sunday 
(Twilight Times Standard - Standard Time 3:00 p.m./Daylight Savings 5:00 p.m.) 
(b)  GUEST RATES FOR NON-RESIDENTS OF GILLESPIE COUNTY. 
Weekday 18 Holes - Green Fee - $42.00/Cart fee - $14.00 = $56.00 
Weekend 18 Holes - Green Fee - $48.00/Cart fee - $14.00 = $62.00 
Weekday 9 Holes - Green Fee - $23.00/Cart fee - $7.50 = $30.50 
Weekend 9 Holes - Green Fee - $26.00/Cart fee - $7.50 = $33.50 
Twilight Rate - Green Fee - $28.00/Cart fee - $14.00 = $42.00 - Monday thru Thursday 
Twilight Rate - Green Fee - $33.00/Cart fee - $14.00 = $47.00 - Friday thru Sunday 
(Twilight Times Standard - Standard Time 3:00 p.m./Daylight Savings 5:00 p.m.) 
(c)  SENIOR RATES FOR THE DAYS OF MONDAY THROUGH THURSDAY FOR PERSONS 65 AND OVER. 
For residents of Gillespie County - Green Fee - $22.00/Cart fee - $14.00 = $36.00 
For non-residents of Gillespie County - Green Fee - $37.00/Cart fee -$14.00 = $51.00 
(d)  JUNIOR RATE FOR RESIDENTS OF GILLESPIE COUNTY WHO ARE 18 YEARS OF AGE AND UNDER. FOURTEEN AND UNDER PLAYING WITH A PAID ADULT ARE FREE. 
Weekday 18 holes - Green Fee - $12.50/Cart fee - $14.00 = $26.50 
Weekend 18 holes - Green Fee - $21.25/Cart fee - $14.00 = $35.25 
Weekday 9 Holes - Green Fee - $8.50/Cart fee - $7.50 = $16.00 
Weekend 9 Holes - Green Fee - $12.50/Cart fee - $7.50 = $20.00 
(e)  JUNIOR RATE FOR NON-RESIDENTS OF GILLESPIE COUNTY WHO ARE 18 YEARS OF AGE AND UNDER. 
Weekday 18 holes - Green Fee - $21.00/Cart fee - $14.00 = $35.00 
Weekend 18 holes - Green Fee - $24.00/Cart fee - $14.00 = $38.00 
Weekday 9 Holes - Green Fee - $11.50/Cart fee - $7.50 = $19.00 
Weekend 9 Holes - Green Fee - $13.00/Cart fee - $7.50 = $20.50 
(f)  MEMBERS OF THE FREDERICKSBURG HIGH SCHOOL GOLF TEAM DURING THE REGULAR SCHOOL YEAR. No charge. 
(g)  REPLAY RATE-APPLIES AFTER 18 HOLES OF PLAY. 
Residents of Gillespie County and Non-Residents - Green Fee - $15.00/Cart fee - $14.00 = $29.00 
Members - Green Fee - $4.00/Cart fee - $14.00 = $18.00 
(h)  MEMBERSHIP PRICING. ALL RATES PLUS APPLICABLE SALES TAX. 
The following Membership Package rates are effective from March 4,2019 through March 31, 2020. Thereafter, Membership Packages shall be effective from April 1 to March 31 of each calendar year. Purchasers of Membership Packages may choose among the following options for each package year. 
(1) 	ANNUAL MEMBERSHIP SINGLE 	ANNUAL MEMBERSHIP FAMILY 
	$149.00 Monthly 	$239.00 Monthly 
	No green fees/unlimited golf 	No green fees/unlimited golf 
(2) 	SEASONAL MEMBERSHIP SINGLE 	SEASONAL MEMBERSHIP FAMILY 
	$179.00 Monthly 	$269.00 Monthly 
	No green fees/unlimited golf 	No green fees/unlimited golf 
(3) 	ANNUAL PRE-PAY SINGLE 	ANNUAL PRE-PAY FAMILY 
	$1,609.00 	$2,581.00 
	No green fees/unlimited golf 	No green fees/unlimited golf 
(4) 	OPTIONAL UNLIMITED CARTS SINGLE (ANNUAL OR SEASONAL) 	OPTIONAL UNLIMITED CARTS FAMILY (ANNUAL OR SEASONAL) 
	$100.00 Monthly 	$175.00 Monthly 
 
All Membership Package holders shall be additionally entitled to a 20 percent discount on all regular priced wearing apparel purchased from the Lady Bird Pro Shop, a ten percent discount on all regular priced hard goods (equipment) purchased from the Lady Bird Pro Shop. Any guest accompanying an Active Member will be entitled to pay Guest Rates for Residents of Gillespie County (set forth in subsection (a) above). Current Members will be allowed to book tee times TEN days in advance. 
(i)  LADY BIRD PLAYERS CLUB CARD. 
The General Manager for the Lady Bird Johnson Municipal Golf Course shall have the authority to make available for sale, and to change the sales price of, an annual "Players Club" Card. Holders of said Card will receive a rate to be shown lower than the published rate, but never at or below the Guest Rates for Residents of Gillespie County. The sales price of said Card on March 4, 2019 is $59.00. All cards are valid for the calendar year. 
(j)  PRACTICE BALLS. 
Small bucket - $ 5.00 
Large bucket - $ 7.00 
(k)  TOURNAMENTS, GROUP RATES AND DYNAMIC PRICING. 
The General Manager for the Lady Bird Johnson Municipal Golf Course shall have the authority to deviate from the rates set forth above in setting rates for tournaments or for special group rates. Additionally, the General Manager may temporarily decrease the rates described in subsections (a), (b), (c), (d), (e), and (g) to provide for specials at such times as he or she determines would encourage additional play. 
The rates set out above will be effective March 4, 2019, except as specifically set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 22-027, 9-17-2012; Ord. No. 23-018, 9-16-2013; Ord. No. 24-023, 11-17-2014; Ord. No. 26-012, 10-17-2016; Ord. No. 28-004, § 1, 4-16-2018; Ord. No. 2019-09, § 1, 3-4-2019)  
Sec. 24.200. - Fees for use of Lady Bird Johnson park pool and town pool. 
(a)  Daily admission per person is $2.00. 
(b)  Season pass per person is $50.00. 
(c)  Season pass per family not exceeding four persons is $125.00. 
(d)  Season pass for a family exceeding four persons is $125.00 plus $20.00 for each additional person. 
(e)  Swim lessons per session (approximately two weeks) is $30.00 per person. 
(f)  Group use fees shall be as follows: 
(i)  Town Pool during normal business hours for no more than 25 persons, including non-swimmers, for a maximum rental period of two hours: $35.00. 
(ii)  Lady Bird Park Pool during normal business hours for no more than 25 persons, including non-swimmers, for a maximum rental period of two hours: $50.00. 
(iii)  Town Pool outside of normal business hours, for a maximum number of 100 people and a rental period of two hours: 
$140.00 for 1 to 25 people, including non-swimmers. 
$170.00 for 26 to 50 people, including non-swimmers. 
$195.00 for 51 to 75 people, including non-swimmers. 
$250.00 for 76 to 100 people, including non-swimmers. 
(iv)  Lady Bird Johnson Park Leisure Pool and Baby Pool outside of normal business hours, for a maximum number of 100 people and a rental period of two hours: 
$140.00 for 1 to 25 people, including non-swimmers. 
$170.00 for 26 to 50 people, including non-swimmers. 
$195.00 for 51 to 75 people, including non-swimmers. 
$250.00 for 76 to 100 people, including non-swimmers. 
(v)  Lady Bird Johnson Park Pool—entire facility outside of normal business hours, for a maximum number of 125 people and a rental period of two hours: 
$190.00 for 1 to 25 people, including non-swimmers. 
$215.00 for 26 to 50 people, including non-swimmers. 
$275.00 for 51 to 75 people, including non-swimmers. 
$300.00 for 76 to 100 people, including non-swimmers. 
$340.00 for 101 to 125 people, including non-swimmers. 
(vi)  Additional conditions: 
All guests entering the facility as part of a group rental will be counted, without regard to a guest's actual length of stay or actual use of the pool. Any guests that exceed the number of guests in the reservation, which requires seven day advance notice, will not be admitted. 
Groups over 25 people may not reserve either pool facility during business hours, and must reserve the pool facilities for use at times outside of business hours. 
Groups that reserve the pool facility during business hours will have exclusive use of designated tables and/or areas, but the guests will not have exclusive use of the pools. Guests of groups that reserve the pool facility during business hours will share the use of the pools with the general public. 
The rates set out above [in subsection 24.200(f)] will be effective May 7, 2018, except as otherwise specifically set forth above. 
(g)  The Director of Parks and Recreation may temporarily decrease the fees set forth in this Section, at such days and times as determined by said Director, to encourage additional use of Lady Bird Johnson Park Pool and Town Pool. 
(Ord. No. 22-028,10-1-2012; Ord. No. 26-013, 9-19-2016; Ord. No. 2018-030, § 1, 5-7-2018; Ord. No. 2018-026, § 1, 12-3-2018)  
Sec. 24.300. - Fees for use of sports fields. 
Fees for use of any sports field is $25.00 per day. This fee does not include any charges for lighting if available. 
(Ord. No. 26-013, 9-19-2016)  
Sec. 24.400. - Fees for use of Lady Bird Johnson Park and campgrounds. 
(a)  Daily rental for Pioneer Pavilion is $625.00, minimum, for a period not to exceed four days, plus a deposit of $500.00. For periods exceeding four days, the fee will be $125.00 for each additional day. A day for the purposes hereof means any part of a day. 
(b)  Daily rental for the Tatsch House is $150.00 for Mondays through Thursdays, excluding City and National holidays, and excluding the month of December, and $200.00 for any other days, plus a deposit of $100.00. A day for the purposes hereof means any part of a day. 
(c)  Weekly rental fee for the entire Lady Bird Johnson Park including all Pavilions and open areas, as determined by the City's Director of Parks and Recreation, is $1,600.00, and $650.00 for each additional day. The following are specifically excluded from entire park rental: Park headquarters building, swimming pool, RV Park, campsites, Dog Park, nature trail and Golf Course. Access to such areas may be closed or restricted for events in the discretion of the Director of Parks and Recreation. 
(d)  The Daily rental fee for non-profit associations for Pioneer Pavilion, Tatsch House or the entire Park is one-half of the fee set forth in (a), (b) and (c) above except that the full deposit fee will be paid. 
(e)  Daily rental for each of Pavilions Nos. 1 and 2 is $40.00. 
(f)  Daily rental for each of Pavilions Nos. 3 and 4 is $45.00. 
(g)  Daily rental for Pavilion No. 5 is $60.00. 
(h)  City sponsored events will not be subject to any of the above charges. 
(i)  The following fees include water, electricity, sewer, basic cable and basic wireless access for one unit at each campsite: 
(1)  Daily rate for all non-tent campsites is $40.00. 
(2)  Weekly rate for all non-tent campsites is $240.00. 
(3)  Monthly rate for all non-tent campsites is $450.00. Monthly rentals are available from September 1 to March 31 of each year. 
(j)  Daily rate for tent campsites is $10.00. 
(k)  The cost for ten pounds of ice is $3.00. 
(l)  The fee for each recreational vehicle sewer system dump or clean water fill is $5.00. 
(m)  The cost of each shower is $2.00. 
(n)  The Director of Parks and Recreation may temporarily decrease the fees set forth in this Section, at such days and times as determined by said Director, to encourage additional use of Lady Bird Johnson Park facilities and campgrounds. 
(Ord. No. 25-024, 9-21-2015; Ord. No. 26-013, 9-19-2016; Ord. No. 27-001, 2-6-2017; Ord. No. 2018-026, § 2, 12-3-2018; Ord. No. 2019-26, § 2, 9-3-2019) 
Editor's note— Section 6 of Ord. No. 2019-26, adopted Aug. 3, 2019, provides an effective date of Jan. 1, 2020.  
Sec. 24.500. - Fees for use of Marktplatz. 
(a)  Daily rental fee for the Adelsverein Halle is $250.00. 
(b)  Daily rental fee for each of the Oktoberfest Halle and the Kinder Halle is $150.00. 
(c)  Daily rental fee for each of the Catering Kitchen and the Fest Room is $50.00. 
(d)  Rental fee for the entire Marktplatz including all Pavilions and open areas as determined by the Director of Parks and Recreation for one week is $2,400.00, and $650.00 for each additional day with a ten day maximum. The following are specifically excluded from entire Marktplatz rental: City Hall and Fire Station, City Hall annex building, Police Department substation and the Vereins Kirche. Access to such areas may be closed or restricted for events in the discretion of the City's Director of Parks and Recreation. 
(e)  The Daily rental fee for non-profit associations for any of the pavilions or the entire Marktplatz is one-half of the fee set forth in (a), (b), (c) and (d) above. 
(f)  Banner hanging at Marktplatz is $25.00 per hanging and takedown. 
(Ord. No. 26-013, 9-19-2016)  
Sec. 24.600. - Fees for use of Fort Martin Scott. 
Daily rental of Fort Martin Scott to include areas inside the historical fence only, is $500.00, plus a deposit of $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 26-013, 9-19-2016)  
Sec. 24.700. - Vendor fees and deposit fees for City sponsored special events; Participant fees for City sponsored recreational classes, camps, events, and programs. 
(a)  The fees and deposits charged to a person or entity providing vendor services for City sponsored special events are as follows: 
Vendor Type (defined below) 	Deposit Range 	Fee Range 
Food 	$0—$50.00 	$25.00—$100.00 
Craft 	$0—$50.00 	$25.00—$100.00 
Commercial 	$0—$50.00 	$25.00—$100.00 
Novelty 	$0—$50.00 	$25.00—$100.00 
Fredericksburg Civic/Service Org. 	$0—$50.00 	$0.00 
 
Vendor fees and deposit amounts listed are per booth, per event. Fees and deposit amounts will be established by the Parks & Recreation Director, or his/her designee, prior to each event, depending on the history, size, and scope of said event. 
(b)  Participant fee for City sponsored recreational classes, camps, events, and programs - Fee Range $0.00—$50.00 - Each participant in a City sponsored recreational class, camp, event, or other program shall pay the participant fee established by the Department of Parks & Recreation. Participant fee amounts will be established by the Parks & Recreation Director, or his/her designee, prior to each class, camp, event, or other program, depending on the history, size, and scope of said class, camp, event, or other program. The participant fee may established per person, per the duration of the class, camp, event, or program (e.g. per week, or per session). 
(c)  Definitions. As used in this Section 24.700, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Food vendor. Person or entity selling or otherwise providing samples or giveaways of food or beverages of any type. 
(2)  Craft vendor. Person or entity selling handmade items and artwork that have a unique design or require skilled work. Examples of craft items include handmade woodwork, art, jewelry, quilts, and floral design. 
(3)  Commercial vendor. Person or entity selling or reselling commercial items, services, or kits, typically under a corporate contract or trademark. Examples of commercial items include: Scentsy, Tupperware, and Avon. 
(4)  Novelty vendor. Person or entity selling children's products or performing children's services. Examples of children's products or services include: face painting, balloon art, sand art, glow products, and children's toys. 
(5)  Fredericksburg Civic/Service Organization. Person or entity that plans to participate in a special event as a method to market their organization and provides a free activity, game, or amusement for children (no charge to participants, subject to approval). The civic/service organization must be a non-profit organization and shall provide verification of non-profit status. Exceptions to the non-profit status verification requirement may be granted if evidence is provided demonstrating that the organization has an established history of charitable work in the Fredericksburg area. 
(Ord. No. 28-017, § 1, 10-1-2018)  
Sec. 24.800. - Special Events Fees and Deposits. 
(a)  Special Event Application fee for first-time event (the event has not occurred on City property before): $100.00, non-refundable. 
(b)  Expedited Special Event Application fee (for applications submitted less than 60 days in advance of event date): $150.00, non-refundable. 
(c)  Special Event Application fee for parades: $0.00. 
(d)  Security deposit for events with anticipated attendance of 300 to 1,000 people (excluding parades): $1,000.00. 
(e)  Security deposit for events with anticipated attendance exceeding 1,000 people (excluding parades): $3,000.00. 
(f)  Special event clean up fee: $50.00 per hour, per employee. 
(g)  Special event restroom access only (Town Pool): $200.00 per day. 
(Ord. No. 2019-26, § 3, 9-3-2019) 
Editor's note— Section 6 of Ord. No. 2019-26, adopted Aug. 3, 2019, provides an effective date of Jan. 1, 2020.  
ARTICLE 25.000. - HEALTH DEPARTMENT FEES 
 
Sec. 25.100. - [Permits issued by the Health Department.] 
The following fees shall be paid for permits issued by the Health Department: 
A. Institutional Food Service Establishment 	$100.00 per year 
	
	
B. Retail Food Establishments and Food Service Establishments: 
	
  1. with 1 to 5 average annual employees 	$350 per year 
	
  2. with 6 to 19 average annual employees 	$400 per year 
	
  3. with 20 or more average annual employees 	$450 per year 
	
	
C. Portable/ Mobile/Roadside Food Units 	$110 per year 
	
  1. Temporary Food Service Establishments-Per booth, per event. Good for 14 days when application is made on or before the tenth day before the event 	$50 per event 
	
  2.—4. 	Reserved. 
	
  5. Temporary Food Service Establishments-Per booth, per event. Good for 14 days when application is made on or before the tenth day before the event 	$70 per event 
	
   6. Temporary food service establishments, one year permit running from January 1 to December 31, with no prorations when application is made after the tenth day before the event per year 	$110 per year 
  7. Temporary food service establishments, one year permit running from January 1 to December 31, with no prorations when application is made after the tenth day before the event per year 	$130 per year 
 
There shall be no refund of fees or proration. 
(Ord. No. 23-017, 9-16-2013)  
Sec. 25.101. - [Late fees and other fines; exemption.] 
A late fee of $50.00 per calendar month, or portion thereof, shall be imposed on all renewing applicants for all permit fee payments made after 10 days following the due date of the fee, and the new or renewed permit shall not be issued until all fees, late charges and any outstanding fines or reinspection fees are paid. There shall be no refund of fees or proration of permit fees. Individuals or organizations which do not regularly (i.e. more than four times per year) sponsor or provide food service or directly or indirectly operate, or permit the use of its facilities to do so, an institutional kitchen, are exempt from the payment of such fees. Provided, however, this exemption applies only to the initial permit fee with accompanying inspection, Any reinspection, required or requested, shall be paid for. (8-111(c)) 
(Ord. No. 23-017, 9-16-2013)  
Sec. 25.102. - [Reinspections.] 
The fee for all reinspections is $50.00, except the first reinspection by the health officer which is required as a follow-up due to failure of an inspection or which is otherwise required by state law which will be performed at no charge. All reinspections requested by Food Establishment shall be paid for in advance. All other reinspections shall be paid for within 30 days following the reinspection. If not paid timely, a late fee of $25.00 per calendar month, or portion thereof, shall be imposed and the Food Establishment shall have its permit revoked under the method provided in section 8-114 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 23-017, 9-16-2013)  
Sec. 25.103. - [Issuance of copy of permit.] 
A fee of $5.00 is hereby imposed for the issuance of any copy of a permit which has been issued pursuant to this section. (Sec. 8-111 (e)) 
(Ord. No. 23-017, 9-16-2013)  
ARTICLE 26.000. - MISCELLANEOUS FEES 
 
Sec. 26.100. - Returned check/payment fee. 
For any check tendered to the City which is not paid or is returned, or for which an electronic or automatic withdrawal is denied for any reason, a fee of $30.00 shall be due to the City for each such payment returned to the City. 
(Ord. No. 23-015, 9-16-2013)  
ARTICLE 27.000. - EMERGENCY SERVICES COST RECOVERY FEES 
Cost Recovery Fees are based on a per hour cost, unless otherwise noted, and will be determined based upon on the descriptions below. The Director of Emergency Services or his or her designee shall determine the levels of service and total charge based upon the following. Not all services listed in each level must be provided for that level of billing to apply. Further, Cost Recovery Rates are average billing levels, and are typical for the incident responses listed. However, the Director of Emergency Services shall determine actual services provided and may adjust the Cost Recovery Rates based on the actual services provided. These rates become effective on October 24, 2014. 
(a)  Motor vehicle incidents 
Level 1 - $435.00 Stabilization 
Hazardous materials assessment and scene stabilization is provided. This will be the most common billing level. This applies in most cases when the fire department responds to an accident/incident. 
Level 2 - $495.00 Common materials or hazardous fluids 
Includes Level 1 services as well as clean up and material used (sorbents) for clean-up and disposal of common hazardous fluid such as gasoline and diesel or common materials such as cargo spills. Billing will be at this level if the City has to clean up, or becomes liable for the costs to clean up, any gasoline or other automotive fluids that are spilled as a result of the accident/incident. 
Level 3 - $605.00 Fire Suppression 
Scene safety, fire suppression, breathing air, rescue tools, hand tools, hose, tip use, foam, structure protection, and cleaning up of gasoline or other automotive fluids that are spilled as a result of the accident/incident are provided. 
Level 4 - $1,800.00 Rescue of person 
Includes Level 1 and 2 services as well as extrication (heavy rescue tools, ropes, airbags, cribbing etc.). The City will bill at this level if the fire department has to free/remove anyone from the vehicle(s) using any equipment. The City will not bill at this level if the patient is simply unconscious and fire department is able to open the door to access the patient. Billing at this level will occur only if equipment is deployed. 
Level 5 - $2,200.00 Multi engine, mutual aid helicopter per transport trip 
Includes Levels 1, 2, and 4 services as well as Air Care (multi-engine company response, mutual aid, helicopter). The City will bill at this level any time a helicopter is utilized to transport the patient(s). 
Level 6 - Extraordinary events 
Itemized Response: Billing for each incident which does not fit the above billing levels will be as an independent event with custom Cost Recovery Rates. Billing will use itemized rates deemed usual, customary and reasonable for each apparatus and personnel, plus products and equipment used. 
(b)  HAZARDOUS MATERIALS 
The following Cost Recovery Rates will apply for clean-up and disposal of un-common hazardous fluid or materials which require specialized services from outside sources. 
Level 1 - $700.00 Basic response 
Services are provided such as engine response, first responder assignment, perimeter establishment, evacuations, set-up and command. 
Level 2 - $2,500.00 Intermediate response 
Services provided which include engine response, first responder assignment, hazmat certified team, provision of appropriate equipment, perimeter establishment, evacuations, set-up and command, as well as any of: level A or B suit donning, breathing air, detection equipment and set-up and removal of decontamination area. 
Level 3 - $5,900.00 Advanced response for a 3 hour on-scene period 
Services provided which include engine response, first responder assignment, hazmat certified team, provision of appropriate equipment, perimeter establishment, evacuations, first responder set-up and command, level A or B suit donning, breathing air, detection equipment, robot deployment. Set-up and removal of decontamination area as well as any of: recovery and identification of material, disposal and environment clean up, including any disposal charges for material and contaminated equipment and mitigation material used at scene. Each additional hour will be billed at $300.00 per HAZMAT team. 
(c)  PIPELINE INCIDENTS/POWER LINE INCIDENTS 
This billing level includes, but is not limited to: oil, gas, sewer, septic and water pipelines. 
Level 1 - $400.00 Basic response 
Services provided include engine response, first responder assignment, appropriate equipment, perimeter establishment, evacuations, first responder set-up and command and inspection when damage or breakage is not found. 
Level 2 - $1,000.00 Intermediate response 
Services provided include engine response, first responder assignment, provision of appropriate equipment, perimeter establishment, evacuations, first responder set-up and command as well as any of: HAZMAT team, level A or B suit donning, breathing air, detection equipment, and the supervision and/or assistance in pipeline repair. 
Level 3 - Itemized response 
Billing for each incident which does not fit the above billing levels will be as an independent event with custom Cost Recovery Rates. Billing will use itemized rates deemed usual, customary and reasonable for each apparatus and personnel, plus products and equipment used. Services provided include engine response, first responder assignment, provision of appropriate equipment, perimeter establishment, evacuations, first responder set-up and command, HAZMAT team, Level A or B suit donning, breathing air and detection equipment, as well as any of: supervision and/or assistance with pipeline repair of intermediate to major pipeline damage, set-up and removal of decontamination center, detection, recovery and identification of material, disposal and environment clean up. 
(d)  POST FIRE INVESTIGATION 
Fire Investigation Team - $275.00 per hour. 
Services provided Include any of: 
•  Scene Safety 
•  Investigation 
•  Source Identification 
•  K-9/Arson Dog Unit 
•  Identification Equipment 
•  Mobile Detection Unit 
•  Fire Report 
The claim begins when the Fire Investigator responds to the incident and is billed for logged time only. 
(e)  FIRES 
Level 1 - Basic response - Assignment - $400.00 per hour, per fire engine/$500.00 per hour, per other rescue truck 
Services provided Include: 
•  Scene Safety 
•  Investigation during incident 
•  Fire / Hazard Control 
This will be the most common billing level applied every time the fire department responds to an incident. House fires and grass fires are examples of Basic response. 
Level 2 - Severe response; itemized billing 
Billing for each incident which does not fit the above billing level will be as an independent event with custom Cost Recovery Rates. Billing will use itemized rates deemed usual, customary and reasonable for each apparatus and the pay rates of personnel, plus products and equipment used. 
(f)  ILLEGAL FIRES 
Assignment - $400.00 per hour, per fire engine / $500.00 per hour, per other rescue truck 
When a fire is started by any person or persons contrary to permits, regulations or controls established by local or state rules, provisions or ordinances such person or persons will be liable for any fire department response at a cost for the actual expenses incurred by the fire department or other responding departments to respond and contain the fire. The actual expenses will include direct labor at the rates of pay for personnel, equipment costs and any other costs that can be reasonably allocated to the cost of the response. 
(g)  WATER RESCUE 
Level 1 - Basic Response - $400.00 per hour plus $50.00 per hour for each rescue person. 
Services provided include engine response, first responder assignment, perimeter establishment, evacuations, first responder set-up and command, scene safety and investigation (including possible patient contact, hazard control). 
This will be the most common billing level applied every time the fire department responds to an incident. 
Level 2 - Intermediate Response - $800.00 per hour plus $50.00 per hour for each rescue person. 
Services provided include Level 1 services as well as any of: clean up and material used (sorbents), minor hazardous clean up and disposal. The City will bill at this level if the fire department has to clean up small amounts of gasoline or other fluids that are spilled as a result of the incident. 
Level 3 - Advanced Response - $2,000.00 per hour plus $50.00 per hour per rescue person, plus $100.00 per hour per HAZMAT team member. 
Includes Level 1 and Level 2 services as well as any of: Drowning Accident Rescue Team activation, donning breathing apparatus, use of detection equipment, set up or removal of decontamination center, recovery and identification of material, disposal and environment clean up, including any disposal charges for material and contaminated equipment and mitigation material used at scene. 
Level 4 - Severe response; itemized billing. 
Billing for each incident which does not fit the above billing levels will be as an independent event with custom Cost Recovery Rates. Billing will use itemized rates deemed usual, customary and reasonable for each apparatus and the pay rates of personnel, plus products and equipment used. 
(h)  BACK COUNTRY, WATER OR SPECIAL RESCUE 
Itemized Response - $400.00 plus $50.00 per rescue person plus $400.00 per hour for each additional response vehicle more than one. 
(j)  MISCELLANEOUS - these rates apply in all cases not covered above 
Fire Engine billed at $400.00 per hour. 
Rescue Truck billed at $500.00 per hour. 
Miscellaneous equipment billed at $300.00. 
(Ord. No. 24-022, 10-20-2014)  
ARTICLE 28.000. - FIRE MARSHAL SERVICES 
 
Sec. 28.000. - Fees and Charges for Fire Marshal Services. 
The fees and charges to the person or entity utilizing or receiving services rendered by the City's Fire Marshal are as follows: 
Type of Fee 	Fee Amount 
Permit Fees 
New Construction (commercial) 	$50.00 
Modified Construction (commercial) 	$50.00 
Plan Review Fees 
New Construction (commercial) 	$50.00 
Modified Construction (commercial) 	$50.00 
Automatic Extinguishing Systems Plan Review 	$50.00 
Fire Detection System Plan Review 	$50.00 
Commercial Kitchen Hood Plans Review 	$50.00 
Site Plans 	$25.00 
Inspection Fees 
Hydro Visual Inspections 	$25.00 per building 
Class 1 Hood Final Inspections 	$50.00 
Fire Detection Final Inspection 	$25.00 per building 
Fire Suppression Final Inspection 	$25.00 per building 
Hotel/Motels Annual Inspection 	$50.00 
Business Annual Inspection 	No Fee Initial Inspection 
Carnivals & Fairs 	$50.00 
1 st Re-inspection 	$0.00 
2 nd Re-Inspection 	$100.00 
Subsequent Re-Inspections 	$150.00 
Miscellaneous Fees 
Fireworks Displays (commercial) 	$250.00 
Burn Permit 	$10.00 
 
(Ord. No. 28-020, § 2, 10-1-2018)  
Sec. 28.100. - PERMIT FOR CONSTRUCTION OR USE OF TOOLS, EQUIPMENT 
The cost of the permit required under Section 20-211 of this Code of Ordinances is $10.00. In lieu thereof, the City will accept an affidavit on the inability to pay. 
(Ord. No. 27-006, 5-15-2017)  
APPENDIX B - ZONING ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Appendix B Zoning Ordinance, as adopted by the city council. Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
 
PURPOSE, AUTHORITY AND SCOPE OF ZONING ORDINANCE  
ENACTING CLAUSE 
The zoning standards contained herein, together with all amendments, shall officially constitute the zoning regulations of the City of Fredericksburg as adopted by Ordinance Number 2-25 effective May 15, 1950, amended June 29, 1967, February 17, 1986, July 27, 1987, December 12, 1988, June 26, 1989, November 26, 1990, October 26, 1992, January 10, 1994, August 22, 1994, and again on November 16, 1998. 
 
Sec. 1.200. - STATUTORY AUTHORITY. 
This ordinance is adopted in pursuant to authority set forth in Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code, and shall be applicable to all property within the corporate limits of Fredericksburg, Texas, herein referred to as "the City."  
Sec. 1.300. - PURPOSE. 
The Zoning Regulations and Districts as herein established have been made in accordance with a Comprehensive Plan, for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the City. They have been designed to lessen the congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration and population; and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks and other public requirements. They have been made with reasonable consideration, among other things, for the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for the particular uses specified; and with a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the City, consistent with a Comprehensive Plan.  
Sec. 1.400. - SCOPE. 
1.410 Minimum Requirements 
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Ordinance such provisions shall be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. 
1.420 Replacement of Other Ordinances 
The provisions of this Ordinance shall not be deemed or construed to repeal, amend, modify, alter or change any other Ordinance or any part thereof not specifically repealed, amended, modified, altered or changed herein, except in such particulars or matters where this Ordinance is more restrictive than such other Ordinances or parts thereof; and if this Ordinance is found to be less restrictive, and each other Ordinance is found to be less restrictive, each such other Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect and shall prevail. 
1.430 Compliance With Other Ordinances And Laws 
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to authorize the use of lands, buildings and/or structures in violation of this Ordinance or any other applicable statues, ordinances or laws. 
1.440 Reference To Any Portion Of This Ordinance 
Whenever reference is made to any portion of this Ordinance, or any other law or ordinances, the reference shall apply to all amendments and additions now or hereafter made.  
Sec. 1.500. - SEVERABILITY. 
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase, or provision of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole or any part or provisions thereof other than the part so decided to be invalid or unconstitutional.  
Sec. 1.600. - INTERPRETATION. 
1.610 Gender 
When consistent with the context, words in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter gender. 
1.620 May 
The word "may" is permissive. 
1.630 Plural 
When consistent with the context, words in the plural include the singular. 
1.640 Shall 
The word "shall" is mandatory. 
1.650 Singular 
When consistent with the context, words in the singular number shall include the plural. 
1.660 Tenses 
When consistent with the context, words in the present tense include the future, and words in the future tense include the present tense.  
Sec. 1.700. - COMPLIANCE REQUIRED. 
All land, and buildings, structures or appurtenances located thereon within the City of Fredericksburg, Texas, which are hereafter occupied, used, erected, altered or converted shall be used, placed and erected in conformance with the zoning regulations prescribed for the zoning district in which such land, or buildings, structures and appurtenances are located, except as hereinafter provided.  
Sec. 1.800. - ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICIAL ZONING DISTRICTS, BOUNDARIES AND MAP. 
1.810 Zoning Districts Established 
The City of Fredericksburg, Texas is hereby divided into zoning districts. The use, height and area regulations as set out are herein are uniform within each state. The districts established herein shall be known as: 
Abbreviated 
Designation 	Zoning District Name 
R-1 	Single Family Residential 
R-2 	Mixed Residential 
R-3 	Multi-Family Residential 
R-4 	Manufactured Home Residential 
R-5 	Patio Home Residential 
C-1 	Neighborhood Commercial 
C-2 	Commercial 
CBD 	Central Business District 
M-1 	Light Manufacturing 
M-2 	Medium Manufacturing 
M-3 	Industrial Park 
PF 	Public Facilities 
OS 	Open Space 
HO 	Historic Overlay 
PUD 	Planned Unit Development 
 
1.820 Zoning Districts Map 
The boundaries of the zoning districts set out herein are delineated and shown on the Zoning Districts Map of the City of Fredericksburg, said map being a part of this ordinance as fully as if the same were set forth herein in detail. 
Two original, official and identical copies of the Zoning Districts Map are hereby adopted, bearing the signature of the Mayor and the attestation of the City Clerk, and shall be filed and maintained as follows: 
A.  One copy shall be filed with the City Clerk and retained as the original record and shall not be changed in any manner. 
B.  One copy shall be filed with the Director of Planning and Building and shall be maintained up to date by posting thereon all changes and subsequent amendments for observation in issuing Building Permits and enforcing the Zoning Ordinance. 
C.  Reproductions of the official Zoning Districts Map, as amended, may be made from time-to-time for information purposes. 
1.830 Zoning District Boundaries 
The district boundary lines shown on the Zoning Districts Map are usually along streets, alleys, property lines or extensions thereof. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official Zoning Districts Maps, the following rules shall apply: 
A.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such centerline. 
B.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
C.  Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following city limits. 
D.  Boundaries indicated as following the centerline of creeks, drainage courses or rivers shall be construed as following such centerline. 
E.  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated above shall so be construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the original Zoning Districts Map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action of the City Council or whenever such area is franchised for building purposes, the zoning district line adjoining each side of such street, alley or other public way shall be automatically extended to the centerline of such vacated street, alley or way and all area so involved shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the extended districts. 
Where physical features on the ground are at variance with information shown on the official Zoning Districts Map or when there arises a question as to how or whether a parcel of property is zoned and such question cannot be resolved by the application of the above rules, the property shall be considered as classified R-1, Single-Family Dwelling District, until the determination of permanent zoning which shall be in accordance with the provisions provided in Section 5.200. DEFINITIONS  
Sec. 2.100. - DEFINITIONS. 
For the purpose of this ordinance, certain numbers, abbreviations, terms and words used herein shall be used, interpreted, and defined as set forth in this Section. Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in the present tense include the future tense; words used in the plural number include the singular; the word "herein" means "in these regulations"; and the word "regulations" means "these regulations." 
A.  "Person" includes a corporation, a partnership, and an incorporated association of persons such as a club. "Shall" and "will" are always mandatory. The term "building" includes a "structure"; a "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof; and "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." 
B.  Words not herein defined but defined in any chapter of the City of Fredericksburg Codes shall conform to the definitions used in said code. 
ABUTTING 
Having lot lines or district boundaries in common. 
ACCESS 
A way or means of approach to provide physical entrance and exit to a property. 
ADDITION 
Any construction which increases the size of a building or structure in terms of site coverage, height, length, width or gross floor area. 
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUSINESS OFFICES 
Offices or private firms or organizations which are primarily used for the provisions of executive, management or administrative services. Typical uses include administrative offices, and services including real estate, insurance, property management, investment, personnel, travel, secretarial services, telephone answering, photocopy and reproduction and business offices of public utilities, organization and associations, or other use classifications when the service rendered is that customarily associated with administrative office services. 
ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES 
Offices, administrative, clerical or public contract services that deal directly with the citizen, together with incidental storage and maintenance of necessary vehicles. Typical uses include federal, state, county and city offices. 
AGENT OF OWNER 
Any person showing written verification that he or she is acting for, and with the knowledge and consent of, a property owner. 
AGRICULTURAL SALES AND SERVICES 
Establishments or places of business engaged in sale from the premises of feed, grain, fertilizers, pesticides and similar goods or in the provisions or agriculturally related services with incidental storage on lots other than where the service is rendered. Typical uses include hay, feed and grain stores and tree service firms. 
ALTERATION 
Any construction of physical change in the internal arrangements of rooms or the supporting members of a building or structure, or change in relative position of buildings or structures on a site, or substantial change in appearance of any building or structure. 
ARTS AND CRAFTS 
Goods which are custom produced in small quantities, often one of a kind. The use may include the sale or production of same or may be a place where a small number of persons are engaged in arts and crafts activities in a class or studio; provided that the area encompassing arts and crafts use shall not exceed 2,500 square feet. Examples include galleries, arts and crafts studios, custom tailoring and dressmaking shops, retail art supplies and hobby materials, florist shops, photographic studios, picture framing shops and arts and crafts schools. 
ATTACHED 
Having one or more walls in common with a principal building, or joined to a principal building by a covered porch, loggia or passageway, the roof of which is a part or extension of the principal building. 
AUTOMOTIVE RENTALS 
Rental of automobiles, non-commercial trucks, trailers and recreational vehicles, including incidental parking and servicing of vehicles available for rent or lease. Typical uses include auto rental agencies, trailer rental agencies and taxicab parking and dispatching. 
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR SERVICES 
Repair of automobiles non-commercial trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles or boats, including the sale, installation and servicing of equipment and parts. Typical uses include muffler shops, auto repair garages, tire sales and installation, wheel and brake shops, body and fender shops, and similar repair and service activities (but specifically excluding dismantling or salvaging of vehicles). 
AUTOMOTIVE SALES 
Sale or rental of automobiles, non-commercial trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles or boats, including incidental storage, maintenance and servicing. Typical uses include new and used car dealerships, motorcycle dealerships, boat, trailer and recreational vehicle dealerships. 
AUTOMOTIVE WASHING 
Washing and cleaning of automobiles and related light equipment. Typical uses include auto laundries or car washes. 
AVIATION FACILITIES 
Landing fields, aircraft parking and service facilities, and related facilities for operation, service, fueling, repair, storage, charter, sales and rental of aircraft, including activities directly associated with the operation and maintenance of airport facilities and the provision of safety and security. 
BASE DISTRICT 
A district established by this ordinance to prescribe basic regulations governing land use and site development. 
BASIC INDUSTRY 
A use engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing or materials of products predominately from extracted or raw materials, or a use engaged in storage of, or manufacturing processes utilizing flammable or explosive materials, or storage or manufacturing processes which potentially involve hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions. Poultry processing shall be included. 
BED AND BREAKFAST 
Tourist or guest lodging services within the rooms of the property owner's principal residence or separate lodging units (for example, in any buildings, cabins, guest homes and the like) not more than eight rental units, where breakfast may be the only meal served and sleeping accommodations are provided or offered for transient guests for compensation. 
BEGINNING OF CONSTRUCTION 
The incorporation of labor and material within the foundation of a building or structure. 
BUILDING 
A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons and/or property. The word "building" includes the word "structure". 
BUILDING PAD 
A portion of a sloping site graded relatively flat, or to a minimum slope, for the purpose of accommodating a building and related outdoor space. 
BUFFER ZONE 
A strip of land, identified on a site plan or by the Zoning Ordinance, established to protect one type of land use from another land use which is incompatible. Buffer zones may be zoned or shown on a site plan. Normally, a buffer zone is landscaped and kept in open space uses. 
BUILDING MAINTENANCE SERVICES 
Establishments primarily engaged in the provisions of maintenance and custodial services to firms rather than individuals. Typical uses include janitorial, landscape maintenance, or window cleaning services. 
BUSINESS SCHOOL 
A use providing education or training in business, commerce, real estate, language or other similar activity or occupational pursuit, not otherwise defined as a home occupation, college or university or public or private educational facility. 
BUSINESS OR TRADE SCHOOL 
A use providing education or training in business, commerce, language or other similar activity or occupational pursuit, not otherwise defined as a home occupation, college or university or public or private educational facility. 
BUSINESS SUPPORT SERVICES 
Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the sale, rental or repair of equipment and supplies used by office, professional and service establishments to the firms themselves rather than to individuals, but excludes automotive, construction and farm equipment. Typical uses include office equipment and supply firms, small business machine repair shops, hotel equipment and supply firms. 
CAMPGROUND 
Campground facilities providing camping and/or parking areas and incidental services for travelers in recreational vehicles or tents. Typical uses include recreational vehicle parks. 
CARPORT 
A roofed space, open on three sides, one story in height, covered with a flat or hipped roof and ordinarily used as a shelter under which vehicles are driven or temporarily parked. 
CEMETERY 
Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbiums, crematoriums, mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery. 
CHANGE OF USE 
The replacement of an existing use by a new use, or a change in the nature of an existing use, but not including a change in ownership, tenancy, name, management or change in product or service within the same use classification where the previous nature of the use, line of business, or other function is substantially unchanged. 
CHURCH 
Any structure used principally as a place wherein persons regularly assemble for religious worship, including sanctuaries, chapels and cathedrals and onsite buildings adjacent thereto, such as parsonages, friaries, convents, fellowship halls, Sunday Schools and rectories, but not including day care centers, community recreation facilities, private primary and secondary educational facilities and parking facilities. 
CITY COUNCIL 
The governing or legislative authority of the City of Fredericksburg. 
CLUB OR LODGE 
A use providing meeting, recreational or social facilities for a private or non-profit association, primarily for use by members and guests. Typical uses include private social clubs and fraternal organizations. 
CLUSTER HOUSING 
Detached multi-family residential structures, situated on the site by a development design technique that concentrates buildings in specific areas. 
COCKTAIL LOUNGE 
Establishments or places of business engaged in the preparation and retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, including taverns, bars, cocktail lounges and similar uses other than restaurant as that term is defined herein. 
COLLEGE AND UNIVERSITY FACILITIES 
Educational institutions of higher learning which offer a course of study designed to culminate in the issuance of a degree as defined by the Education Code of the State of Texas. 
COMMERCIAL OFF-STREET PARKING 
Parking of motor vehicles on a temporary basis within a privately owned off-street parking facility, other than accessory to a principal use. Typical uses include commercial parking lots or commercial parking garages. 
COMMON AREA 
An area held, designed and designated for the common use of the owners or occupants or a townhouse project, PUD, apartment, condominium, manufactured home park or subdivision. 
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES 
Establishments primarily engaged in the provisions of broadcasting and other information relay services accomplished through the use of electronic and telephonic mechanisms but excluding those classified as Major Utility Facilities. Typical uses include television studios, telecommunications service centers, telegraphic service offices, film recording, sound recording or cable television operations. 
COMMUNITY RECREATION 
A recreational facility for use by residents and guests of a particular residential development, planned unit development, church, private primary educational facility, private secondary educational facility, club or lodge or limited residential neighborhood, including both indoor and outdoor facilities. 
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN 
The planning documents and related material officially adopted by the City of Fredericksburg containing the goals, objectives and policies pertaining to urban growth, community facilities, infrastructure, circulation, housing and other subjects related to the development of the City. 
CONDOMINIUM RESIDENTIAL 
The use of a site for four or more dwelling units intended for separate ownership, together with common area serving all dwelling units. 
CONSTRUCTION SALES AND SERVICES 
Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in construction activities and incidental storage on lots other than construction sites, as well as the retail or wholesale sale, from the premises, of materials used in the construction of buildings or other structures, but excluding retail sale of paint, fixture and hardware and those classified as one of the Automotive and Equipment Service use types. Typical uses include building materials stores, tool and equipment rental or sales, building, plumbing, electrical or mechanical contractors. 
CONSUMER CONVENIENCE SERVICES 
Establishments which provide services, primarily to individuals, of a convenient and limited nature, often in access-controlled facilities which make twenty-four (24) hour operation possible. Typical uses include the renting of private postal and safety deposit boxes to individuals and automated baking machines. 
CONSUMER REPAIR SERVICES 
Establishments primarily engaged in the provisions of repair services to individuals and households rather than firms, but excluding Automotive and Equipment Service use types. Typical uses include appliance repair shops, watch or jewelry repair shops or musical instrument repair shops. 
CONVALESCENT SERVICES 
A use providing bed care and in-patient services for persons requiring regular medical attention, such as nursing homes, but excluding facilities providing surgical or emergency medical services, facilities providing care for alcoholism, drug addiction, mental disease or communicable disease. 
CONVENIENCE STORAGE 
Storage services primarily for personal effects and household goods within enclosed storage areas having individual access, but excluding uses such as workshops, hobby shops, manufacturing or commercial activity. Typical uses include mini-warehousing and mini-storage units. 
CONVENIENCE STORE/SELF SERVICE GASOLINE 
An establishment engaged in the sale of food, beer, wine, household products, and self service gasoline retail sales limited to three (3) multiple dispensers or pump units within one (1) service island, with one (1) canopy cover. 
CULTURAL SERVICES 
A library, museum or similar registered non-profit organizational use displaying, preserving and/or exhibiting objects of community and cultural interest. 
CUSTOM MANUFACTURING 
Establishments primarily engaged in the on-site production of goods by hand manufacturing which involves only the use of hand tools or domestic mechanical equipment not exceeding eight (8) kilowatts and the incidental direct sale to consumers of only those goods produced on-site. Typical uses include ceramic studios, candle-making shops or custom jewelry manufacturing. 
DAY CARE SERVICES 
A facility designed or adapted for the care of children or adults that require a license for group day care homes from the Texas Department of Protective and Regulatory Services. This term includes nursery schools, pre-schools, day care centers for children or adults and similar uses, but excluding public and private primary and secondary educational facilities. 
DENSITY 
The average number of housing units per unit of land expressed as square feet of land area per housing unit or dwelling units per acre. 
DETACHED 
Fully separated from any other building or joined to another building by structural members not constituting an enclosed or covered space. 
DETENTION FACILITIES 
A publicly operated use providing housing and care for individuals legally confined. 
DIRECTOR OF PLANNING AND BUILDING 
The designated officer responsible for enforcement of this Ordinance. 
DISCONTINUANCE OF USE 
To cease or discontinue a use or activity, excluding temporary or short-term interruptions to a use or activity during periods of restoring, remodeling, maintaining or otherwise improving a facility, or normal, seasonal cessation of a use, or other temporary cessation resulting from a change of use. 
DRIP LINE 
A vertical line extending from the outermost branches of a tree to the ground. 
DRIVE-IN SERVICE 
A feature or characteristic of a use involving sale of products or provision of services to occupants in vehicles, including drive-in windows and drive through services such as mechanical automobile washing. 
DRIVE THROUGH FACILITIES 
Facilities provided by an establishment or place of business for the purpose of allowing a customer or patron to transact business, whether it be pick-up, drop-off, ordering or service, from a motor vehicle. 
DRIVE WAY 
A permanently surfaced (asphalt, gravel, "grass-crete" or similar surface) area providing vehicular access between a street and an off-street parking or loading area. 
DUPLEX RESIDENTIAL 
The use of a site for two dwelling units, within a single building, other than a manufactured home. 
DWELLING UNIT 
A residential unit other than a manufactured home providing complete, independent living facility for one family, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating and cooking. 
Efficiency Dwelling Unit. A dwelling unit containing not more than 400 square feet of floor area and not having a separate bedroom or sleeping area independent of the principal living area. 
EASEMENT 
A privilege of one or more property rights by the property owner to and for the use of the public, a corporation or other persons, for a designated part of his property and for a specified purpose. 
Maintenance Easement. An easement granted by the owner of a lot adjacent to a zero lot line development, exclusively for the purpose of allowing the occupant of a dwelling unit constructed on or within five (5) feet of the lot line access to the adjoining property in order to maintain that portion of his dwelling situated on or adjacent to the common side lot line. 
Use Easement. An easement granted by the owner of one lot to the owner of another lot in a zero lot line development, exclusively for the purpose of allowing the occupant of the dwelling unit having the dominant side yard of a common side lot line, the use, enjoyment, and privacy of such easement. 
ENCLOSED 
A roof or covered space fully surrounded by walls, including windows, doors, and similar openings or architectural features, or an open space of less than 100 square feet fully surrounded by a building or walls exceeding 8-feet in height. 
EQUIPMENT REPAIR SERVICES 
Repair of trucks, tractors, construction equipment, agricultural implements, and similar heavy equipment. Typical uses include truck repair garages, trucking yard terminals, tractor and farm implement repair services, and machine shops (but specifically excluding dismantling or salvaging of vehicles. 
EQUIPMENT SALES 
Sale or rental of trucks, tractors, construction equipment, agricultural implements, manufactured homes, and similar heavy equipment, including incidental storage, maintenance and servicing. Typical uses include truck dealerships, construction equipment dealerships, manufactured home dealerships and sales (but specifically excluding dismantling or salvage of vehicles). 
EXTERMINATING SERVICES 
Services related to the eradication and control of rodents, insects and other pests, with incidental storage on lots other than where the service is rendered. 
FACILITIES AND SERVICE LINES 
Electric, water, drainage facilities, sewer, gas, telephone, cable, and electric lines, meters and anchor equipment required to provide utility service. 
FAMILY 
Any number of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit in which not more than two (2) individuals are unrelated by blood, legal adoption or marriage. 
FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of financial and banking services. Typical uses include banks, savings and loan institutions, loan and lending activities and similar services. 
FOOD SALES 
Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the retail sale of food (with incidental sale of beer and wine) for home consumption or household products. Typical uses include groceries, delicatessens, meat markets, retail bakeries, candy shops and ice cream parlors. Restaurants are specifically excluded from this definition. 
FUNERAL SERVICES 
Establishments engaged in undertaking services such as preparing the human dead for burial and arranging and managing funerals. Typical uses include funeral homes or mortuaries. 
GENERAL RETAIL SALES 
Sale or rental of commonly used goods and merchandise for personal or household use, but excluding those classified more specifically in Section 4.500. Typical uses include department stores, apparel stores, furniture stores and establishments providing the following products or services: household cleaning and maintenance products; drugs, cards, stationery, notions, books, tobacco products, cosmetics and specialty items; flowers, plants, hobby materials, toys and hand-crafted items; apparel, jewelry, fabrics, and like items; cameras and photography services; household electronic equipment; sporting equipment; kitchen utensils; home furnishing and appliances; art supplies, framing, arts and antiques; paint and wallpaper; carpeting and floor covering; interior decorating services; office supplies; bicycles and auto parts (inside a building with no repair services). 
GROSS FLOOR AREA 
The total enclosed area of all floors in a building, measured to the surface of the exterior walls, that has a clear height of more than six (6) feet. Parking facilities for the principal use and driveways, elevator shafts and air space above the atria ground floor are excluded from gross floor area calculations. Enclosed loading berths and off-street maneuvering are also excluded, but not the dock area itself. 
GRADE 
The lowest horizontal elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving or sidewalk or a point where height is to be measured. See Section 7.510. 
GROUP RESIDENTIAL 
The use of a site for residential occupancy of living accommodations by groups of more than six (6) persons not defined as a family, on a weekly or longer basis. Typical uses include occupancy of fraternity or sorority houses, dormitories, residence halls or boarding houses or assisted living facilities. 
GUEST HOUSE 
An accessory building containing a lodging unit with or without kitchen facilities, and used to house occasional visitors or guests of the occupants of a dwelling unit on the same site. Where permitted, paying guests shall be subject to the provisions of Hotel Tax Ordinance. See Section 8.220G. 
GUIDANCE SERVICES 
A use providing counseling, guidance, recuperative or similar services to persons requiring rehabilitation assistance as a result of mental illness, alcoholism, detention, drug addiction or similar condition, on a day time care basis. 
GUIDELINE 
A statement of characteristics or design criteria considered desirable, but which are not required. 
HEIGHT 
The vertical distance from "grade" to the highest point of coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the average height of the highest gable on a pitched, or hipped roof, or if none of the preceding, then to the highest point of a structure. As applied to a building, the height shall be measured from an elevation derived from the average of the highest and lowest grade adjacent to the building. See Section 7.510. 
HISTORIC DISTRICT 
A geographically defined area which possesses significant concentration, linkage or continuity of buildings, structures, sites, areas or land, which in turn are united by architectural, historical, archaeological or cultural importance or significance and which the City Council determines shall be protected, enhanced and preserved. 
HISTORIC LANDMARK 
Any building, structure, site, district, area or land of architectural, cultural or significance, which the City Council determines shall be protected, enhanced or preserved, or is listed in the Historic Resource Survey of the City of Fredericksburg. 
HOME OCCUPATION 
An accessory occupational use conducted entirely within a dwelling unit by the inhabitants thereof, which is clearly incidental to the use of the structure for residential purposes and does not change the residential character of the site. See Section 8.300, Home Occupation. 
HORTICULTURE 
The growing of horticulture and floriculture specialties such as flowers, shrubs or trees intended for ornamental or landscaping purposes, but excluding retail sales. Typical uses include wholesale plant nurseries and greenhouses. 
HOSPITAL SERVICES (GENERAL) 
A facility providing medical, psychiatric or surgical service for sick or injured persons, primarily on an in-patient basis, and including ancillary facilities for out-patient and emergency treatment, diagnostic services, training, research, administration and services to patients, employees or visitors. 
HOSPITAL SERVICES (LIMITED) 
A facility providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical services for sick or injured persons, exclusively on an out-patient basis, including emergency treatment, diagnostic services, training, administration and services to out-patients, employees or visitors. 
HOTEL-MOTEL 
Temporary, transient lodging services involving the provision of room and/or board containing more than eight rental units. 
INDOOR ENTERTAINMENT 
Predominately spectator uses conducted within an enclosed building. Typical uses include motion picture theaters, meeting halls and dance halls. 
INDOOR SPORTS AND RECREATION 
Uses conducted within an enclosed building. Typical uses include bowling alleys, billiard parlors, ice and roller skating rinks, penny arcades, electronic video games and indoor racquetball courts or swimming pools. 
INTERNAL STREET 
A private way which affords the principal means of access to individual manufactured home spaces or auxiliary buildings in a manufactured home park, a private right-of-way or other non-public street within a Planned Unit Development (PUD) or other similar development. 
KENNELS 
Boarding and care services for dogs, cats and similar animals. Typical uses include boarding kennels, pet motels or dog training centers. 
KIOSK 
A small light structure with one or more open sides for general retail sales use only. 
LAUNDRY SERVICES 
Establishments primarily engaged in the provisions of laundering, dry cleaning or dyeing services other than those classified as Personal Services. Typical uses include bulk laundry and cleaning plants, diaper services or linen supply services. 
LANDSCAPED AREA 
An area devoted to or developed predominately with plant material, natural landscape or xeroscape features, including lawn, ground cover, gardens, trees, shrubs and other plant materials; and also including accessory decorative outdoor landscape elements such as pools, fountains, water features and sculptural elements, provided that the use of brick, stone, aggregate or other inorganic materials shall not predominate over the use of plant material. 
Interior Landscaping. As applied to parking and loading facilities, or to similar paved areas, a landscaped area or areas within the shortest circumferential line defining the perimeter or exterior boundary of the parking or loading area, excluding driveways or walkways providing access to the facility. 
Perimeter Landscaping. As applied to parking and loading facilities, or to similar paved areas, a landscaped area adjoining and outside the shortest circumferential line defining the exterior boundary of a parking or loading area, excluding driveways or walkways providing access to the facility. 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING 
A use engaged in the manufacture, predominately from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment and packaging of such products, including incidental storage, sales and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial processing. Typical uses include winery, sheet metal shop, welding shop and machine shop. 
LIMITED RETAIL SALES 
Sale of goods and merchandise which are typically bought in limited quantities and are of a personal nature. Uses within this category are characterized by limited traffic, noise, parking and hours of operation. Typical uses include an antique shop, bakery, book or stationary store, camera shop, candy, cigar & tobacco shop, florist, jewelry, optical goods, toys and hand crafted items. 
LIQUOR SALES 
Establishments or places of business engaged in retail sale for consumption off the premises of alcoholic beverages. Typical uses include liquor stores, bottle shops, or any licensed sale of liquor, beer or wine for off-site consumption. 
LOCAL STREET 
A street which is intended primarily to serve traffic within a neighborhood or limited residential district, and which is not necessarily continuous through several residential districts. 
LOADING SPACE 
An area used for loading or unloading of goods from a vehicle in connection with the use of the site on which such space is located. 
LOCAL UTILITY SERVICES 
Services which are necessary to support principal development and involve only minor structures such as lines and poles which are necessary to support principal development. 
LODGING UNIT 
A room or group of rooms in a dwelling unit or a group residential use, for overnight occupancy on a transient or residential occupancy basis. Where designed or used for occupancy by more than two persons, each two person capacity shall be deemed a separate lodging unit. 
LOT 
A parcel of real property with a separate and distinct number or other designation shown on a plat, record of survey, parcel map or subdivision map recorded in the office of the County Clerk, or a parcel legally created or established pursuant to applicable zoning or subdivision regulations in effect prior to the effective date of application of this ordinance to such parcel. 
Corner Lot. A lot located at the intersection or junction of two streets, or two segments of a curved street, forming an angle of not more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. 
Interior Lot. A lot other than a corner lot. 
Reverse Corner Lot. A corner lot having a side lot line which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of a lot to its rear. 
Through Lot. A lot other than a corner lot abutting more than one street. 
LOT AREA 
The net horizontal area within bounding lot lines, but excluding any portion of a flat (panhandle) lot providing access to a street and any public or private easement or right-of-way providing access to another lot. 
LOT COVERAGE OR BUILDING COVERAGE 
The area of lot covered by buildings or roofed areas, but excluding incidental projecting eaves, balconies and similar features, ground level paving, landscaping, and open recreational facilities. See Section 7.700. 
LOT DEPTH 
The horizontal distance between the mid-point of the front lot line and the mid-point of the rear lot line. 
LOT LINE 
A line or series of connected line segments bounding a lot as herein defined. 
Common Side Lot Line. A side line between two or more lots. 
Dominant Side Yard of a Small Lot. The side of a small or zero lot line parcel, having the larger width. The wall of a dwelling unit having the dominant side yard is permitted to have windows and door openings adjacent to the dominant side yard. 
Front Lot Line. On an interior lot, the lot line abutting the street. On a corner lot, the shorter lot line abutting a street or the line designated as the front lot line by subdivision or parcel map. On a through lot, the lot line abutting the street providing the primary access to the lot. On a flat (panhandle) lot, the interior lot line designated as a front lot line by a subdivision or parcel map, or the line determined by the Director of Planning and Building to be the front lot line. 
Interior Lot Line. A lot line not abutting a street. 
Rear Lot Line. A lot line not defined as a front or side lot line. In the case of an irregular shaped lot or a lot bounded by only three lot lines, a line within the lot having a length of ten (10) feet, parallel to and most distant from the front lot line shall be interpreted as the rear lot line for the purpose of determining required yards, setbacks and other provisions of this ordinance. 
Side Lot Line. A lot line intersecting the front lot line and extending there from a minimum distance of seventy-five (75) feet. 
Street or Exterior Lot Line. A lot line abutting the street. 
Zero Lot Line. A common lot line on which a wall of a structure may be constructed. 
LOT WIDTH 
The horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured at the front setback line and at a distance of fifty (50) feet to the rear thereof. 
MAJOR UTILITY FACILITIES 
Generating plants, electrical switching facilities and primary substations, refuse collection or disposal facilities, water and wastewater treatment plants and similar facilities. 
MAINTENANCE AND SERVICE FACILITIES 
A facility supporting maintenance, repair, vehicular or equipment servicing, material storage and similar activities, including corporation yards, equipment service centers and similar uses having characteristics of commercial services or contracting or industrial activities. 
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK 
A unified development of twenty or more HUD-Code manufactured home spaces for rent or lease, including common areas and facilities for management, recreation, laundry and utility services, storage and similar services for the convenience of residents of the manufactured home park. 
MANUFACTURED HOME RESIDENTIAL 
A dwelling that is manufactured in one or more modules at a location other than the homesite and which is designed as a residence when the modules are transported to the homesite, and the modules are joined together and installed on a permanent foundation system or tied down in accordance with appropriate Code requirements. Manufactured residence construction shall be in accordance with the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act and shall include the plumbing, heating/air conditioning and electrical systems to be contained in the structure. The term manufactured home or residence shall not mean or apply to a mobile home as defined in the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act, nor is it to include building modules incorporating concrete or masonry as a primary component. 
MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION 
A subdivision designed and/or intended for the sale of lots for siting manufactured homes and in accordance with the requirements of the subdivision ordinance. 
MANUFACTURED HOME SPACE 
An area within a manufactured home park which is designed for and designated as the location for a manufactured home and the exclusive use of its occupants. 
MANUFACTURED HOME STAND 
That portion of a mobile home space upon which the manufactured home is placed. 
MEDICAL OFFICES 
A use providing consultation, diagnosis, therapeutic, preventive or corrective personal treatment services by doctors, dentists, medical and dental laboratories, and similar practitioners of medical and healing arts for humans licensed for such practice by the State of Texas. 
MILITARY INSTALLATIONS 
Military facilities of the federal and state governments. 
MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL 
The use of a site for three or more dwelling units, within one or more buildings. 
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE OR BUILDING 
A structure or building, the size, dimension, or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment to the zoning ordinance but fails by reason of such adoption, revision, or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district. 
NONCONFORMING USE 
A lawful use of any land, building or structure, other than a sign or PUD, which does not conform with currently applicable use regulations, but which complies with use regulations in effect at the time the use was established. See Section 6.100. 
NON-COMPLYING 
A building or structure, including off-street parking or loading areas, but excluding PUD's which do not comply with the current, applicable site development regulations for the district in which it is located, or with applicable General Regulations set forth in Section 5.100, but which complied with applicable regulations at the time of construction. 
OUTDOOR ENTERTAINMENT 
Predominately spectator uses conducted in open or partially enclosed or screened facilities. Typical uses include sports arenas, racing facilities and amusement parks. 
OUTDOOR SPORTS AND RECREATION 
Uses conducted in open, partially enclosed or screened facilities. Typical uses include driving ranges, miniature golf courses, golf courses, swimming pools, tennis courts and outdoor racquetball courts. 
PARK AND RECREATION SERVICES 
Publicly owned and operated parks, playgrounds, recreation facilities and open spaces. 
PARKING FACILITY 
An area on a lot, within a building, or both, including one or more parking spaces together with driveways, aisles, turning and maneuvering areas, clearances and similar features, and meeting the requirements established by this ordinance. The term "parking facility" shall include parking lots, parking garages and parking structures. See Section 7.800. 
PARKING SPACE 
An area on a lot, site or within a building not on a public street or alley and having an all-weather surface, enclosed or not, together with an all-weather surface driveway which may be an easement connecting the parking space with a street or alley permitting free ingress and egress, used or intended to be used for parking of a motor vehicle. The term "parking space" is equivalent to the term "parking stall" and does not include driveways, aisles or other features comprising a parking facility. Any parking adjacent to a public street wherein the maneuvering is done on the public street shall not be classified as off-street parking in computing the parking area requirements for any use. See Section 7.800. 
PAWN SHOP SERVICES 
A use engaged in the loaning of money on the security of property pledged in the keeping of the pawnbroker and the incidental sale of such property. 
PERSONAL IMPROVEMENT SERVICES 
Establishment, or places of business, primarily engaged in providing informational, instructional, personal improvement and similar services of a non-professional nature. Typical uses include driving schools, health or physical fitness studios, reducing salons, dance studios, handcraft and hobby instructions. 
PERSONAL SERVICES 
Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in providing frequently or recurrently needed services of a personal nature. Typical uses include beauty salons, barber shops, seamstresses, tailors, shoe repair shops, dry cleaning pick-up station services, and coin operated laundries. 
PET SERVICES 
Retail sales, veterinary services, grooming and boarding when totally within a building, of dogs, cats, birds, fish and similar small animals customarily used as household pets. Typical uses include pet stores, small clinics, dog bathing and clipping salons and pet grooming shop but excluding uses for livestock and large animals. 
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) 
A Planned Unit Development is a development which is under unified control and is planned, and developed, as a whole in a single development operation of programmed series or phases of development, each phase of which is specifically integrated into and made a part of the overall plan of development, and which shall include streets, lots, adequate utilities to serve the proposed uses and densities, and which indicates all structures and their relationship to each other and to adjacent uses and improvements, and which provides for common taxation, maintenance, and operation thereof. A Plan Unit Development shall consist of dwelling units, and may also include non-residential uses compatibly and harmoniously incorporated into the unitary design for the Planned Unit Development. A Planned Unit Development where more than five (5) percent of the total area is utilized for non-residential purposes, such as commercial or industrial uses, is a non-residential PUD. See Section 3.700. 
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION 
The Planning and Zoning Commission created and appointed by the City Council. 
POSTAL FACILITIES 
Postal services, including post offices, bulk mail processing or sorting centers, operated by the United States Postal Service. 
PRIVATE GARAGE 
A building for the storage of motor vehicles where no repair facilities are maintained and where no motor vehicles are kept for hire or sale and where no filling station is maintained, having a capacity of not more than four automobiles or trucks of less than one ton capacity. 
PRIVATE PRIMARY EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES 
A private or parochial school offering instruction at the elementary school level in the branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools of the State of Texas. 
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE 
A use providing professional or consulting services in the fields of law, architecture, design engineering, accounting and similar professions. 
PUBLIC PRIMARY EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES 
A public school offering instruction at the elementary school level in the branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools of the State of Texas. 
PUBLIC SECONDARY EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES 
A public school offering instruction beyond the elementary school through the twelfth grade level in the branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools of the State of Texas. 
PRIVATE SECONDARY EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES 
A private or parochial school offering instruction beyond the elementary level through the twelfth grade in the branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools of the State of Texas. 
PRIVATE PRIMARY EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES 
A private or parochial school offering instruction at the elementary school level in the branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools of the State of Texas. 
QUEUE LINE 
An area for temporary parking and lining of motor vehicles while awaiting service or other activity. 
RAILROAD FACILITIES 
Railroad yards, equipment servicing facilities and terminal facilities. 
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE 
A vehicle towed or self-propelled on its own chassis or attached to the chassis of another vehicle and designed or used for temporary dwelling recreational or sporting purposes. The term recreational vehicle shall include, but shall not be limited to, travel trailers, pick-up campers, camping trailers, motor coach homes, converted trucks and buses, boats and boat trailers. 
REGISTERED FAMILY HOME 
The care of children in the home as defined by the Texas Department of Protective and Regulatory Services. 
RELIGIOUS ASSEMBLY 
A use located in a permanent or temporary building and providing regular organized religious worship and religious education incidental thereto, but excluding private primary or private secondary educational facilities, community recreational facilities and parking facilities. A property tax exemption obtained pursuant to Property Tax Code of the State of Texas shall constitute prima facie evidence of religious assembly use. 
RESOURCE EXTRACTION 
A use involving the on-site extraction of surface or subsurface mineral products or natural resources. Typical uses include quarries, borrow pits, sand and gravel operations, oil and gas extraction and mining operations. 
RESEARCH SERVICES 
Establishments primarily engaged in research of an industrial or scientific nature but excluding product testing. Typical uses include electronics research laboratories, space research and development firms and pharmaceutical research. 
RESTAURANT 
A use engaged in the preparation and retail sale of food and beverages, including sale of alcoholic beverages when conducted as an accessory or secondary feature and producing less than fifty percent (50%) of the gross income. A general restaurant may include live entertainment with amplified sound. Typical uses include restaurants, coffee shops, dinner houses and similar establishments with or without incidental alcoholic beverage service. 
RESTAURANT - DRIVE-IN/FAST FOOD 
A chain and/or franchise restaurant which may include, but not limited to, two or more of the following characteristics: 
The product is primarily intended for immediate consumption and is available upon short waiting time. 
The product is prepared, packaged or presented in a manner that can be readily eaten outside the premises where it is sold. 
The facilities for on-premises consumption of food are insufficient for the volume of food sold. 
The building floor area devoted to food preparation and serving is greater than the building floor area devoted to dining. 
The restaurant is affiliated by agreement with two (2) or more similar restaurants by common ownership, common process and common building architecture. 
RESTAURANTS - LIMITED 
Restaurants which typically involve the custom preparation of food in limited quantities and of a personal nature. Restaurants within this category are characterized by limited traffic, noise and parking that is similar in nature to an office use of a similar size, limited hours of operation typically not later than 10:00 pm, no drive-thru, and lighting which is shielded from and directed away from adjacent neighborhoods and is dimmed to a minimal level after hours. Said restaurants may include live entertainment with amplified sound as long as such activity is wholly enclosed within the main building and incidental alcohol beverage service. Lighted signs shall be turned off after business hours. No outdoor cooking shall be permitted. 
REQUIREMENT 
A specific condition or development regulation which must be followed. 
RESIDENTIAL CONVENIENCE SERVICE 
A use or activity of a commercial nature conducted as an accessory use to multiple family residential or manufactured home park residential use, and intended solely for the convenience of residents thereof. 
RESIDENCE 
A building occupied as the abiding place of one or more persons in which the use and management of sleeping quarters, and all appliances for cooling, ventilating, heating, or lighting are under one control, including but not limited to one-family and two-family dwellings, duplexes, townhouses, condominiums, apartment houses and boarding houses, and which shall be the principal building or use on any lot in R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 or R-5 residence districts. 
SAFETY SERVICES 
Facilities for conduct of public safety and emergency services, including police and fire protection services and emergency medical and ambulance services. 
SCRAP AND SALVAGE SERVICES 
Places of business primarily engaged in the storage, sale, dismantling or other processing of used or waste materials which are not intended for reuse in their original forms. Typical uses include automotive wrecking yards, junkyards or salvage yards. 
SCREENED 
Shielded, concealed and effectively hidden from the view of a person standing at ground level on an abutting site, or outside the area or feature so screened, by a fence, wall, hedge, berm or similar architectural or landscape feature which is, or will grow to, at least six (6) feet in height. 
SEPARATE LODGING UNIT 
Bed and Breakfast or hotel-motel lodging in a stand-alone structure or one only minimally connected with other units such as with verandas or other architectural features. 
SERVICE BUILDING 
A structure within a manufactured home park housing toilet, lavatory or other facilities. 
SERVICE STATION 
Provision of fuel, lubricants, parts and accessories and incidental services to motor vehicles. 
SETBACK LINE 
A line within a lot parallel to and measured from a corresponding lot line, forming the boundary of a required yard and governing the placement of structures and uses on the lot. 
SHOPPING CENTER OR MALL 
An integrated grouping of commercial activity, primarily of a retail and personal service nature, in a building complex having the individual establishments joined by a common pedestrian mall or walkway. 
SIDEWALK 
A paved surface area, usually a parallel line, and separated from the roadway, used as a pedestrian-way. 
SIGN 
Any device or surface on which letters, illustrations, designs, figures or symbols are painted, printed, stamped, raised, projected or in any manner outlined or attached and used for location and advertising purposes. 
SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL 
The use of a site for only one dwelling unit, other than a manufactured home. 
SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (ATTACHED) 
A single family dwelling constructed as part of a series of dwellings, all of which are either attached to the adjacent dwelling or dwellings by party walls or are located immediately adjacent thereto with no visible separation. Included under this use category is townhouse and condominium. 
SITE 
A tract or parcel of land, subdivided lot or lots, or parts thereof, or land acreage intended and suitable for development, which is a genuine part of the development; or the ground or area on which a building or buildings or a townhouse has been proposed to be built or has been built. 
SITE AREA 
The calculated area within the site. 
Base Site Area. A calculated area defined as the Gross Site Area minus 25-year floodplain. 
Gross Site Plan. An area defined as the total site area including easements, flood plains, waterways, ponds and any other area for preservation. 
SITE PLAN 
A plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensions, all of the buildings, structures and uses, and principal site development features including parking, access, landscaping and screening, proposed for a specific lot or parcel of land. 
STREET 
A public or private thoroughfare which affords a primary means of access to abutting property, including all land within the right-of-way thereof. 
STRUCTURE 
That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. 
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION 
Any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls, columns, girders or beams over eight-feet long. 
STABLES 
Boarding, breeding or raising of horses not owned by the occupants of the premises or riding of horses by other than the occupants of the premises or their non-paying guests. Typical uses include boarding stables or public stables. 
STANDARD LOT 
A lot or tract of record by deed or plat that does not comply with a minimum area, width or depth requirements currently applicable to the district in which it is located, but which complied with applicable requirements when it was placed on record. 
STOCKYARDS 
Stockyard services involving the temporary keeping of livestock for slaughter, market and shipping. Typical uses include stockyards and animal sales in auction yards. 
TOWNHOUSE GROUP 
Two or more contiguous townhouses having common or abutting walls. 
TOWNHOUSE LOT 
That portion of the total development site or a townhouse residential use intended for separate ownership as the location of a single townhouse and associated private yard area. 
TOWNHOUSE RESIDENTIAL 
The use of a site for two or more townhouse dwelling units, constructed with common or abutting walls and each located on a separate ground parcel within the total development site, together with common area serving all dwelling units. 
TRANSPORTATION TERMINAL 
A facility for loading, unloading and interchange of passengers, baggage and incidental freight or package express between modes of transportation, including bus terminals, railroad stations, airport terminals and public transit facilities. 
TRAVEL TRAILER 
Any structure or vehicle used as sleeping or living quarters which may be driven or propelled from one location to another without change in the structure, vehicle, or design thereof, whether or not the same is intended to include recreational and vacation vehicles and trailers and not used for year-round living, such as travel trailers, pickup coaches mounted on a truck chassis, motor homes, or camping trailers. 
USE 
The conduct of an activity, or the performance of a function or operation, on a site or in a building or facility. 
Accessory Use. A use or activity which is incidental to and customarily associated with a specific principal use on the same site, including parking for the principal use. 
Principal Use. A use listed by the regulations for any particular district as a permitted use within that zone and permitted, therein, as a matter of right when conducted in accordance with the regulations established by this ordinance. 
Conditional Use. A use defined by Section 4.400 and listed by the regulations for any particular district as a conditional use within that district and allowable therein, solely on a discretionary and conditional basis subject to a Conditional Use Permit, and to all other regulations established by this ordinance. 
VALUE AND VALUATION 
The value of a structure shall be the estimated cost to replace the structure in kind, based on current replacement costs. 
VEHICLE STORAGE 
Long term storage of operating or non-operating vehicles. Typical uses include storage of private parking tow-aways or impound yard (but specifically excluding dismantling or salvaging of vehicles). 
VETERINARY SERVICES 
Veterinary services and hospitals for animals. Typical uses include pet clinics, dog and cat hospitals and veterinary hospitals for livestock and large animals. 
WAREHOUSING AND DISTRIBUTION 
Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in wholesaling, storage, distribution and handling of materials and equipment other than live animals and plants. The following are wholesaling, storage and distribution use types: 
Limited Warehousing and Distribution. Wholesaling, storage, warehousing services within enclosed structures. Typical uses include wholesale distributors, storage warehouses and moving and storage firms. 
General Warehousing and Distribution. Open-air storage, distribution and handling of materials and equipment. Typical uses include monument and stone yards, grain elevators, open storage yards and petroleum products storage and distribution. 
YARD 
A required open space on a lot adjoining a lot line, containing landscaping, parking and such uses as may be permitted by this ordinance. 
Front Yard. A required yard extending the full width of a lot between the front lot line and the front setback line. 
Interior Yard. Any required yard, not adjacent to a street, which is determined on the basis of an interior lot line. 
Rear Yard. A required yard extending the full width of a lot between the rear lot line and the rear setback line, but excluding an area located within the street side yard of a corner lot. 
Side Yard. A required yard extending the depth of a lot from the front yard so the rear yard between the side lot line and the side setback line. In the case of a corner lot, the street side yard shall extend from the front yard to the rear lot line. 
Street Yard. A required yard adjacent to a street and which is determined on the basis of the yard lot line and front yard set back line. 
(Ord. No. 23-014, 9-16-2013) 
SECTION 3 
ZONING DISTRICTS 
PURPOSE, USES AND CONFORMANCE TO COMPREHENSIVE PLAN  
Sec. 3.000. - PURPOSE. 
This section outlines each zoning district including restrictions, principal permitted uses, conditional uses and development standards. Each zoning district is associated with certain land use categories in the Comprehensive Plan. Two further explanations that are helpful in applying each zoning district are as follows: 
Principal permitted uses are uses permitted by right in the subject district. Uses similar to the principal permitted uses, but not listed as such, are also permitted by right. 
Conditional uses are uses which are unusual or unique in character and may be offensive or incompatible in some cases within a zoning district. A conditional use requires review and approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council to determine impacts of the use on the surrounding area before such use will be allowed.  
Sec. 3.100. - R-1: SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL. 
Intent 
This zone is intended to provide for a single family dwellings, with not more than one principal residence permitted on any lot to ensure an environment conductive to single family residential use. Additional uses necessary and incidental to a single family residential dwelling unit are also permitted. This zone is typically associated with the Low Density Residential Land Use category but is conditionally allowed within all land use categories except "Open Space/Parks", "Industrial" and "Public Facilities". 
Principal Permitted Uses 
Buildings, structures and lands shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereinafter be erected, altered or enlarged only for the following uses, plus such other uses as the City Council, by resolution, may deem to be similar to those uses listed and not obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare: 
Single Family Residential (Detached) 	Local Utility Services 
 
Uses Permitted Subject to Conditional Use Permit 
The following uses may be permitted subject to a Conditional Use Permit as provided in Section 5.400. 
Community Recreation 	Private Primary Education 
Day Care Services 	Private Secondary Education 
Guidance Services 	Religious Assembly 
 
Uses permitted with a Bed and Breakfast Compliance Use Permit: 
Bed and Breakfast 
Conditions under which a permit will be issued: 
-Compliance with provisions of Sec. 5.401, and 
-Use is allowed in rooms of property owner's principal residence with no limit as to number of units up to eight, OR if the property is not the owner's principal residence, then Bed and Breakfast use is limited to one rental unit OR one separate guest house if the lot is 10,000 square feet or more, and 
-Two off street parking spaces shall be provided for the main residence plus one off street parking space for each Bed and Breakfast unit but only two parking spaces are required if the Bed and Breakfast is the principal residence 
-Compliance with other R-1 regulations 
Property Development Standards 
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered or converted for any use permitted in this district unless it is in conformity with all the standards and regulations herein specified for lot area, width and depth, dwelling unit area, lot coverage, yards and building height. The following standards shall apply except in cases where a lot does not meet the standards herein required but was an official "lot of record" prior to the adoption of this ordinance. In such cases, the present dimension shall be maintained as a minimum standard unit until such time as the use is removed. The replacement shall meet the standards and regulations herein specified. 
Site Development Regulations 
Each site in the R-1 district shall be subject to the following site development regulations: 
Feature 	Regulation 
Lot Size 	Minimum Lot Area, 7500 Square feet 
Lot Width 	Minimum Lot Width, 70 feet 
Height 	Maximum Building Height, 2½ stories, 28 feet 
Front Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 25 feet 
Street Side Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 15 feet 
Interior Side Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 5 feet 
Rear Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 10 feet 
Residential Density 	Maximum Dwelling Units per Lot, 1 per Lot Minimum Dwelling Areas 
(Living Area Only) 	750 Square feet 
Maximum Building Coverage 	Percent of Lot Area, 40% 
Nonconforming Uses 	Section 6.100 
Special Yard Regulations 	Section 7.300 
Fences, Walls and Visibility 	Section 7.530 
Parking 	Section 7.800 
Temporary/Accessory Building 	Section 8.000 
Home Occupations 	Section 8.300 
 
(Ord. No. 23-014, 9-16-2013)  
Sec. 3.101. - R-1-A: SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL-SMALL LOT. 
Intent 
This zone is intended to provide for detached single family dwellings, with not more than one principal residence permitted on any lot to ensure an environment conducive to single family residential use. Additional uses necessary and incidental to a single family residential dwelling unit are also permitted. This zone is typically associated with the Low to Medium Density Residential Land Use category but is conditionally allowed within all land use categories except "Open Space/Parks," "Industrial" and "Public Facilities." 
Principal Permitted Uses 
Buildings, structures and lands shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereinafter be erected, altered or enlarged only for the following uses, plus such other uses as the City Council, by resolution, may deem to be similar to those uses listed and not obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare: 
Single Family Residential (detached) 	Local Utility Service 
 
Uses Permitted Subject to Conditional Use Permit 
The following uses may be permitted subject to a Conditional Use Permit as provided in Section 5.400: 
Community Recreation 	Private Primary Education 
Day Care Services 	Private Secondary Education 
Guidance Service 	Religious Assembly 
 
Bed and Breakfast use is specifically prohibited. 
Property Development Standards 
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered or converted for any use permitted in this district unless it is in conformity with all the standards and regulations herein specified for lot area, width and depth, dwelling unit area, lot coverage, yards and building height. The following standards shall apply except in cases where a lot does not meet the standards herein required but was an official "lot of record" prior to the adoption of this ordinance. In such cases, the present dimension shall be maintained as a minimum standard unit until such time as the use is removed. The replacement shall meet the standards and regulations herein specified. 
Site Development Regulations 
Each site in the R-1 district shall be subject to the following site development regulations: 
Feature 	Regulations 
Lot Size 	Minimum Lot Area, 4,500 Square Feet 
Lot Width 	Minimum Lot Width, 45 feet 
Height 	Maximum Building Height, 2 Stories, 28 feet 
Front Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 15 feet (20 for Garage) 
Street Side Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 15 feet 
Interior Side Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 5 feet 
Rear Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 10 feet 
Residential Density 	Maximum Dwelling Units per Lot, 1 per Lot 
Minimum Dwelling Areas (Living Area Only) 	750 Square Feet 
Maximum Building Coverage 	Percent of Lot Area, 50% 
Maximum Impervious Coverage 	Percent of Lot area, 60% 
Nonconforming Uses 	Section 6.100 
Special Yard Regulations 	Section 7.300 
Fences, Walls and Visibility 	Section 7.530 
Parking 	Section 7.800 
Temporary/Accessory Building 	Section 8.000 
Home Occupations 	Section 8.300 
 
(Ord. No. 18-014, § 3.101, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 23-014, 9-16-2013)  
Sec. 3.110. - R-2: MIXED RESIDENTIAL. 
Intent 
This zone is intended to provide for medium density living, for example, with not more than one (two bedroom) dwelling unit permitted for each 3,500 square feet of lot area. (See Site Development Regulations). Additional uses necessary and incidental to multiple family residential dwellings are also permitted. It is a zone well suited as a buffer between single family uses and other more intense uses. This zone is typically associated with Medium Density Residential Land Use category but is allowed within all Land Use categories except "Open Space/Park," "Public Facility" and "Industrial." 
Principal Permitted Uses 
Buildings, structures and land shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereinafter be erected, altered or enlarged only for the following uses, plus such other uses as the City Council, by resolution, may deem to be similar to those uses listed and not obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare: 
Community Recreation 	Local Utility Service 
Duplex Residential 	Multiple Family Residential 
Townhouses (Section 7.610) 	Condominiums (Section 7.610) 
Group Residential 	Single Family Residential (Detached) 
Single Family Small Lot (Section 3.101 R-1-A) 	
 
Uses Permitted Subject To Conditional Use Permit 
The following uses may be permitted subject to a Conditional Use Permit as provided in Section 5.400. 
Private Primary Educational Facilities 	Private Secondary Educational Facilities 
Day Care Services 	
Convalescent Services 	
Cultural Services 	Religious Assembly 
Guidance Services 	
 
Uses permitted with a Bed and Breakfast Compliance Use Permit: 
Bed and Breakfast 
Conditions under which a permit will be issued: 
-Compliance with provisions of section 5.401, and 
-Any structure which exists as of September 1, 2013 may be used as a Bed and Breakfast whether or not owner-occupied, and 
-Additions or new construction, taking into consideration any existing structures, shall comply with other requirements of R-2 
-One off street parking space for each Bed and Breakfast unit in addition to those required for other uses 
-Lots may not be combined to permit more than eight separate lodging units on contiguous property regardless of density regulations 
-Compliance with other R-2 regulations 
Property Development Standards 
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered or converted for any use permitted in this district unless it is in conformity with all the standards and regulations herein specified for lot area, width and depth, dwelling unit area, lot coverage, yards and building height. The following standards shall apply except in cases where a lot does not meet the standards herein required but was an official "lot of record" prior to the adoption of this ordinance. In such cases, the present dimension shall be maintained as a minimum standard until such time as the use is removed. The replacement shall meet the standards and regulations herein specified. 
Site Development Regulations 
Each site in the R-2 district shall be subject to the following site development regulations: 
Feature 	Regulation 
Lot Size 	Minimum Lot Area, 5,000 Square feet 
Lot Width 	Minimum Lot Width, 50 feet 
Height 	2½ Stories, 28 feet 
Front Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 15 feet (20 feet for garage) 
Street Side Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 15 feet 
Interior Side Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 5 feet 
Rear Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 10 feet 
Residential Density 	Minimum Site Area per Dwelling Units, 
	Efficiency: 2,500 Square feet 
	1 Bedroom: 3,000 Square feet 
	2 Bedroom: 3,500 Square feet 
Maximum Impervious Coverage 	65% 
Maximum Building Coverage 	Percent of Lot Area, 55% 
Nonconforming Uses 	Section 6.100 
Site Development Regulations 	Section 7.000 
Special Yard Regulations 	Section 7.300 
Fences, Walls and Visibility 	Section 7.530 
Parking 	Section 7.800 
Landscaping and Screening Regulations 	Section 7.900 
Temporary/Accessory Building 	Section 8.000 
Home Occupations 	Section 8.300 
 
Note— In an R-2 Zone the R-1-A Site Development Regulations may apply to the development of single family dwellings at the option of the Owner. 
(Ord. No. 18-014, § 3.110, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 23-014, 9-16-2013)  
Sec. 3.120. - R-3: MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL. 
Intent 
This zone is intended to provide for higher density living, for example, with not more than one (two bedroom) dwelling unit permitted for each 2,400 square feet of lot area. (See Site Development Regulations.) Additional uses necessary and incidental to multiple family residential dwellings are also permitted. It is a zone well suited as a buffer between single family uses and other more intense uses. This zone is typically associated with the Medium Density Residential Land Use category, but is allowed within all Land Use categories except "Open Space/Parks," "Public Facilities" and "Industrial." 
Principal Permitted Uses 
Buildings, structures and lands shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereinafter be erected, altered or enlarged only for the following uses, plus such other uses as the City Council, by resolution, may deem to be similar to those uses listed and not obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare: 
Community Recreation 	Multiple Family Residential 
Duplex Residential 	Religious Assembly 
Group Residential 	Single Family Residential 
Local Utility Services 	Townhouses (Section 7.610) 
Condominiums (Section 7.610) 	
 
Uses Permitted Subject to Conditional Use Permit 
The following uses may be permitted subject to a Conditional Use Permit as provided in Section 5.400. 
Club or Lodge 	Guidance Services 
Convalescent Services 	Private Primary Educational Facilities 
Cultural Services 	Private Secondary Educational Facilities 
Day Care Services 	
 
Uses permitted with a Bed and Breakfast Compliance Use Permit: 
Bed and Breakfast 
Conditions under which a permit will be issued: 
-Compliance with provisions of section 5.401, and 
-Any structure which exists as of September 1, 2013 may be used as a Bed and Breakfast whether or not owner-occupied, and 
-Additions or new construction, taking into consideration any existing structures, shall comply with other requirements of R-3 
-One off street parking space for each Bed and Breakfast unit in addition to those required for other uses 
-Lots may not be combined to permit more than eight separate lodging units on contiguous property regardless of density regulations 
-Compliance with other R-3 regulations. 
Property Development Standards 
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered on converted for any use permitted in this district unless it is in conformity with all the standards and regulations herein specified for lot area, lot width and depth, dwelling unit area, lot coverage, yards and building height. The following standards shall apply except in cases where a lot does not meet the standards herein required but was an official "lot of record" prior to the adoption of this ordinance. In such cases, the present dimension shall be maintained as a minimum standard until such time as the use is removed. The replacement shall meet the standards and regulations herein specified. 
Site Development Regulations 
Each site in the R-3 district shall be subject to the following site development regulations: 
Feature 	Regulation 
Lot Size 	Minimum Lot Area, 7500 Square feet 
Lot Width 	Minimum Lot Width, 50 feet 
Height 	Maximum Building Height, 3 stories, 38 feet 
Front Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 25 feet 
Street Side Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 15 feet 
Interior Side Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 5 feet 
Rear Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 10 feet 
Residential Density 	Minimum Site Area per Dwelling Units, 
	Efficiency: 1600 Square feet 
	1 Bedroom: 2000 Square feet 
	2 Bedrooms: 2400 Square feet 
Maximum Impervious Coverage 	65% 
Maximum Building Coverage 	Percent of Lot Area, 55% 
Nonconforming Uses 	Section 6.100 
Site Development Regulations 	Section 7.000 
Special Yard Regulations 	Section 7.300 
Fences, Walls and Visibility 	Section 7.530 
Parking 	Section 7.800 
Landscaping and Screening Regulations 	Section 7.900 
Temporary/Accessory Buildings 	Section 8.000 
Home Occupations 	Section 8.300 
 
(Ord. No. 18-014, § 3.120, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 23-014, 9-16-2013)  
Sec. 3.130. - R-4: MANUFACTURED HOME RESIDENTIAL. 
Intent 
This zone is intended to provide homes manufactured in one or more modules at a site other than the homesite. Additional uses necessary and incidental to the operation of a residential dwelling are also permitted. This zone is typically associated with the Low and Medium Density Residential Land Use category and is not permitted in other Land Use categories. 
Principal Permitted Uses 
Buildings, structures and lands shall be used and structures shall hereinafter be erected, altered, or enlarged only for the following uses, plus such other uses as the City Council, by resolution, may deem to be similar to those uses listed and not obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare: 
Community Recreation 	Manufactured Home Residential 
Local Utility Services 	Single Family Residential ( Detached) 
 
Uses Permitted Subject to Conditional Use Permit 
The following uses may be permitted subject to a Conditional Use Permit as provided in Section 5.400. 
Day Care Services 	Private Primary Educational Facilities 
Religious Assembly 	Private Secondary Educational Facilities 
 
Bed and Breakfast use is specifically prohibited. 
Property Development Standards 
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered or converted for any use permitted in this district unless it is in conformity with all the standards and regulations herein specified for lot area, lot width, lot depth, dwelling unit area, lot coverage, yards and building height. The following standards shall apply except in cases where a lot does not meet the standards herein required but was an official "lot of record" prior to the adoption of this ordinance. In such cases, the present dimension shall be maintained as a minimum standard until such time as the use is removed. The replacement shall meet the standards and regulations herein specified. 
Manufactured Home Subdivision 
Each lot in the R-4 District shall be subject to the following site development regulations: 
Feature 	Regulation 
Lot Size 	Minimum Lot Area, 6000 Square feet 
Lot Width 	Minimum Lot Width, 50 feet 
Height 	Maximum Building Height, 1 Story 
Front Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 20 feet 
Street Side Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 15 feet 
Interior Side Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 5 feet 
Rear Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 10 feet 
Residential Density 	1 per Lot 
Minimum Dwelling Area 	750 Square feet 
Maximum Impervious Area 	Percent of Lot Area, 40% 
Nonconforming Uses 	Section 6.100 
Site Development Regulations 	Section 7.000 
Special Yard Regulations 	Section 7.300 
Fences, Walls and Visibility 	Section 7.530 
Parking 	Section 7.800 
Landscaping and Screening Regulations 	Section 7.900 
Temporary/Accessory Building 	Section 8.000 
Home Occupations 	Section 8.300 
Manufactured Home Skirting 	Masonry Material Only 
 
Manufactured Home Park 
Each site in the District shall be subject to the following site development regulations: 
Feature 	Regulation 
Site Area 	Minimum Site Area, 3 acres 
Minimum Site Density 	4500 Square feet per space/20 spaces 
Manufactured Home Space: Width 	Minimum 40 feet (50 feet-Doublewide) 
Depth 	Minimum 80 feet (100 feet-Doublewide) 
Front Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 20 feet 
Side Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 10 feet 
Rear Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 10 feet 
Public Street 	Minimum 25 feet to the lot line adjoining a public street 
Height 	Maximum Building Height, 1 story 
Private Internal Street Paving Width 	Minimum Width, 30 feet 
Site Development Regulations 	Section 7.000 
Parking 	Section 7.800 
Accessory Building Regulations 	Section 8.200 
Fences, Walls and Visibility 	Section 7.530 
Open Space Requirements 	10% of the total park area for active and passive recreation location in one (1) area. 
Manufactured Home Skirting 	Required (as permitted by Code) 
 
(Ord. No. 23-014, 9-16-2013)  
Sec. 3.140. - R-5: PATIO HOME RESIDENTIAL. 
Intent 
This zone is intended to provide for the establishment of single family dwellings with not more than one principal residence on any lot. Additional uses necessary and incidental to a Single Family Residential Dwelling Unit and also permitted. This zone is typically associated with low to moderate density residential land use category. 
Principal Permitted Uses 
Buildings, structures and lands shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereinafter be erected, attended or enlarged only for the following uses plus other uses the City Council, by resolution, may seem to be similar to those listed and not obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare: 
Local Utility Services 	Single Family Residential (Detached) 
 
Uses Permitted Subject To Conditional Use Permit 
The following uses may be permitted subject to a Conditional Use Permit as provided in Section 5.400. 
Community Recreation 	Private Primary Education Facilities 
Day Care Services 	Private Secondary Education Facilities 
Guidance Service 	Religious Assembly 
 
Bed and Breakfast use is specifically prohibited. 
Property Development Standards 
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered or converted for any use permitted in the district unless it is in conformity with all the standards and regulations herein specified for lot area, width, and depth, dwelling unit area, lot coverage, yards, and building height. The following standards shall apply except in cases where a lot does not meet the standards herein required but was an official "lot of record" prior to the adoption of this ordinance. In such cases, the present dimension shall be maintained as a minimum standard until such time as the use is removed. The replacement shall meet the standards and regulations herein specified. 
Site Development Regulations 
Each site in the R-5 district shall be subject to the following site development regulations: 
Feature 	Regulation 
Lot Size 	Minimum Lot Area, 4500 Square feet 
Lot Width 	Minimum Lot Width, 50 feet 
Depth 	Minimum 85 feet 
Height 	Maximum Building Height, 2 stories, 28 feet 
Front Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 15 feet (20 feet for garage) 
Street Side Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 15 feet 
Interior Side Yard 	Ten (10) feet on at least one side of each lot, and zero feet on the opposite side. All zero lot lines shall be indicated on the plat and each lot shall have only one (1) zero lot line. Adjoining lots shall not have common zero lot lines. No windows, doors, or other openings shall be allowed on the zero lot line. 
Rear Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 10 feet 
Residential Density 	Maximum Dwelling Units per Lot 1 per Lot 
Minimum Number of Lots 	Five (5) adjoining lots utilizing the entire frontage of one (1) side of the street in the block. Minimum Dwelling Areas 
(Living Area Only) 	750 Square feet 
Maximum Building Coverage 	Percent of Lot Area, 55% 
Nonconforming Uses 	Section 6.100 
Special Yard Regulations 	Section 7.300 
Fences, Walls and Visibility 	Section 7.530 
Parking 	Section 7.800 
Temporary/Accessory Building 	Section 8.000 
Home Occupation 	Section 8.300 
Impervious Cover 	Percent of Lot Area, 65% 
 
(Ord. No. 18-014, § 3.140, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 23-014, 9-16-2013)  
Sec. 3.150. - RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. 
Purpose: 
The RR Rural Residential District is intended as an area for very low density residential use, with a minimum lot size of one acre. The RR District is appropriate for selected locations where rural characteristics are desired, and where terrain or public service capacities necessitate very low densities. 
Permitted Uses: 
The following use types are permitted. 
a.  Residential Uses 
Single Family Residential 
b.  Civic Uses 
Community Recreation 
c.  Conditional Use Permit 
Day Care Services 
Guidance Services 
Private Primary Education 
Private Secondary Education 
Religious Assembly 
Site Development Regulations: 
Each site in the RR Rural Residential District shall be subject to the following site development regulations. 
Feature 	Regulation 
Minimum Site Area 	To be determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission 
Lot Size 	43,560 square feet (1 acre) 
Minimum Site Density 	To be determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission 
Lot Width 	100 feet 
Lot Depth 	200 feet 
Height 	2½ stories, 28 feet 
Residential Density 	One dwelling unit per lot 
Front Yard 	50 feet 
Street Side Yard 	50 feet 
Interior Side Yard 	20 feet 
Rear Yard 	20 feet 
Building Coverage 	Maximum coverage, 20 percent of lot area 
Impervious coverage 	Maximum coverage, 25 percent of lot area 
Water Wells 	Prohibited 
Streets 	31" - "RR Type" with curbs 
Nonconforming Uses 	Section 6.100 
Special Yard Regulations 	Section 7.300 
Fences, Walls and Visibility 	Section 7.530 
Parking 	Section 7.800 
Temporary/Accessory Buildings 	Section 8.000 
Home Occupations 	Section 8.300 
 
(Ord. No. 11-004, 2-26-2001)  
Sec. 3.200. - C-1: NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL. 
Intent 
This zone is intended to provide for the establishment of restricted commercial facilities, to serve the conveniences and needs of the immediate neighborhood and must be compatible with the residential character and environment of the neighborhood. These uses generally result in limited traffic generation. 
Principal Permitted Uses 
Building, structures and lands shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereinafter be erected, altered or enlarged only for the following uses as the City Council, by resolution, may deem to be similar to those uses listed and not obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare: 
Administrative and Business Office 
Convalescent Services 
Cultural Services 
Day Care Services 
Group Residential 
Local Utility Services 
Medical Services 
Multiple Family Residential 
Personal Services 
Private Primary Educational Services 
Private Secondary Educational Facilities 
Professional Office 
Religious Assembly 
Single Family Residential (detached) if structure was not used as other than residential in its most recent use 
 
Uses Permitted Subject to Conditional Use Permit 
The following uses may be permitted subject to a Conditional Use Permit as provided for in section 5.400. 
Arts and Crafts 
Automotive Washing 
Building Maintenance Services 
Business School 
Business Support Services 
Club or Lodge 
Communication Services 
Condominium Residential (section 7.610) 
Consumer Repair Services 
Convenience Storage 
Convenience Store/Self Serve Gasoline 
Duplex Residential 
Food Sales 
Guidance Services 
Laundry Services 
Limited Retail Sales 
Liquor Sales 
Personal Improvement Services 
Pet Services 
Restaurant - Limited 
Single Family Residential (detached)- new construction or after cessation of use other than residential 
Townhouse Residential Drive through Facilities Associated with any use 
 
Uses permitted with a Bed and Breakfast Compliance Use Permit: 
Bed and Breakfast 
Conditions under which a permit will be issued: 
-Compliance with provisions of section 5.401, and 
-Any structure which exists as of September 1, 2013 may be used as a Bed and Breakfast whether or not owner-occupied, and 
-Additions or new construction, taking into consideration any existing structures, shall comply with other requirements of C-1 
-One off street parking space for each Bed and Breakfast unit in addition to those required for other uses 
-Lots may not be combined to permit more than eight separate lodging units on contiguous property regardless of density regulations 
-Compliance with other C-1 regulations. 
Property Development Standards 
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered or converted for any use permitted in this district unless it is in conformity with all the standards and regulations herein specified for lot area, lot width, lot depth, dwelling unit area, lot coverage, yards and building height. The following standards shall apply except in cases where a lot does not meet the standards herein required but was an official "lot of record" prior to the adoption of this ordinance. In such cases, the present dimension shall be maintained as a minimum standard until such time as the use is removed. The replacement shall meet the standards and regulations herein specified. 
Site Development Regulations 
Each site in the C-1 District shall be subject to the following site development regulations: 
Feature 	Regulation 
Lot Size 	Minimum Lot Area, 7500 Square feet 
Lot Width 	Minimum Lot Width, 70 feet 
Height 	Maximum Building Height, 3 stories, 38 feet 
Front Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 25 feet 
Street Side Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 25 feet 
Interior Side Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 5 feet* 
Rear Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 10 feet 
Maximum Impervious Coverage 	70% 
Maximum Building Coverage 	Percent of Lot Area, 50% 
Residential Density 	Section 3.120 
Nonconforming Uses 	Section 6.100 
Site Development Regulations 	Section 7.000 
Special Yard Regulations 	Section 7.300 
Fences, Walls and Visibility 	Section 7.530 
Parking 	Section 7.800 
Landscaping and Screening Regulations 	Section 7.900 
Temporary/Accessory Building 	Section 8.000 
Signs 	Sign Ordinance 
Outdoor Amplified Sound 	Prohibited when adjacent to R-1, R-1-A, or R5 
 
* 10 feet when adjacent to R-1 or R-5 
(Ord. No. 23-007, 5-20-2013; Ord. No. 23-014, 9-16-2013; Ord. No. 2019-11, § 1, 4-15-2019)  
Sec. 3.205. - C-1.5: MEDIUM COMMERCIAL. 
Intent 
This zone represents an effort to provide a district between the Neighborhood Commercial District and the Commercial District. Uses have been selected from each of the various districts, with the intent that the proposed uses could function as a transition between highway commercial and residential neighborhoods, but could also provide a lower impact zone along other major roadways. 
Principal Permitted Uses 
Building, structures and lands shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereinafter be erected, altered or enlarged only for the following uses as the City Council, by resolution, may deem to be similar to those uses listed and not obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare: 
Administrative and Business Office 
Arts and Crafts 
Business Support Services 
Communication Services 
Consumer Repair Services 
Convalescent Services 
Cultural Services 
Day Care Services 
Financial Services 
Guidance Services 
Hospital Services (Limited) 
Local Utility Services 
Medical Offices 
Mobile Food Establishments 
Outdoor Sports and Recreation 
Park and Recreation Services 
Personal Improvement Services 
Personal Services 
Pet Services 
Professional Offices 
Private Primary Educational Facilities 
Private Secondary Educational Facilities 
Religious Assembly 
Restaurant - Limited 
Retail Sales - Limited 
Single Family Residential (Detached) - if structure was not used as other than residential in its most recent use 
Duplex Residential 
Townhouse Residential 
Condominium Residential 
Multiple Family Residential 
 
Uses Permitted Subject to Conditional Use Permit 
The following uses may be permitted subject to a Conditional Use Permit as provided for in section 5.400. 
Automobile Rentals 
Building Maintenance Services 
Business or Trade School 
Club or Lounge 
Cocktail Lounge 
Convenience Storage 
Consumer Convenience Services 
Custom Manufacturing 
Food Sales 
Outdoor Sports and Recreation 
Drive through or Drive-in facilities associated with any use 
Group Residential 
General Retail Services 
Kennels 
Laundry Services 
Liquor Sales 
Mobile Food Establishments 
Single Family Residential (Detached) - new construction or after cessation of use other than residential 
 
Property Development Standards 
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered or converted for any use permitted in this district unless it is in conformity with all the standards and regulations herein specified for lot area, lot width, lot depth, dwelling unit area, lot coverage, yards and building height. The following standards shall apply except in cases where a lot does not meet the standards herein required but was an official "lot of record" prior to the adoption of this ordinance. In such cases, the present dimension shall be maintained as a minimum standard until such time as the use is removed. The replacement shall meet the standards and regulations herein specified. 
Site Development Regulations 
Each site in the C-1.5 District shall be subject to the following site development regulations: 
Feature 	Regulation 
Lot Size 	Minimum Lot Area, 7,500 Square feet 
Lot Width 	Minimum Lot Width, 70 feet 
Height 	Maximum Building Height, 3 stories, 38 feet 
Front Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 20 feet 
Street Side Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 20 feet 
Interior Side Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 5 feet* 
Rear Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 10 feet* 
Maximum Impervious Coverage 	75% 
Maximum Building Coverage 	Percent of Lot Area, 60% 
Residential Density 	Section 3.120 
Nonconforming Uses 	Section 6.100 
Site Development Regulations 	Section 7.000 and 7.100 
Yard Regulations 	Section 7.300 
Height Regulations 	Section 7.510 
Fences, Walls and Visibility 	Section 7.530 
Parking 	Section 7.800 
Landscaping and Screening Regulations 	Section 7.900 
Temporary/Accessory Building 	Section 8.100 
Signs 	Sign Ordinance 
Outdoor Amplified Sound 	Prohibited when adjacent to R-1, R-1-A, and R-5 
 
* 25 feet when adjacent to residential zoning district 
(Ord. No. 2019-12, § 1, 4-15-2019)  
Sec. 3.210. - C-2: COMMERCIAL. 
Intent 
This zone is intended to provide for businesses and services that serve persons throughout the city and the area. These uses generally require frontages on major cross street intersections of highways or other major arterial, given their high visibility and traffic generation ability. 
Principal Permitted Uses 
Administrative and Business Office 
Agricultural Sales and Services 
Arts and Crafts 
Automotive Rentals 
Automotive Repair Services 
Automotive Sales 
Automotive Washing 
Building Maintenance Services 
Business or Trade School 
Business Support Services 
Club or Lodge 
Cocktail Lounge 
Commercial Off-Street Parking 
Communication Services 
Construction Sales and Services 
Consumer Convenience Services 
Consumer Repair Services 
Convalescent Services 
Convenience Store/Self Serve Gas. 
Cultural Services 
Custom Manufacturing 
Day Care Services 
Equipment Repair Services 
Equipment Sales 
Exterminating Services 
Financial Services 
Food Sales 
Funeral Services 
Group Residential 
Single Family Residential (detached) if structure was not used as other than residential in its most recent use 
General Retail Sales 
Guidance Services 
Hotel/Motel 
Horticulture 
Hospital Services (Limited) 
Indoor Entertainment 
Indoor Sports and Recreation 
Kennels 
Laundry Services 
Liquor Sales 
Local Utility Services 
Maintenance and Service Facilities 
Medical Offices 
Mobile Food Establishments, but not in any right-of-way or public easement 
Multiple Family Residential 
Outdoor Entertainment 
Outdoor Sports and Recreation 
Pawn Shop Services 
Personal Improvement Services 
Personal Services 
Pet Services 
Private Primary Educational Facilities 
Private Secondary Educational Facilities 
Professional Offices 
Religious Assembly 
Research Services 
Restaurant - Drive-In/Fast Food 
Restaurant 
Service Station 
Veterinary Services 
 
Buildings, structures and lands shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereinafter be erected, altered or enlarged only for the following uses, plus such other uses as the City Council, by resolution, may deem to be similar to those uses listed and not obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. 
Uses Permitted Subject to Conditional Use Permit 
The following uses may be permitted subject to a Conditional Use Permit as provided for in section 5.400. 
Camp Grounds 
Convenience Storage 
Drive through facilities associated with any use 
Single Family Residential (detached)- new construction or after cessation of use other than residential 
Duplex Residential Condominium Residential(section 7.610) 
Single Family Residential (Detached) 
Townhouse Residential (section 7.610) 
Transportation Terminals 
 
Uses permitted with a Bed and Breakfast Compliance Use Permit: 
Bed and Breakfast 
Conditions under which a permit will be issued: 
-Compliance with provisions of section 5.401, and 
-One off street parking space for each Bed and Breakfast unit in addition to those required for other uses 
-Compliance with other C-2 regulations 
Property Development Regulations 
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered or converted for any use permitted in this district unless it is in conformity with all the standards and regulations herein specified for lot area, lot width, lot depth, dwelling unit area, lot coverage, yards and building height. The following standards shall apply except in cases where a lot does not meet the following standards herein required but was an official "lot of record" prior to the adoption of this ordinance. In such cases, the present dimension shall be maintained as a minimum standard until such time as the use is removed. The replacement shall meet the standards and regulations herein specified. 
Site Development Regulations 
Each site in the C-2 District shall be subject to the following site development regulations. 
Feature 	Regulation 
Lot Size 	Minimum Lot Area, 5000 Square feet 
Lot Width 	Minimum Lot Width, 50 feet 
Height 	Maximum Building Height, 3 stories, 38 feet 
Front Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 15 feet 
Street Side Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 15 feet 
Interior Side Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 0 feet* 
Rear Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 0 feet* 
Maximum Impervious Coverage 	80% 
Maximum Building Coverage 	Percent of Lot Area, 75% 
Residential Density 	Section 3.120 
Nonconforming Uses 	Section 6.100 
Site Development Regulations 	Section 7.000 
Special Yard Regulations 	Section 7.300 
Fences, Walls and Visibility 	Section 7.530 
Parking 	Section 7.800 
Landscaping and Screening Regulations 	Section 7.900 
Temporary/Accessory Building 	Section 8.100 
Signs 	Sign Ordinance 
Outdoor Amplified Sound 	Prohibited when adjacent to R-1, R-1-A, or R5 
 
* 10 feet when adjacent to R-1 or R-5 
(Ord. No. 23-007, 5-20-2013; Ord. No. 23-014, 9-16-2013; Ord. No. 25-004, 5-4-2015; Ord. No. 2019-11, § 2, 4-15-2019)  
Sec. 3.220. - CBD: CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT. 
Intent 
This zone is intended to provide for the intense commercial activities of the central business district or central trading area of the City. This district establishes the character of the City by serving the tourist as well as the residents of the City. 
Principal Permitted Uses 
Buildings, structures and lands shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereinafter be erected, altered or enlarged only for the following uses, plus such other uses as the City Council, by resolution, may deem to be similar to those uses listed and not obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare: 
Administrative and Business Office 
Arts and Crafts 
Club or Lodge 
Cocktail Lounge 
Consumer Convenience Services 
Consumer Repair Services 
Cultural Services 
Day Care Services 
Financial Services 
General Retail Sales 
Guidance Services 
Liquor Sales 
Local Utility Services 
Mobile Food Establishments, but not in any right-of-way, public easement or in the Historic Overlay District, except that Mobile Food Vendor's in the Historic District Overlay shall be allowed on school property, museum property, church property, and public property subject to section 8-117(h). 
Multiple Family Residential 
Personal Improvement Services 
Personal Services 
Pet Services 
Private Primary Educational Facilities 
Private Secondary Educational Facilities 
Professional Offices 
Religious Assembly 
Restaurant 
Single Family Residential (detached) if structure was not used as other than residential in its most recent use 
 
Uses Permitted Subject to Conditional Use Permit 
The following uses may be permitted subject to a Conditional Use Permit as provided for in section 5.400. 
Business or Trade School 
Business Support Services 
Commercial Off-Street Parking 
Communications Services 
Condominium Residential (section 7.610) 
Custom Manufacturing 
Drive through Facilities associated with any use 
Duplex Residential 
Food Sales 
Funeral Services 
Horticulture 
Hospital Services (Limited) 
Hotel/Motel 
Indoor Entertainment 
Indoor Sports and Recreation 
Medical Offices 
Outdoor Entertainment 
Outdoor Sports and Recreation 
Single Family Residential (Detached) 
Townhouse Residential (section 7.610) 
Transportation Terminals 
Single Family Residential (detached)- new construction or after cessation of use other than residential Group Residential 
 
Uses permitted with a Bed and Breakfast Compliance Use Permit: 
Bed and Breakfast 
Conditions under which a permit will be issued: 
-Compliance with provisions of section 5.401, and 
-Any structure which exists as of September 1, 2013 may be used as a Bed and Breakfast whether or not owner-occupied, and 
-Additions or new construction, taking into consideration any existing structures, shall comply with other requirements of CBD, and 
-Density shall comply with the provisions of the Multi-Family Residential District (R-3) 
-One off street parking space for each Bed and Breakfast unit in addition to those required for other uses 
-Lots may be combined to permit more than eight separate lodging units on contiguous property with a Conditional Use Permit 
-Compliance with other R-3 regulations 
Property Development Standards 
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered, or converted for any use permitted in this district unless it is in conformity with all the standards and regulations herein specified for lot area, lot width, lot depth, dwelling unit area, lot coverage, yards and building height. The following standards shall apply except in cases where a lot does not meet the standards herein required but was an official "lot of record" prior to the adoption of this ordinance. In such cases, the present dimension shall be maintained as a minimum standard until such time as the use is removed. The replacement shall meet the standards and regulations herein specified. 
Site Development Regulations 
Each site in the CBD District shall be subject to the following site development regulations. 
Feature 	Regulation 
Lot Size 	Minimum Lot Area, 5000 Square feet 
Lot Width 	Minimum Lot Width, 50 feet 
Height 	Maximum Building Height, 3 stories, 38 feet 
Front Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 0 feet 
Street Side Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 0 feet 
Interior Side Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 0 feet* 
Rear Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 0 feet* 
Maximum Impervious Coverage 	90% 
Maximum Building Coverage 	
Residential Density 	Section 3.120 
Nonconforming Uses 	Section 6.100 
Site Development Regulations 	Section 7.000 
Special Yard Regulation 	Section 7.300 
Fences, Walls and Visibility 	Section 7.530 
Parking 	Section 7.800 
Landscaping and Screening Regulations 	Section 7.900 
Accessory Building Regulations 	Section 8.200 
Signs 	Sign Ordinance 
Outdoor Amplified Sound 	Prohibited when adjacent to R-1, R-1-A, or R5 
 
* 10 feet when adjacent to R-1 or R-5 
(Ord. No. 23-007, 5-20-2013; Ord. No. 23-014, 9-16-2013; Ord. No. 25-004, 5-4-2015; Ord. No. 2019-11, § 3, 4-15-2019)  
Sec. 3.300. - INDUSTRIAL. 
Principal Permitted Uses 
Mobile Food Establishments, but not in any right-of-way or public easement 
(Ord. No. 25-004, 5-4-2015)  
Sec. 3.310. - M-1: LIGHT MANUFACTURING. 
Intent 
This zone is intended to provide for the development of industrial uses involving fabrication, manufacturing, assembly or processing of materials that are already in processed from, and warehousing. The uses permitted are restricted, limiting objectionable or obnoxious influences and activities, thereby permitting the location of such uses in reasonable proximity to other forms of land use without any detrimental effect. 
Principal Permitted Uses 
Buildings, structures and lands shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereinafter be erected, altered or enlarged only for the following uses, plus such other uses as the City Council, by resolution, may deem to be similar to those uses listed and not obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare: 
Administrative and Business Office 	Funeral Services 
Agricultural Sales and Service 	General Retail Sales 
Arts and Crafts 	Horticulture 
Automotive Rentals 	Hotel/Motel 
Automotive Repair Services 	Hospital Services (Limited) 
Automotive Sales 	Indoor Entertainment 
Automotive Washing 	Indoor Sports and Recreation 
Building Maintenance Services 	Kennels 
Business Support Services 	Laundry Services 
Business or Trade School 	Liquor Sales 
Club or Lounge 	Local Utility Service 
Cocktail Lounge 	Maintenance and Service Facilities 
Commercial Off-Street Parking 	Medical Offices 
Communication Services 	Mobile Food Establishments, but not in any right-of-way or public easement 
Construction Sales and Services 	Outdoor Entertainment 
Consumer Convenience Services 	Outdoor Sports and Recreation 
Consumer Repair Services 	Pawn Shop Services 
Convenience Storage 	Personal Improvement Services 
Convenience Store/Self Serve Gas 	Personal Services 
Custom Manufacturing 	Pet Services 
Equipment Repair Services 	Professional Offices 
Equipment Sales 	Religious Assembly 
Exterminating Services 	Research Services 
Financial Services 	Restaurant 
Food Sales 	Service Station 
	Veterinary Services 
 
Uses Permitted Subject to Conditional Use Permit 
The following uses may be permitted subject to a Conditional Use Permit as provided for in Section 5.400. 
Campground 	Limited Warehousing & Distribution 
Drive through facilities associated with any use 	Restaurant-Drive In/Fast Food 
Light Manufacturing 	Transportation Terminal 
 
Bed and Breakfast use is specifically prohibited. 
Property Development Standards 
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered or converted for any use permitted in this district unless it is in conformity with all the standards and regulations herein specified for lot area, lot width, lot depth, dwelling unit area, lot coverage, yards and building height. The following standards shall apply except in cases where a lot does not meet the standards herein required but was an official "lot of record" prior to the adoption of this ordinance. In such cases, the present dimension shall be maintained as a minimum standard until such time as the use is removed. The replacement shall meet the standards and regulations herein specified prior to the adoption of this ordinance. In such cases, the present dimension shall be maintained as a minimum standard until such time as the use is removed. The replacement shall meet the standards and regulations herein specified. 
Site Development Regulations 
Each site in the "M-1" district shall be subject to the following site development regulations. 
Feature 	Regulation 
Lot Size 	Minimum Lot Area, 5,000 Square feet 
Lot Width 	Minimum Lot Width, 50 feet 
Height 	Maximum Building Height, 3 stories, 38 feet 
Front Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 10 feet 
Street Side Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 10 feet 
Interior Side Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 10 feet* 
Rear Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 10 feet* 
Maximum Impervious Coverage 	85% 
Maximum Building Coverage 	Percent of Lot Area, 75% 
Nonconforming Uses 	Section 6.100 
Site Development Regulations 	Section 7.000 
Special Yard Regulations 	Section 7.300 
Fences, Walls and Visibility 	Section 7.530 
Parking 	Section 7.800 
Landscaping and Screening Regulations 	Section 7.900 
Temporary/Accessory Building 	Section 8.000 
Signs 	Sign Ordinance 
Outdoor Amplified Sound 	Prohibited when adjacent to R-1, R-1-A, or R5 
 
* 25 feet when adjacent to Residential Uses outside subject district 
(Ord. No. 23-014, 9-16-2013; Ord. No. 25-004, 5-4-2015; Ord. No. 2019-11, § 4, 4-15-2019)  
Sec. 3.320. - M-2: MEDIUM MANUFACTURING. 
Intent 
This zone is intended to allow the establishment of intermediate industrial uses permitting the processing or producing of materials which may produce smoke, noise, vibration, light, heat, glare or fumes, provided measures are taken from the specified development standards to minimize the impact beyond the boundaries of the property upon which the use is located. 
Principal Permitted Uses 
Buildings, structures and lands shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereinafter be erected, altered or enlarged only for the following uses, plus such other uses as the City Council, by resolution, may deem to be similar to those uses listed and not obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare: 
Administrative and Business Office 	Food Sales 
Agricultural Sales and Service 	Funeral Services 
Automotive Rentals 	General Retail Sales 
Automotive Repair Services 	Horticulture 
Automotive Sales 	Hospital Services (Limited) 
Automotive Washing 	Indoor Entertainment 
Building Maintenance Services 	Indoor Sports and Recreation 
Business Support Services 	Kennels 
Business or Trade School 	Laundry Services 
Club or Lodge 	Local Utility Service 
Commercial Off-Street Parking 	Maintenance and Service Facilities 
Communication Services 	Mobile Food Establishments, but not in any right-of-way or public easement 
Construction Sales and Services 	Outdoor Sports and Recreation 
Convenience Storage 	Pawn Shop Services 
Convenience Store/Self Serve Gas 	Professional Offices 
Custom Manufacturing 	Religious Assembly 
Equipment Repair Services 	Research Services 
Equipment Sales 	Restaurant 
Exterminating Services 	Service Station 
Financial Services 	Veterinary Services 
 
Uses Permitted Subject to Conditional Use Permit 
The following uses may be permitted subject to a Conditional Use Permit as provided for in Section 5.400. 
Campground 	Restaurant-Drive In/Fast Food 
Drive through facilities associated with any use 	Scrap and Salvage Services 
General Warehousing and Distribution 	Stockyards 
Light Manufacturing 	Transportation Terminal 
Limited Warehousing & Distribution 	Vehicle Storage 
 
Bed and Breakfast use is specifically prohibited. 
Property Development Standards 
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered or converted for any use permitted in this district unless it is in conformity with all the standards and regulations herein specified for lot area, lot width, lot depth, dwelling unit area, lot coverage, yards and building height. The following standards shall apply except in cases where a lot does not meet the standards herein required but was an official "lot of record" prior to the adoption of this ordinance. In such cases, the present dimension shall be maintained as a minimum standard until such time as the use is removed. The replacement shall meet the standards and regulations herein specified prior to the adoption of this ordinance. In such cases, the present dimension shall be maintained as a minimum standard until such time as the use is removed. The replacement shall meet the standards and regulations herein specified. 
Site Development Regulations 
Each site in the "M-2" district shall be subject to the following site development regulations. 
Feature 	Regulation 
Lot Size 	Minimum Lot Area, 10,000 Square feet 
Lot Width 	Minimum Lot Width, 100 feet 
Height 	Maximum Building Height, 3 stories, 38 feet 
Front Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 10 feet 
Street Side Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 10 feet 
Interior Side Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 10 feet* 
Rear Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 10 feet* 
Maximum Impervious Coverage 	85% 
Maximum Building Coverage 	Percent of Lot Area, 80% 
Nonconforming Uses 	Section 6.100 
Site Development Regulations 	Section 7.000 
Special Yard Regulations 	Section 7.300 
Fences, Walls and Visibility 	Section 7.530 
Parking 	Section 7.800 
Landscaping and Screening Regulations 	Section 7.900 
Temporary/Accessory Building 	Section 8.000 
Signs 	Sign Ordinance 
Outdoor Amplified Sound 	Prohibited when adjacent to R-1, R-1-A, or R5 
 
* 25 feet when adjacent to Residential Uses outside subject district 
(Ord. No. 23-014, 9-16-2013; Ord. No. 25-004, 5-4-2015; Ord. No. 2019-11, § 5, 4-15-2019)  
Sec. 3.330. - M-3: INDUSTRIAL PARK. 
Intent 
This zone is intended to allow heavier and more intense industrial uses in an area requiring large land area and which operations may produce objectionable qualities. However, such operations shall not exceed the degree of tolerance provided by pollution control authorities. Any uses permitted in this zone should not have a detrimental effect upon abutting properties or be injurious thereto. 
Principal Permitted Uses 
Buildings, structures and lands shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereinafter be erected, altered or enlarged only for the following uses, plus such other uses as the City Council, by resolution, may deem to be similar to those uses listed and not obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare: 
Administrative and Business Office 	Custom Manufacturing 
Agricultural Sales and Service 	Equipment Repair Services 
Automotive Rentals 	Equipment Sales 
Automotive Repair Services 	Exterminating Services 
Automotive Sales 	Financial Services 
Automotive Washing 	Food Sales 
Building Maintenance Services 	Funeral Services 
Business Support Services 	General Retail Sales 
Business or Trade School 	Horticulture 
Communication Services 	Local Utility Service 
Construction Sales and Services 	Maintenance and Service Facilities 
Convenience Storage 	Mobile Food Establishments, but not in any right-of-way or public easement 
Convenience Store/Self Serve Gas 	Research Services 
 
Uses Permitted Subject to Conditional Use Permit 
The following uses may be permitted subject to a Conditional Use Permit as provided for in Section 5.400. 
Basic Industry 	Resource Extraction 
Drive through facilities associated with any use 	Restaurant-Drive In/Fast Food 
General Warehousing and Distribution 	Scrap and Salvage Services 
Light Manufacturing 	Stockyards 
Limited Warehousing & Distribution 	Transportation Terminal 
Railroad Facilities 	
 
Bed and Breakfast use is specifically prohibited. 
Property Development Standards 
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered or converted for any use permitted in this district unless it is in conformity with all the standards and regulations herein specified for lot area, lot width, lot depth, dwelling unit area, lot coverage, yards and building height. The following standards shall apply except in cases where a lot does not meet the standards herein required but was an official "lot of record" prior to the adoption of this ordinance. In such cases, the present dimension shall be maintained as a minimum standard until such time as the use is removed. The replacement shall meet the standards and regulations herein specified prior to the adoption of this ordinance. In such cases, the present dimension shall be maintained as a minimum standard until such time as the use is removed. The replacement shall meet the standards and regulations herein specified. 
Site Development Regulations 
Each site in the "M-3" district shall be subject to the following site development regulations. 
Feature 	Regulation 
Lot Size 	Minimum Lot Area, 43,560 Square feet 
Lot Width 	Minimum Lot Width, 100 feet 
Height 	Maximum Building Height, 3 stories, 38 feet 
Front Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 25 feet 
Street Side Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 25 feet 
Interior Side Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 10 feet* 
Rear Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 10 feet* 
Maximum Impervious Coverage 	80% 
Maximum Building Coverage 	Percent of Lot Area, 50% 
Nonconforming Uses 	Section 6.100 
Site Development Regulations 	Section 7.000 
Special Yard Regulations 	Section 7.300 
Fences, Walls and Visibility 	Section 7.530 
Parking 	Section 7.800 
Landscaping and Screening Regulations 	Section 7.900 
Temporary/Accessory Building 	Section 8.000 
Signs 	Sign Ordinance 
	
*25 feet when adjacent to Residential Uses outside subject district 	
 
(Ord. No. 23-014, 9-16-2013; Ord. No. 25-004, 5-4-2015)  
Sec. 3.400. - OS: OPEN SPACE. 
Intent 
This category is intended to be left undeveloped, except for park facilities. Land in this category is generally unsuitable for development because of flood susceptibility or steep slopes. Vantage points that offer unique views are best left undeveloped so as not to block the view. Park facilities or beautification efforts are consistent with the open space category. 
Principal Permitted Uses 
Buildings, structures and lands shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereinafter be erected, altered or enlarged only for the following uses, plus such other uses as the City Council, by resolution, may deem to be similar to those uses listed and not obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare: 
Local Utility Services 	Park and Recreational Services 
 
Uses Permitted Subject to Conditional Use Permit 
The following uses may be permitted subject to a Conditional Use Permit as provided for in Section 5.400: 
Campgrounds 	Stables 
 
Property Development Standards 
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered or converted for any use permitted in this district unless it is in conformity with all the standards and regulations herein specified for lot area, lot width, lot depth, dwelling unit area, lot coverage, yards and building height. The following standards shall apply except in cases where a lot does not meet the standards herein required but was an official "lot of record" prior to the adoption of this ordinance. In such cases, the present dimension shall be maintained as a minimum standard until such time as the use is removed. The replacement shall meet the standards and regulations herein specified. 
Lot Area - No provisions 
Lot Dimensions - No provisions 
Yards - Yards shall be provided as may be required by the Planning Commission at the time of granting a conditional use permit or Site Plan approval. 
Height Regulations - Building heights shall be determined by the Planning Commission at the time of granting a conditional use permit or Site Plan approval. 
Fences, Walls and Visibility - No fence, wall or hedge shall be placed to impede normal flow of water or restrict visibility. See Section 7.530. 
Parking - See Section 7.800. 
Signs - Per guideline of Sign Ordinance for adjacent property.  
Sec. 3.500. - HO: HISTORIC OVERLAY. 
Intent 
This zone is intended to encompass that portion of the City with historic resource value. The area within the Historic District is subject to the requirements of two land use designations: the underlying designation and the historic characteristics of the district. All exterior construction, restoration, alteration or demolition within the district are subject to the provisions of the Historic Preservation Ordinance. 
Principal Permitted Uses 
Buildings, structures and lands shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereinafter be erected, altered or enlarged only for the following uses as the City Council, by resolution, may deem to be similar to those uses listed and not obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare: 
Administrative and Business Office 	Liquor Sales 
Administrative Services 	Local Utility Services 
Arts and Crafts 	Medical Offices 
Business or Trade School 	Outdoor Entertainment 
Business Support Services 	Outdoor Sports and Recreation 
Club or Lodge 	Park and Recreation Services 
Cocktail Lounge 	Personal Improvement Services 
Commercial Off- Street Parking 	Personal Services 
Consumer Convenience Services 	Pet Services 
Consumer Repair Services 	Postal Facilities 
Cultural Services 	Private Primary Educational Facilities 
Day Care Services 	Private Secondary Educational Facilities 
Duplex Residential 	Professional Offices 
Financial Services 	Public Primary Educational Facilities 
Food Sales 	Public Secondary Educational Facilities 
General Retail Sales 	Religious Assembly 
Hospital Services (limited) 	Restaurant 
Indoor Entertainment 	Safety Services 
Indoor Sports and Recreation 	Single Family Residential (Detached) 
Laundry Services 	
 
Uses Permitted Subject to Conditional Use Permit 
The following uses may be permitted subject to a Conditional Use Permit as provided in Section 5.400. 
College and University Facilities 	Group Residential 
Communications Services 	Guidance Services 
Community Recreation 	Horticulture 
Condominiums (Section 7.610) 	Hotel/Motel 
Detention Facilities 	Multiple Family Residential 
Drive -In/Fast Food 	Townhouse Residential (Section 7.610) 
Drive-Through Facilities associated with any use 	Transportation Terminal 
Funeral Services 	
 
Property Development Standards 
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered or converted for any use permitted in this district unless it is in conformity with all the standards and regulations herein specified for lot area, lot width, lot depth, dwelling unit area, lot coverage, yards and building height. The following standards shall apply except in cases where a lot does not meet the standards herein required but was an official "lot of record" prior to the adoption of this ordinance. In such cases, the present dimension shall be maintained as a minimum standard until such time as the use is removed. The replacement shall meet the standards and regulations herein specified. 
Lot Area - The minimum lot area shall be as provided in any underlying zone or as may be required upon approval of a Conditional Use Permit. 
Lot Dimensions - Shall be as provided in any underlying zone, or as may be required upon approval of a Conditional Use Permit. 
Yards - Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards extending across the full widths and lengths of the lot as may be required in the underlying zone, or as may be required upon approval of a Conditional Use Permit. 
Height Regulations - Section 7.500. 
Fences, Walls and Visibility - Section 7.530. 
Parking - Section 7.800. 
Temporary/Accessory Building Regulations - Section 8.000. 
Historic Preservation Ordinance 
Signs - Sign Ordinance  
Sec. 3.510. - HSD: HISTORIC SHOPPING DISTRICT OVERLAY. 
Intent. 
This zone is intended to encompass that portion of the City which constitutes the in-town historic shopping and tourist area. The area within the District is subject to the requirements of the underlying zoning district, the Historic Overlay District, if within its defined area, and the requirements of this Historic Shopping District. 
Principal Permitted Uses 
See uses listed in the underlying district. 
Uses Permitted Subject to issuance of a Conditional Use Permit using the review and evaluation criteria of Section 5.460. See the uses listed for the underlying district. 
Uses Permitted Subject to issuance of a Conditional Use Permit using review and evaluation criteria in Sections 5.460 and 5.461. Any Standardized Business may be located in the Historic Shopping District subject to a Conditional Use Permit as provided in Section 5.400 using the review and evaluation criteria set forth in Sections 5.460 and 5.461. 
Bed and Breakfast is allowed if the same is in compliance with all Central Business District Bed and Breakfast regulations EXCEPT 
-A Conditional Use Permit is required for any new construction of a first floor Bed and Breakfast unit, and the review and evaluation criteria of section 5.461 shall be used as applicable. 
For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  Historic Shopping District shall be all properties generally located between Elk Street and Acorn Street including the properties fronting on both sides of Acorn Street, and between San Antonio Street including the properties fronting on both sides of such street, and Austin Street including the properties fronting on both sides of such street, as they are depicted on the map of the area attached to this ordinance. 
B.  Standardized Business shall mean a business which is required by contractual or other arrangement or affiliation to maintain one or more of the following items: standardized ("formula") array of services and/or merchandise, trademark, logo, signs, service mark, symbol, decor, architecture, layout, uniform, menu, or similar standardized features and which causes it to be substantially identical to more than ten other businesses regardless of ownership or location at the time the application therefor is completed. Standardized Businesses can include, but are not limited to: restaurants, retail stores, banks, sales offices, spas, hair and nail salons, art galleries, and hotel/motel/inn/bed and breakfast establishments. A statement made under oath, and subject to penalties for perjury concerning the status as a standardized business shall be submitted with the application for Conditional use permit, along with any other reasonable proof required by the person administering the City's Zoning ordinance. 
Property Development Standards 
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered or converted for any use permitted in this district unless it is in conformity with all the standards and regulations herein specified for lot area, lot width, lot depth, dwelling unit area, lot coverage, yards and building height. The following standards shall apply except in cases where a lot does not meet the standards herein required but was an official "lot of record" prior to the adoption of this ordinance. In such cases, the present dimension shall be maintained as a minimum standard until such time as the use is removed. The replacement shall meet the standards and regulations herein specified. 
[A.]  Lot Area - The minimum lot area shall be as provided in any underlying zone or as may be required upon approval of a Conditional Use Permit. 
B.  Lot Dimensions - Shall be as provided in any underlying zone, or as may be required upon approval of a Conditional Use Permit. 
C.  Yards - Each lot shall have front, side and rear yards extending across the full widths and lengths of the lot as may be required in the underlying zone, or as may be required upon approval of a Conditional Use Permit. 
D.  Height Regulations - Shall be as provided in the underlying zoning District. 
E.  Fences, Walls and Visibility - Section 7.530. 
F.  Parking - The standards of Section 7.800 shall apply. 
G.  Temporary/Accessory Building Regulations - Section 8.000. 
H.  Historic Preservation Ordinance. 
I.  Signs - Sign Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 18-002, § 3.510, 4-21-2008; Ord. No. 19-005, § 3.510, 4-20-2009; Ord. No. 23-014, 9-16-2013)  
Sec. 3.600. - PF: PUBLIC FACILITIES. 
Intent 
This zone is intended to provide for the placing of public or semi-public facilities within close proximity to the various forms of neighborhood land uses, to provide needed public service to the community on a local or regional basis and to provide for the placing of governmental facilities in areas where such are needed to complement the particular needs of the surrounding land uses. 
Principal Permitted Uses 
Buildings, structures and lands shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereinafter be erected, altered or enlarged only for the following uses, plus such other uses as the City Council, by resolution, may deem to be similar to those uses listed and not obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare: 
Administrative Services 	Major Utility Facilities 
College and University Facilities 	Medical Offices 
Cultural Services 	Military Installations 
Detention Facilities 	Mobile Food Establishments, but not in any right-of-way or public easement 
Guidance Services 	Park and Recreational Services 
Hospital Services (General) 	Postal Facilities 
Local Utility Services 	Public Primary Educational Facilities 
Maintenance & Service Facilities 	Public Secondary Educational Facilities 
Aviation Facilities 	Safety Services 
 
Uses Permitted Subject To Conditional Use Permit 
The following uses may be permitted subject to a Conditional Use Permit as provided for in Section 5.400. 
	Railroad Facilities 
Campgrounds 	Stables 
Cemetery 	Transportation Terminals 
Outdoor Entertainment 	Vehicle Storage 
	Hotel/Motel Restaurant 
 
Bed and Breakfast use is specifically prohibited. 
Property Development Standards 
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered or converted for any use permitted in this district unless it is in conformity with all the standards and regulations herein specified for lot area, lot width, lot depth, dwelling unit area, lot coverage, yards and building height. The following standards shall apply except in cases where a lot does not meet the standards herein required but was an official "lot of record" prior to the adoption of this ordinance. In such cases, the present dimension shall be maintained as a minimum standard until such time as the use is removed. The replacement shall meet the standards and regulation herein specified. 
Site Development Regulation 
Each site in the PF district shall be subject to the following site development regulations. 
Feature 	Regulation 
Lot Size 	No Requirement 
Lot Width 	No Requirement 
Height 	Maximum Building Height, 4 stories, 50 feet 
Front Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, Same as Most Restrictive Districts Adjacent to PF 
Street Side Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, Same as Most Restrictive Districts Adjacent to PF 
Interior Side Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 0 feet* 
Rear Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 0 feet** 
Maximum Impervious Coverage 	85% 
Maximum Building Coverage 	Percent of Lot Area, 75% 
Site Development Regulations 	Section 7.000 
Special Yard Regulations 	Section 7.300 
Fences, Wall and Visibility 	Section 7.530 
Parking 	Section 7.800 
Landscaping and Screening Regulations 	Section 7.900 
Temporary/Accessory Building 	Section 8.000 
Signs 	Equivalent to requirements of the Sign Ordinance for adjacent property 
*5 feet when adjacent to a residential zone on side10 feet when adjacent to a residential zone on rear. 	
 
(Ord. No. 23-014, 9-16-2013; Ord. No. 25-004, 5-4-2015)  
Sec. 3.700. - PUD: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. 
Intent 
The purpose of the Planned Unit Development (PUD) Zone provides a means of achieving greater flexibility in the development of land, appropriate in size and shape to facilitate utilization in a manner not possible by conventional zones. The PUD Zone, is intended to encourage more efficient uses of land, while still providing proper arrangement of uses and structures. As such PUDs must be related to the land, surrounding uses and zoning; and would ensure the fulfillment of community needs relative to certain residential, commercial, industrial, recreational and other land uses. Through the exercise of sound and proper planning principles, PUDs incorporate appropriate property development standards, that would not be detrimental to surrounding property or uses nor the public health, safety and welfare. All forms of Planned Unit Developments (PUD) shall be subject to the granting of a Conditional Use Permit and may include mixed combinations of the various forms of residential, civic, commercial, industrial, recreational uses and other forms of land uses. 
Principal Permitted Uses 
Buildings, structures and land shall be used and structures shall hereinafter be erected, altered or enlarged only for those uses specifically listed in the granting of a Conditional Use Permit, as hereinafter provided for in the following section. 
Mobile Food Establishments, but not in a PUD which permits residential use, and not in any right-of-way or public easement 
Uses Permitted Subject to a Conditional Use Permit 
The following uses may be permitted in the Planned Unit Development (PUD) Zone, and require a Conditional Use Permit, plus such other uses as the City Council, by resolution, may deem to be similar to those uses listed and not obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare: 
Residential 	Condominium Residential 
	Duplex Residential 
	Local Utility Service 
	Manufactured Home Residential 
	Multiple Family Residential 
	Single Family (Detached) 
	Townhouse Residential 
	Those other uses deemed appropriate by the Planning and Zoning Commission 
Civic 	Club or Lodge 
	Cultural Services 
	Day Care Services 
	Religious Assembly 
Commercial 	Administrative or Professional Offices 
	Automotive Sales 
	Business Support Services 
	Business or Trade School 
	Cocktail Lounge 
	Commercial Off-Street Parking 
	Communication Services 
	Consumer Repair Services 
	Convenience Store/Self Service Gas 
	Customer Convenience Services 
	Financial Services 
	Food Sales 
	General Retail Sales 
	Hotels/Motels 
	Indoor Entertainment 
	Indoor Sports and Recreation 
	Laundry Services 
	Liquor Sales 
	Medical Offices 
	Outdoor Sports and Recreation 
	Personal Improvement Services 
	Personal Services 
	Pet Services 
	Professional Services 
	Research Services 
	Restaurant 
	Restaurant, Drive-In/Fast Food 
	Service Station 
	Shopping Centers 
	Veterinary Services 
	Those other uses deemed appropriate by the Planning Commission 
Industrial 	All Industrial 
	Those other uses deemed appropriate by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
Recreational 	Those recreational uses deemed appropriate by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
Accessory 	Those uses deemed appropriate by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
 
Uses Expressly Prohibited 
Any use not included in the granting of a Conditional Use Permit shall be deemed as a use expressly prohibited, unless additional uses are included pursuant to an amendment to the Conditional Use Permit authorizing a Planned Unit Development. The use of outdoor amplified sound shall be prohibited when adjacent to R-1, R-1-A, and R-5. 
Property Development Standards 
Each Planned Unit Development shall contain a minimum area of three (3) acres. 
Property development standards, applicable to any Planned Unit Development regarding lot area, lot dimension including width and depth, yards including front, side and rear, building heights, distance between buildings, fences, hedges and walls, signs, lighting, access, off-street parking, vehicular and pedestrian circulation, open spaces, grading and drainage, sanitation, public utilities and such other matters pertinent to the development, shall be determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council at the time of review of plans denoting the proposed Planned Unit Development (PUD) or associated Conditional Use Permit considerations. 
The property development standards denoted in the various zones defined in this Ordinance may be used as guidelines for the determining of appropriate property development standards. 
Property development standards imposed in conjunction with Planned Unit Development shall in no way be contrary to applicable federal, state or county laws and shall not be inconsistent with any plans enacted pursuant to applicable authority by the legislative body, nor shall such property development standards be in deviation from sound planning principles nor detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. 
The mechanics of the process require the developer to submit a "General Development Plan" based on Conditional Use Permit provisions in this ordinance. The Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council will review the plan for conformance with this ordinance and specify additional conditions to minimize possible adverse effects. Subjects for possible additional conditions include the following: 
A.  Access 
B.  Services 
C.  Design 
D.  Physical Environment 
E.  Density 
F.  Fences, Walls and Visibility 
G.  Parking 
H.  Yards (Set-Backs/Open Space) 
I.  Landscaping and Landscape Preservation 
J.  Signage 
K.  Amenities 
L.  Screening 
Construction plans, when submitted, must indicate that each condition is met as the project continues. 
(Ord. No. 25-004, 5-4-2015; Ord. No. 2019-11, § 6, 4-15-2019)  
Sec. 3.800. - MU-1: MIXED USE - INFILL. 
Intent 
This zone represents an effort to provide a zoning category for properties outside of the main commercial area, which are large enough and located in proximity to the core of the city to provide for a mix of uses, and that are intended to be pedestrian and bicycle oriented. Features for consideration include a balanced mix of uses, connectivity of uses, compactness, compatibility with town character or traditional context, reduced parking, good pedestrian and bicycle access. 
Principal Permitted Uses 
Building, structures and lands shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereinafter be erected, altered or enlarged only for the following uses as the City Council, by resolution, may deem to be similar to those uses listed and not obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare: 
Administrative and Business Office 
Administrative Services 
Arts and Crafts 
Business Support Services 
Club or Lodge 
Cocktail Lounge 
College or University Facilities 
Community Recreation 
Consumer Convenience Services 
Consumer Repair Services 
Convalescent Services 
Cultural Services 
Custom Manufacturing 
Day Care Services 
Financial Services 
Food Sales 
Group Residential 
General Retail Sales 
Hotel/Motel 
Hospital Services (Limited) 
Indoor Entertainment 
Indoor Sports and Recreation 
Kennels 
Laundry Services 
Liquor Sales 
Local Utility Services 
Medical Offices 
Mobile Food Establishments 
Outdoor Entertainment 
Outdoor Sports and Recreation 
Park and Recreation Services 
Personal Improvement Services 
Personal Services 
Pet Services 
Professional Offices 
Religious Assembly 
Restaurant - Drive-In/Fast Food 
Restaurant - Limited 
Retail Sales - Limited 
Shopping Center 
Single Family Residential (Detached) 
Duplex Residential 
Townhouse Residential 
Condominium Residential 
Multiple Family Residential 
 
Uses Permitted Subject to Conditional Use Permit 
The following uses may be permitted subject to a Conditional Use Permit as provided for in section 5.400. 
Automobile Rentals 
Business or Trade School 
Convenience Storage 
Outdoor Sports and Recreation 
Drive through or Drive-in facilities associated with any use 
Group Residential 
Guidance Services 
Private Primary Educational Facilities 
Private Secondary Educational Facilities 
Transportation Terminals 
 
Property Development Standards 
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered or converted for any use permitted in this district unless it is in conformity with all the standards and regulations herein specified for lot area, lot width, lot depth, dwelling unit area, lot coverage, yards and building height. The following standards shall apply except in cases where a lot does not meet the standards herein required but was an official "lot of record" prior to the adoption of this ordinance. In such cases, the present dimension shall be maintained as a minimum standard until such time as the use is removed. The replacement shall meet the standards and regulations herein specified. 
Site Development Regulations 
Each site in the MU-1 District shall be subject to the following site development regulations: 
Feature 	Regulation 
Lot Size 	Minimum Lot Area, 7500 Square feet 
Lot Width 	Minimum Lot Width, 75 feet 
Height 	Maximum Building Height, 3 stories, 38 feet 
Front Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 15 feet 
Street Side Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 15 feet 
Interior Side Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 0 feet* 
Rear Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 0 feet* 
Maximum Impervious Coverage 	80% 
Maximum Building Coverage 	Percent of Lot Area, 75% 
Residential Density 	Section 3.120 
Nonconforming Uses 	Section 6.100 
Site Development Regulations 	Section 7.000 and 7.100 
Yard Regulations 	Section 7.300 
Height Regulations 	Section 7.510 
Fences, Walls and Visibility 	Section 7.530 
Parking 	Section 7.800 
Landscaping and Screening Regulations 	Section 7.900 
Temporary/Accessory Building 	Section 8.100 
Signs 	Sign Ordinance 
 
* 25 feet when adjacent to residential zoning district 
Additional Special Site and Development Regulations: 
1.  All Entry Corridor Standards and Guidelines shall apply to development within the MU-1 District, with the following modifications: 
a.  New designs shall be compatible with the design traditions of the established neighborhoods and regional Texas Hill Country aesthetic. It is not the intent of these guidelines to require that new buildings copy older building styles. Therefore, use traditional building forms and broader similarities of design in order to be compatible with existing buildings in the area that reflect the traditional context. 
b.  If a shed roof or flat roof design is used, a parapet wall shall be added to screen the roof. 
c.  When making transitions to lower density areas, modulate the mass of the building to relate to smaller buildings. 
d.  Faux windows and similar details are not appropriate articulation. 
e.  Signs shall integrate into building and site design so they do not appear as an afterthought. 
f.  Attached signs shall be located above the building entrance, storefront opening, or at other locations that are compatible with the architectural features of the building. 
g.  The front door shall connect to the sidewalk along the entry corridor. 
h.  Light fixture style and location shall be compatible with the building's architecture, site design and landscape design. Decorative fixtures are highly recommended and where warranted, may be required. Light fixture style shall be consistent throughout the project. 
i.  Light fixtures shall be located facing away from adjacent sites (particularly residential parcels) so that the light does not spill-over onto abutting properties. Parking and building light fixtures shall be cut-off luminaries that have less than 90 degree cut-off so that the light is not emitted horizontally or upward. 
j.  All roof-top equipment shall be screened from entry corridors, side streets, plazas and parks. 
k.  Parking shall be located behind buildings or on the side. Parking in front of buildings may be permitted, subject to a Conditional Use Permit as provided for in section 5.400. 
2.  Shared access for pedestrians and vehicles shall be provided between properties and uses. 
3.  Pedestrian circulation will be given priority over vehicular access. 
4.  A drive-thru associated with any use shall be oriented away from any adjacent residential. 
5.  Exterior amplified sound associated with any use shall be prohibited when adjacent to single family residential use. 
6.  Required parking may be reduced by up to 25 percent if development can demonstrate that the mix of uses do not conflict with one another. 
7.  Residential density for townhomes, condominiums and multi-family dwellings may be increased by 25 percent if utilized above the ground floor level and combined with other permitted uses. 
8.  Outdoor storage shall be prohibited. 
9.  Outdoor display of merchandise shall be limited to 10 percent of the lot area, and shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner. 
10.  Screening shall be required where parking is located adjacent to a residential use. 
11.  Building setbacks may be reduced by 25 percent when a minimum of three different uses are included, provided that one of the uses is residential. 
(Ord. No. 2019-13, § 1, 5-6-2019; Ord. No. 2019-11, § 6, 4-15-2019)  
Sec. 3.810. - MU-2: MIXED USE - CORRIDOR. 
Intent 
This zone represents an effort to change the typical pattern of strips of underperforming commercial development that often line highways and arterials. Rather than limiting the properties along major entry corridors to commercial uses, this category offers a variety of higher density residential and mixed use opportunities. The policy of allowing this mix of uses along major roadways supports a change in development from a pattern of older commercial structures to new projects with a variety of uses, including mixed use within an individual building project or building. 
Principal Permitted Uses 
Building, structures and lands shall be used, and buildings and structures shall hereinafter be erected, altered or enlarged only for the following uses as the City Council, by resolution, may deem to be similar to those uses listed and not obnoxious or detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare: 
Administrative and Business Office 
Administrative Services 
Arts and Crafts 
Business Support Services 
Club or Lodge 
Cocktail Lounge 
College or University Facilities 
Community Recreation 
Consumer Convenience Services 
Consumer Repair Services 
Convalescent Services 
Cultural Services 
Custom Manufacturing 
Day Care Services 
Financial Services 
Food Sales 
Group Residential 
General Retail Sales 
Hotel/Motel 
Hospital Services (Limited) 
Indoor Entertainment 
Indoor Sports and Recreation 
Kennels 
Laundry Services 
Liquor Sales 
Local Utility Services 
Medical Offices 
Mobile Food Establishments 
Outdoor Sports and Recreation 
Park and Recreation Services 
Personal Improvement Services 
Personal Services 
Pet Services 
Professional Offices 
Religious Assembly 
Restaurant - Drive-In/Fast Food 
Restaurant - Limited 
Restaurant 
Retail Sales - Limited 
Shopping Center 
Single Family Residential (Detached) 
Duplex Residential 
Townhouse Residential 
Condominium Residential 
Multiple Family Residential 
 
Uses Permitted Subject to Conditional Use Permit 
The following uses may be permitted subject to a Conditional Use Permit as provided for in section 5.400. 
Automobile Rentals 
Business or Trade School 
Convenience Storage 
Outdoor Sports and Recreation 
Drive through or Drive-in facilities associated with any use 
Group Residential 
Guidance Services 
Private Primary Educational Facilities 
Private Secondary Educational Facilities 
Transportation Terminals 
 
Property Development Standards 
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, altered or converted for any use permitted in this district unless it is in conformity with all the standards and regulations herein specified for lot area, lot width, lot depth, dwelling unit area, lot coverage, yards and building height. The following standards shall apply except in cases where a lot does not meet the standards herein required but was an official "lot of record" prior to the adoption of this ordinance. In such cases, the present dimension shall be maintained as a minimum standard until such time as the use is removed. The replacement shall meet the standards and regulations herein specified. 
Site Development Regulations 
Each site in the MU-2 District shall be subject to the following site development regulations: 
Feature 	Regulation 
Lot Size 	Minimum Lot Area, 10,000 Square feet 
Lot Width 	Minimum Lot Width, 100 feet 
Height 	Maximum Building Height, 3 stories, 38 feet 
Front Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 20 feet 
Street Side Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 15 feet 
Interior Side Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 0 feet* 
Rear Yard 	Minimum Required Setback, 0 feet* 
Maximum Impervious Coverage 	75% 
Maximum Building Coverage 	Percent of Lot Area, 65% 
Residential Density 	Section 3.120 
Nonconforming Uses 	Section 6.100 
Site Development Regulations 	Section 7.000 and 7.100 
Yard Regulations 	Section 7.300 
Height Regulations 	Section 7.510 
Fences, Walls and Visibility 	Section 7.530 
Parking 	Section 7.800 
Landscaping and Screening Regulations 	Section 7.900 
Temporary/Accessory Building 	Section 8.100 
Signs 	Sign Ordinance 
 
*25 feet when adjacent to Residential zoning district 
Additional Special Site and Development Regulations: 
1.  All Entry Corridor Standards and Guidelines shall apply to development within the MU-2 District, with the following modifications: 
a.  New designs shall be compatible with the design traditions of the established neighborhoods and regional Texas Hill Country aesthetic. It is not the intent of these guidelines to require that new buildings copy older building styles. Therefore, use traditional building forms and broader similarities of design in order to be compatible with existing buildings in the area that reflect the traditional context. 
b.  If a shed roof or flat roof design is used, a parapet wall shall be added to screen the roof. 
c.  When making transitions to lower density areas, modulate the mass of the building to relate to smaller buildings. 
d.  Faux windows and similar details are not appropriate articulation. 
e.  Signs shall integrate into building and site design so they do not appear as an afterthought. 
f.  Attached signs shall be located above the building entrance, storefront opening, or at other locations that are compatible with the architectural features of the building. 
g.  The front door shall connect to the sidewalk along the entry corridor. 
h.  Light fixture style and location shall be compatible with the building's architecture, site design and landscape design. Decorative fixtures are highly recommended and where warranted, may be required. Light fixture style shall be consistent throughout the project. 
i.  Light fixtures shall be located facing away from adjacent sites (particularly residential parcels) so that the light does not spill-over onto abutting properties. Parking and building light fixtures shall be cut-off luminaries that have less than 90 degree cut-off so that the light is not emitted horizontally or upward. 
j.  All roof-top equipment shall be screened from entry corridors, side streets, plazas and parks. 
k.  Parking shall be located behind buildings or on the side. Parking in front of buildings may be permitted, subject to a Conditional Use Permit as provided for in section 5.400. 
2.  Shared access for pedestrians and vehicles shall be provided between properties and uses. 
3.  Pedestrian circulation will be given priority over vehicular access. 
4.  A drive-thru associated with any use shall be oriented away from any adjacent residential. 
5.  Exterior amplified sound associated with any use shall be prohibited when adjacent to single family residential use. 
6.  Required parking may be reduced by up to 25 percent if development can demonstrate that the mix of uses do not conflict with one another. 
7.  Residential density for townhomes, condominiums and multi-family dwellings may be increased by 25 percent if utilized above the ground floor level and combined with other permitted uses. 
8.  Outdoor storage shall be prohibited. 
9.  Outdoor display of merchandise shall be limited to 10 percent of the lot area, and shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner. 
10.  Height may be increased to four stories above grade, with a maximum height of 54 feet, if a minimum of three different uses are included and structured parking is proposed within a single development, and subject to a Conditional Use Permit as provided for in section 5.400. 
11.  Screening shall be required where parking is located adjacent to a residential use. 
12.  Building setbacks may be reduced by 25 percent when a minimum of three different uses are included, provided that one of the uses is residential. 
(Ord. No. 2019-14, § 1, 4-15-2019) 
SECTION 4 
USE CLASSIFICATION  
Sec. 4.100. - USE CLASSIFICATION. 
The purpose of the Use Classification is to provide a consistent set of terms encompassing and defining uses permitted or conditionally permitted in the various zoning districts, and to provide a procedure for determination of the applicable use classification of any activity not clearly within a defined use classification.  
Sec. 4.200. - DETERMINATION. 
In the event of any questions as to the appropriate use classification of any existing or proposed use or activity, the Director of Planning and Building shall have the authority to determine the appropriate classification subject to the right of appeal to the Planning and Zoning Commission. In making such determinations, the Director of Planning and Building shall consider the characteristics of the particular use in question, and shall consider any functional, product, service, or physical facility requirements common with or similar to uses cited as examples of use classifications. The Director of Planning and Building shall bring before the Planning and Zoning Commission all appeals that are on file within forty (40) days of filing. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a determination of the appropriate classification.  
Sec. 4.300. - SUPPLEMENTAL LISTING. 
The Director of Planning and Building shall maintain a list of all determinations made pursuant to Section 4.200 and shall periodically recommend to the Planning and Zoning Commission additions, deletions, or revisions to the use clarification to reflect contemporary usage and terminology and to minimize ambiguity.  
Sec. 4.400. - GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF RESIDENTIAL USE TYPES. 
Residential use types include the occupancy of living accommodations on a wholly or primarily non-transient basis. 
CONDOMINIUM RESIDENTIAL 
The use of a site for four or more dwelling units intended for separate ownership, together with common area serving all dwelling units. 
DUPLEX RESIDENTIAL 
The use of site for two dwelling units, within a single building, other than a manufactured home. 
SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (DETACHED) 
The use of a site for only one dwelling unit, other than a manufactured home. 
GROUP RESIDENTIAL 
The use of a site for residential occupancy of living accommodations by groups of more than six (6) persons not defined as a family, on a weekly or longer basis. Typical uses include occupancy of fraternity or sorority houses, dormitories, residence halls, or boarding houses or assisted living facilities. 
MANUFACTURED HOME RESIDENTIAL 
A dwelling that is manufactured in one or more modules at a location other than the homesite and which is designed as a residence when the modules are transported to the homesite, and the modules are joined together and installed on a permanent foundation system or tied down in accordance with the appropriate Code requirements. Manufactured residence construction shall be in accordance with the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act and shall include the plumbing, heating/air conditioning and electrical systems to be contained in the structure. The term manufactured home or residence shall not mean nor apply to a mobile home as defined in the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act , nor is it to include building modules incorporating concrete or masonry as a primary component. 
MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL 
The use of a site for three or more dwelling units, within one or more buildings. 
TOWNHOUSE RESIDENTIAL 
The use of a site for two or more townhouse dwelling units, constructed with common or abutting walls and each located on a separate ground parcel within the total development site, together with common area serving all dwelling units.  
Sec. 4.500. - GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF COMMERCIAL USE TYPES. 
Commercial use types include the sale, rental, service, and distribution of goods, and the provisions of services other than those classified as industrial or Civic Uses. 
ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUSINESS OFFICES 
Offices or private firms or organizations which are primarily used for the provision of executive, management or administrative services. Typical uses include administrative offices, and services including real estate, insurance, property management, investment, personnel, travel, secretarial services, telephone answering, photocopy and reproduction and business offices of public utilities, organizations and associations, or other use classifications when the service rendered is that customarily associated with administrative office services. 
AGRICULTURAL SALES AND SERVICES 
Establishments or places of business engaged in sale from the premises of feed, grain, fertilizers, pesticides and similar goods of in the provision or agriculturally related services with incidental storage on lots other than where the service is rendered. Typical uses include hay, feed and grain stores and tree service firms. 
ARTS AND CRAFTS 
Goods which are custom produced in small quantities, often one of a kind. The use may include the sale or production of same or may be a place where a small number of persons are engaged in arts and crafts activities in a class or studio; provided that the area encompassing arts and crafts use shall not exceed 2500 square feet. Examples include galleries, arts and crafts studios, custom tailoring and dressmaking shops, retail art supplies and hobby materials, florist shops, photographic studios, picture framing shops and arts and crafts schools. 
AUTOMOTIVE AND EQUIPMENT SERVICES 
Establishments or places or businesses primarily engaged in automotive related or heavy equipment sales and services. The following are automotive and equipment use types: 
Automotive Washing. Washing and cleaning of automobiles and related light equipment. Typical uses include auto laundries or car washes. 
Service Station. Provision of fuel, lubricants, parts and accessories, and incidental services to motor vehicles. 
Commercial Off-Street Parking. Parking of motor vehicles on a temporary basis within a private owned off-street parking facility, other than accessory to a principal use. Typical uses include commercial parking lots or commercial parking garages. 
Automotive Rentals. Rental of automobiles, non-commercial trucks, trailers and recreational vehicles, including incidental parking and servicing of vehicles available for rent or lease. Typical uses include auto rental agencies, trailer rental agencies and taxicab parking and dispatching. 
Automotive Sales. Sale or rental of automobiles, non-commercial trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles or boats, including incidental storage, maintenance and servicing. Typical uses include new and used car dealerships, motorcycle dealerships, boat, trailer and recreational vehicle dealerships. 
Equipment Sales. Sale or rental of trucks, tractors, construction equipment, agriculture implements, manufactured homes, and similar heavy equipment, including incidental storage, maintenance and servicing. Typical uses include truck dealerships, construction equipment dealerships, manufactured home dealerships and sales (but specifically excluding dismantling or salvaging of vehicles). 
Automotive Repair Services. Repair of automobiles non-commercial trucks, motorcycles, motor homes, recreational vehicles or boats, including the sale, installation, and servicing of equipment and parts. Typical uses include muffler shops, auto repair garages, tire sales and installation, wheel and brake shops, body and fender shops, and similar repair and service activities (but specifically excluding dismantling or salvaging of vehicles). 
Equipment Repair Services. Repair of trucks, tractors, construction equipment, agriculture implements and similar heavy equipment. Typical uses include truck repair garages, trucking yard terminals, tractor and farm implement repair services and machine shops (but specifically excluding dismantling or salvaging of vehicles). 
Vehicle Storage. Long term storage of operating or non-operating vehicles. Typical uses include storage of private parking towaways or impound yards, (but specifically excluding dismantling or salvaging of vehicles). 
BUILDING MAINTENANCE SERVICES 
Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of maintenance and custodial services to firms rather than individuals. Typical uses include janitorial, landscape maintenance or window cleaning services. 
BUSINESS SUPPORT SERVICE 
Establishments or places of business primary engaged in the sale, rental or repair of equipment and supplies used by office, professional and service establishments to the firms themselves rather than to individuals, but excludes automotive, construction and farm equipment. Typical uses include office equipment and supply firms, small business repair shops, hotel equipment and supply firms. 
BUSINESS OR TRADE SCHOOL 
A use providing education or training in business, commerce, language or other similar activity or occupational pursuit, and not otherwise defined as a home occupation, college or university or public or private educational facility. 
CAMPGROUND 
Campground facilities providing camping and/or parking areas and incidental services for travelers in recreational vehicles or tents. Typical uses include recreational vehicle parks. 
COCKTAIL LOUNGE 
Establishments or places of business engaged in the preparation and retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, including taverns, bars, cocktail lounges and similar uses other than a restaurant as that term is defined herein. 
COMMERCIAL RECREATION 
Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in providing sports, entertainment, or recreation for participants or spectators. The following are commercial recreational use types: 
Indoor Sports and Recreation. Uses conducted within an enclosed building. Typical uses include bowling alleys, billiard parlors, ice and roller skating rinks, penny arcades, electronic video games and indoor racquetball courts. 
Outdoor Sports and Recreation. Uses conducted in open or partially enclosed or screened facilities. Typical uses include driving ranges, miniature golf courses, golf courses, swimming pools, tennis courts and outdoor racquetball courts. 
Indoor Entertainment. Predominately spectator uses conducted within an enclosed building. Typical uses include motion picture theaters, meeting halls and dance halls. 
Outdoor Entertainment. Predominately spectator uses conducted in open or partially enclosed or screened facilities. Typical uses include sports arenas, racing facilities and amusement parks. 
COMMUNICATION SERVICES 
Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of broadcasting and other information relay services accomplished through the use of electronic and telephonic mechanisms but excluding those classified as Major Utility Facilities. Typical uses include television studios, telecommunication service centers, telegraph service offices, film recording, sound recording and cable television operations. 
CONSTRUCTION SALES AND SERVICES 
Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in construction activities and incidental storage on lots other than construction sites as well as the retail or wholesale sale, from the premises, of materials used in the construction of buildings or other structures, but excluding retail sale of paint, fixture and hardware, and those classified as one of the Automotive and Equipment Service use types. Typical uses include building materials stores, tool and equipment rental or sales, building, plumbing, electrical or mechanical contractors. 
CONSUMER CONVENIENCE SERVICES 
Establishments which provide services, primarily to individuals, of a convenient and limited nature, often in access-controlled facilities which make twenty-four (24) hour operations possible. Typical uses include the renting of private postal and safety deposit boxes to individuals and automated banking machines. 
CONSUMER REPAIR SERVICES 
Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of repair services to individuals and households rather than firms, but excluding Automotive and Equipment Service use types. Typical uses include appliance repair shops, watch or jewelry repair shops or musical instrument repair shops. 
CONVENIENCE STORAGE 
Storage services primarily for personal effects and household goods within enclosed storage areas having individual access, but excluding uses such as workshops, hobby shops, manufacturing or commercial activity. Typical uses include mini-warehousing and mini-storage units. 
CONVENIENCE STORE/SELF SERVICE GASOLINE 
An establishment engaged in the sale of food, beer, wine, household products and self-serve gasoline retail sales limited to three (3) multiple service dispensers or pumps units within one (1) service island, with one (1) canopy cover. 
DRIVE THROUGH FACILITIES 
Facilities provided by an establishment or place of business for the purpose of allowing a customer, or patron, to transact business, whether it be pick-up, drop-off, ordering or service, from a motor vehicle. 
EXTERMINATING SERVICES 
Services related to the eradication and control of rodents, insects and other pests, with incidental storage on lots other than where the service is rendered. 
FINANCIAL SERVICES 
Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of financial and banking services. Typical uses include banks, savings and loan institutions, loan and lending activities and similar services. 
FOOD SALES 
Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in the retail sale of food (with incidental sale of beer and wine) for home consumption or household products. Typical uses include groceries, delicatessens, meat markets, retail bakeries, candy shops and ice cream parlors. Restaurants are specifically excluded from this definition. 
FUNERAL SERVICES 
Establishments engaged in undertaking services such as preparing the human dead for burial and arranging and managing funerals. Typical uses include funeral homes or mortuaries. 
GENERAL RETAIL SALES 
Sale or rental of commonly used goods, and merchandise for personal or household use, but excluding those classified more specifically in Section 4.500. Typical uses include department stores, apparel stores, furniture stores and establishments providing the following products or services: household cleaning and maintenance products, drugs, cards, stationary, notions, books, tobacco products, cosmetic and specialty items; flowers, plants, hobby materials, toys and hand-crafted items; apparel, jewelry, fabrics and like items; cameras, photography services, household electronic equipment, sporting equipment, kitchen utensils, home furnishings and appliances, art supplies and framing, arts, antiques, paint and wallpaper, carpeting and floor covering, interior decorating services, office supplies, bicycles and auto parts (inside a building with no repair services). 
HOTEL-MOTEL 
Lodging services involving the provision of room and/or board. Typical uses include hotels, motels and inns. 
KENNELS 
Boarding and care services for dogs, cats and similar small animals. Typical uses include boarding kennels, pet motels and dog training centers. 
LAUNDRY SERVICES 
Establishments primarily engaged in the provision of laundering, dry cleaning or dying services other than those classified as Personal Services. Typical uses include bulk laundry and cleaning plants, diaper services or linen supply services. 
LIQUOR SALES 
Establishments or places of business engaged in retail sale for consumption off the premises of alcoholic beverages. Typical uses include liquor stores, bottle shops, or any licensed sale of liquor, beer or wine for off-site consumption. 
MEDICAL OFFICES 
A use providing consultation, diagnosis, therapeutic, preventive or corrective personal treatment services by doctors, dentists, medical and dental laboratories and similar practitioners of medical and healing arts for humans licensed for such practice by the State of Texas. 
PAWN SHOP SERVICES 
A use engaged in the loaning of money on the security of property pledged in the keeping of the pawnbroker, and the incidental sale of such property. 
PERSONAL IMPROVEMENT SERVICES 
Establishment or places of business primarily engaged in providing informational, instructional, personal improvement and similar services of a non-professional nature. Typical uses include driving schools, health or physical fitness studios, reducing salons, dance studios, handcraft and hobby instructions. 
PERSONAL SERVICES 
Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in providing frequently or recurrently needed services of a personal nature. Typical uses include beauty salons, barber shops, seamstresses, tailors, shoe repair shops, dry cleaning pick-up station services and coin operated laundries. 
PET SERVICES 
Retail sales, veterinarian services, grooming and boarding when totally within a building, of dogs, cats, birds, fish and similar small animals customarily used as household pets. Typical uses include pet stores, small clinics, dog bathing and clipping salons and pet grooming shops but excluding uses for livestock and large animals. 
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE 
A use providing professional or consulting services in the fields of law, architecture, design engineering, accounting and similar professions. 
RESEARCH SERVICES 
Establishments primarily engaged in research of an industrial or scientific nature but excluding product testing. Typical uses include electronics research laboratories, space research and development firms and pharmaceutical research. 
RESTAURANT - DRIVE-IN/FAST FOOD 
A chain and/or franchise restaurant which may include but not limited to two or more of the following characteristics: 
The product is primarily intended for immediate consumption and is available upon short waiting time. 
The product is prepared, packaged, or presented in such a manner that it can be readily eaten outside the premises where it is sold. 
The facilities for on-premises consumption of food and insufficient for the volume of food sold. 
The building floor area devoted to food preparation and serving is greater than the building floor area devoted to dining. 
The restaurant is affiliated by agreement with two (2) or more similar restaurants by common ownership, common name, common product, common process and common building architecture. 
RESTAURANT 
A use engaged in the preparation and retail sale of food and beverages, including sale of alcoholic beverages when conducted as an accessory or secondary feature and producing less than fifty (50) percent of the gross income. A restaurant may include live entertainment with amplified sound. Typical uses include restaurants, coffee shops, dinner houses and similar establishments with incidental alcoholic beverage service. 
SCRAP AND SALVAGE SERVICES 
Places of business primarily engaged in the storage, sale, dismantling or other processing of used or waste materials which are not intended for reuse in their original forms. Typical uses include automotive wrecking yards, junkyards or salvage yards. 
SHOPPING CENTER OR MALL 
An integrated grouping of commercial activity, primarily of a retail and personal service nature, in a building complex having the individual establishments joined by a common covered pedestrian mall or walkway. 
STABLES 
Boarding, breeding or raising of horses not owned by the occupants of the premises or riding of horses by other than the occupants of the premises or their non-paying guests. Typical uses include boarding stables or public stables. 
VETERINARY SERVICES 
Veterinary services and hospitals for animals. Typical uses include pet clinics, dog and cat hospitals and veterinary hospitals for livestock and large animals.  
Sec. 4.600 - GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF INDUSTRIAL TYPES. 
Industrial use types include the on-site extraction or production of goods by methods not agricultural and storage/distribution of products. 
BASIC INDUSTRY 
A use in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or products predominately from extracted or raw materials, or a use engaged in storage of, or manufacturing process utilizing flammable or explosive materials, or storage or manufacturing processes which potentially involve hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions. Poultry processing shall be included. 
CUSTOM MANUFACTURING 
Establishments primarily engaged in the on-site production of goods by hand manufacturing which involves only the use of hand tools or domestic mechanical equipment not exceeding eight (8) kilowatts and the incidental direct sale to consumers of only those goods produced on-site. Typical uses include ceramic studios, candle-making shops and jewelry manufacturing. 
LIGHT MANUFACTURING 
A use engaged in the manufacture, predominately from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment and packaging of such products, and incidental storage, sales and distribution of such products, but excluding basic industrial processing. Typical uses include winery, sheet metal shop, welding shop and machine shop. 
RESOURCE EXTRACTION 
A use involving the on-site extraction of surface or subsurface mineral products or natural resources. Typical uses include quarries, borrow pits, sand and gravel operations, oil and gas extraction and mining operations. 
STOCKYARDS 
Stockyard services involving the temporary keeping of livestock for slaughter, market or shipping. Typical uses include stockyards and animal sales in auction yards. 
WAREHOUSING AND DISTRIBUTION 
Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in wholesaling, storage, distribution and handling of materials and equipment other than live animals and plants. The following are wholesaling, storage and distribution use types: 
Limited Warehousing and Distribution. Wholesaling, storage, warehousing services within enclosed structures. Typical uses include wholesale distributors, storage warehouses and moving and storage firms. 
General Warehousing and Distribution. Open-air storage, distribution and handling of materials and equipment. Typical uses include monument and stone yards, grain elevators, open storage yards and petroleum products storage and distribution.  
Sec. 4.700 - GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF CIVIC USE TYPES. 
Civic use types include the performance of utility, educational, recreational, cultural, medical, productive, governmental and other uses which are strongly vested with public or social importance. 
ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES 
Offices, administrative, clerical or public contact services that deal directly with the citizen, together with incidental storage and maintenance of necessary vehicles. Typical uses include federal, state county and city offices. 
AVIATION FACILITIES 
Landing fields, aircraft parking and service facilities, and related facilities for operation, service, fueling, repair, storage, charter, sales and rental of aircraft, including activities directly associated with the operation and maintenance of airport facilities and the provision of safety and security. 
CEMETERY 
Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbiums, crematoriums, mausoleums and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery. 
CLUB OR LODGE 
A use providing meeting, recreational, or social facilities for a private or non-profit association, primarily for use by members and guests. Typical uses include private social clubs and fraternal organizations. 
COLLEGE AND UNIVERSITY FACILITIES 
Educational institutions of higher learning which offer a course of study designed to culminate in the issuance of a degree as defined by the Education Code of the State of Texas. 
COMMUNITY RECREATION 
A recreational facility for use by residents and guests of a particular residential development, planned unit development, church, private primary educational facility, private secondary educational facility, club or lodge or limited residential neighborhood, including both indoor and outdoor facilities. 
CONVALESCENT SERVICES 
A use providing bed care and in-patient services for persons requiring regular medical attention, such as nursing homes, but excluding facilities providing surgical or emergency medical services, facilities providing care for alcoholism, drug addiction, mental disease or communicable disease. 
CULTURAL SERVICES 
A library, museum or similar registered non-profit organizational use displaying, preserving and/or exhibiting objects of community and cultural interest. 
DAY CARE SERVICES 
A facility designed or adapted for the care of children or adults, that requires a license for group day care homes from the Texas Department of Protective and Regulatory Services. This term includes nursery schools, pre-schools, day care centers for children or adults and similar uses, but excluding public and private primary and secondary educational facilities. 
DETENTION FACILITIES 
A publicly operated use providing housing and care for individuals legally confined. 
GUIDANCE SERVICES 
A use providing counseling, guidance, recuperative, or similar services to persons requiring rehabilitation assistance as a result of mental illness, alcoholism, detention, drug addiction or similar condition, on a day time care basis. 
HOSPITAL SERVICES 
Hospital Services (General). A facility providing medical, psychiatric or surgical service for sick or injured persons, primarily on an in-patient basis, and including ancillary facilities for out-patient and emergency treatment, diagnostic services, training, research, administration and services to patients, employees, or visitors. 
Hospital Services (Limited). A facility providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical services for sick or injured persons exclusively on an out-patient basis, including emergency treatment, diagnostic services, training, administration and services to out-patients, employees or visitors. 
LOCAL UTILITY SERVICES 
Services which are necessary to support principal development and involve only minor structures such as lines and poles which are necessary to support principal development. 
MAINTENANCE AND SERVICE FACILITIES 
A facility supporting maintenance, repair, vehicular or equipment servicing, material storage, and similar activities, including corporation yards, equipment service centers and similar uses having characteristics of commercial services or contracting or industrial activities. 
MAJOR UTILITY FACILITIES 
Generating plants, electrical switching facilities and primary substations, refuse collection or disposal facilities, water and wastewater treatment plants and similar facilities. 
MILITARY INSTALLATIONS 
Military facilities of the federal and state governments. 
PARK AND RECREATION SERVICES 
Publicly owned and operated parks, playgrounds, recreation facilities and open space. 
POSTAL FACILITIES 
Postal services, including post offices, bulk mail processing or sorting centers, operated by the United States Postal Service. 
PRIVATE PRIMARY EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES 
A private or parochial school offering instruction at the elementary school level in the branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools of the State of Texas. 
PRIVATE SECONDARY EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES 
A private or parochial school offering instruction beyond the elementary school level through the twelfth grade in the branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools of the State of Texas. 
PUBLIC PRIMARY EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES 
A public school offering instruction at the elementary school level in the branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools of the State of Texas. 
PUBLIC SECONDARY EDUCATIONAL FACILITIES 
A public school offering instruction beyond the elementary school level through the twelfth grade in the branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools of the State of Texas. 
RAILROAD FACILITIES 
Railroad yards, equipment servicing facilities and terminal facilities. 
RELIGIOUS ASSEMBLY 
A use located in a permanent or temporary building and providing regular organized religious worship and religious education incidental thereto, but excluding private primary or private secondary educational facilities, community recreational facilities, and parking facilities. A property tax exemption obtained pursuant to Property Tax Code of the State of Texas shall constitute prima facie evidence of religious assembly use. 
SAFETY SERVICES 
Facilities for conduct of public safety and emergency services, including police and fire protection services and emergency medical and ambulance services. 
TRANSPORTATION TERMINAL 
A facility for loading, unloading, and interchange of passengers, baggage, and incidental freight or package express between modes of transportation, including bus terminals, railroad stations, airport terminals and public transit facilities.  
Sec. 4.800. - GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF AGRICULTURE USE TYPES. 
Agricultural use types include the on-site production of plant and animal products by agricultural methods. 
HORTICULTURE 
The growing of horticulture and floriculture specialties, such as flowers, scrubs, or trees intended for ornamental or landscaping purposes, but excluding retail sales. Typical uses include wholesale plant nurseries and greenhouses. 
SECTION 5 
ADMINISTRATION OF ZONING REGULATIONS  
Sec. 5.100. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission is established with authority to prepare and update the Comprehensive Plan for the orderly growth of the community, and to provide implementation of the comprehensive Plan through zoning, subdivision control, and other related techniques. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold public hearing on request for land use considerations, except variances, and forward recommendations of action to the City Council. The City Council shall hold a public hearing and make a final determination concerning each such request.  
Sec. 5.200. - ZONING AMENDMENTS. 
The purpose of this Section is to prescribe the manner in which changes may be made in the text of the Zoning Regulations, Text Amendment, and the procedure to change the application of the Zoning Districts Map to property in the City of Fredericksburg (Rezoning).  
Sec. 5.210. - Jurisdiction. 
The City Council shall have jurisdiction with respect to all Text Amendments and Rezoning requests. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review and submit a recommendation to the City Council for all Text Amendments and Rezoning requests prior to action by the City Council.  
Sec. 5.220. - Initiation. 
A Text Amendment may be initiated by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Council. 
A Rezoning request may be initiated by the owner of the property involved, or his/her duly authorized agent, by filing an application as prescribed in this Section. If the property is owned by more than one person or entity, all the owners or their authorized agents shall join in filing the application. A rezoning request may also be initiated by the Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Council.  
Sec. 5.230. - Application and Fee. 
Application for rezoning initiated by a property owner shall be filed with the Director of Planning and Zoning on a form prescribed by the Director of Planning and Zoning and shall include the following data and maps: 
Name and address of the owner and applicant. 
Address and legal description of the property. 
If the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, statement that the applicant is the duly authorized agent of the owner. 
A City tax parcel map of the area proposed for Rezoning and the surrounding area, showing existing streets and property lines, and existing district boundaries. The map shall include an area determined by the Director of Planning and Building to be necessary to illustrate the relationship to and potential impact on the surrounding area from the property proposed for zoning. 
The current zoning and requested zoning of the property. 
The Director of Planning and Building may require additional information or maps if it is necessary to enable the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council to determine whether the change is consistent with the objectives of the Zoning Regulations and the Comprehensive Plan. 
An application for an amendment initiated by the property owner, or other person seeking a zoning change, shall be accompanied by the fee set forth in Appendix A of this Code. 
An amendment initiated by the Planning and Zoning Commission or City Council shall be pursuant to a motion of the body. The Director of Planning and Building shall prepare the information prescribed in paragraph (A) above, pursuant to the intent of the motion. No fee shall be applicable. 
An application for Rezoning will not be accepted unless the requested zoning classification conforms to the Comprehensive Land Use Plan. An application may apply for a change in the Comprehensive Land Use Plan concurrently with a Rezoning application; however, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council shall consider and make its recommendation or decision on the Comprehensive Land Use Plan change prior to the Rezoning. 
A Text Amendment may be initiated by the Planning and Zoning Commission or by the City Council and shall be pursuant to a motion of the body. The City Attorney shall prepare a draft of an ordinance amending the text of the Zoning Regulations pursuant to the intent of the motion. 
(Ord. No. 23-016, 9-16-2013)  
Sec. 5.240. - Public Hearing. 
Within sixty (60) days after the filing of a completed application, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on such application for a Text Amendment or Rezoning. Notice shall be given as prescribed in Section 5.800. At the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the application or the proposal and shall receive pertinent evidence relating to consistency with the objectives of this ordinance, the Comprehensive Plan and the development policies of the City.  
Sec. 5.250. - Recommendation of the Director of Planning and Building. 
The Director of Planning and Building shall review each application and shall prepare a recommendation thereon which shall be filed with the Planning and Zoning Commission and made available to the applicant at least five (5) days prior to the public hearing.  
Sec. 5.260. - Action by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall act on the application within twenty (20) days following the closing of the public hearing. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine whether, in its opinion, the change is consistent with the objectives of his Ordinance and with the Comprehensive Plan, and shall recommend to the City Council that the Text Amendment or Rezoning be enacted, be enacted in modified form, or be denied.  
Sec. 5.261. - Alternate Classification in Lieu of Proposed Classification. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend more restrictive classification than that requested by the applicant.  
Sec. 5.270. - Action by the City Council. 
Within forty (40) days following receipt of the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, the City Council shall hold at least one public hearing on the Text Amendment or Rezoning. Within twenty (20) days following the closing of a public hearing, the City Council shall make a specific finding as to whether the change is consistent with the objectives of this Ordinance and with the Comprehensive Plan. If the change is not consistent with the Comprehensive Land Use Plan, the Comprehensive Land Use Plan must be amended prior to a zoning change, as prescribed in section 5.300.If the City Council finds that the change is consistent with the Zoning Regulations and the Comprehensive Plan, it shall introduce an ordinance amending the Zoning Districts Map, whichever is appropriate.  
Sec. 5.271. - Protest Provision. 
If the Planning and Zoning Commission has not recommended approval of the Rezoning Application, or if there is a protest against the Rezoning Application signed by the owners of twenty (20) percent or more of either the area of the property included in the Rezoning Application, or of the area of the property immediately adjoining the same and extending two hundred (200) feet there from, such Rezoning Application shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths (3/4) of the members of the City Council.  
Sec. 5.280. - Change of Zoning Map. 
A change in district boundaries shall be indicated on the Zoning Districts Map.  
Sec. 5.300. - COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN. 
Comprehensive Land Use Plan changes are subject to the same procedural requirements outlined in Section 5.200, Zoning Amendments. Private parties requesting such a change are subject to the established fee. The Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council may initiate a Comprehensive Land Use Plan change. No fee shall be applicable.  
Sec. 5.310. - Review and Evaluation Criteria. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make the following determinations prior to forwarding a recommendation to the City Council. Before it can grant a change of Comprehensive Land Use Plan designation, the City Council must confirm the findings. 
The property affected by the request is adequate in size and shape to facilitate those uses normally associated with the requested designation. 
The property affected by the request does not exceed the capabilities of the infrastructure. 
The request will have no adverse affect on any property within six hundred (600) feet of the affected property. 
The requested change is to accommodate an appropriate land use and is consistent with other elements of the Comprehensive Plan. 
The request, together with the applicable conditions, will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity.  
Sec. 5.400. - CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT. 
The purpose of this procedure is to provide for review and discretionary approval of uses typically having unusual site development features or unique operating characteristics requiring special consideration so that they may be located, designed, and operated compatibly with uses on surrounding properties and within the City at large. The Conditional Use Permit process is intended to encourage broad public review and evaluation of site development features and operating characteristics and to ensure adequate mitigation of potentially unfavorable impacts.  
Sec. 5.401. - Additional requirements for bed and breakfast uses. 
All Bed and Breakfast use facilities shall be subject to the following additional requirements to those set forth otherwise in the City of Fredericksburg's Ordinances: 
A.  Only overnight guests may be served meals except in zones permitting restaurant use. Such meals shall be limited to continental-type breakfast consisting of pastries prepared by a licensed provider, milk, cereal, fruit, fruit juice and coffee unless the facility meets the State of Texas and Gillespie County Health Division requirements for commercial food service. 
B.  All signs must comply with the City's Sign Ordinance (Currently Chapter 29 of the Code of Ordinances.) 
C.  All Bed and Breakfast facilities must comply with all State of Texas and City of Fredericksburg building codes for existing or new construction, as applicable, including ADA standards. 
D.  Bed and Breakfast facilities shall comply with the regulations for Fire Protection set forth in the appropriate NFPA 101 Life Safety Code and the International Construction Codes, the latest version adopted by the City at the time of construction or conversion to Bed and Breakfast use using the "Lodging and Rooming Houses" regulations. 
E.  External lighting shall be shielded from adjoining properties. 
F.  All functions such as weddings, parties or other gatherings shall be limited to Commercial Zoning Districts. 
(Ord. No. 23-014, 9-16-2013)  
Sec. 5.402. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 28-001, § 2, adopted Jan. 2, 2018, repealed § 5.402, which pertained to bed and breakfast compliance use permit and derived from Ord. No. 23-014, 9-16-2013.  
Sec. 5.410. - Jurisdiction. 
The City Council shall have jurisdiction with respect to all Conditional Use Permits. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review and submit a recommendation to the City Council on all applications for a Conditional Use Permit.  
Sec. 5.420. - Application and Fee. 
Application for a Conditional Use Permit shall be filed with the Director of Planning and Building. The application shall include the following: 
Name and address of the owner and applicant. 
Address and legal description of the property. 
If the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, a signed statement by the owner that the applicant is the authorized agent of the owner of the property. 
A statement describing the nature and operating characteristics of the proposed use, including any data pertinent to the finding required for approval of the application. For uses involving public assembly or industrial processing, or uses generating potentially high volumes of vehicular traffic, the Director of Planning and Building may require specific information relative to the anticipated peak loads and peak use periods, relative to industrial standard or substantiating the adequacy of proposed parking, loading and circulation facilities. 
Site plans, preliminary building elevations, preliminary improvement plans, and such additional maps and drawings, all sufficiently dimensional as required to illustrate the following: 
The date, scale, north point, title, name of owner and name of person preparing the site plan. 
The location and dimensions of boundary lines, with distances and bearings, easements, and required yards and setbacks, water courses, drainage features and location and size of existing and proposed streets and alleys and the one hundred (100) year flood plain. 
The location, height, bulk, general appearance, and intended use of existing and proposed buildings on the site, and the approximate location of existing buildings on abutting sites within fifty (50) feet. 
The location of existing and proposed site improvements including parking and loading areas, pedestrian and vehicular access, landscaped areas, utility or service areas, fencing and screening, signs and lighting. 
The location of water courses and drainage features. 
The number of existing and proposed off-street parking and loading spaces, and a calculation of applicable minimum requirements. 
For sites with an average slope greater than ten (10) percent, a plan showing existing and proposed topography and grading and proposed erosion control measures. 
The relationship of the site and the proposed use to surrounding uses, including pedestrian and vehicular circulation, current use of nearby parcels, and any proposed off-site improvements to be made. 
An application for a Conditional Use Permit shall be accompanied by the fee set forth in Appendix A of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 23-016, 9-16-2013)  
Sec. 5.421. - Concurrent Applications. 
Application for a Conditional Use Permit and for Rezoning for the same property may be made concurrently, subject to the fee applicable to a Rezoning.  
Sec. 5.430. - Public Hearing. 
Within sixty (60) days after filing of a completed application, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing on such application for a Conditional Use permit. Notice shall be given as prescribed in Section 5.800. At the public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the application and shall receive pertinent evidence concerning the proposed use and the proposed conditions under which it would be operated or maintained, particularly with respect to the findings prescribed in Section 5.450.  
Sec. 5.440. - Recommendation of the Director of Planning and Building. 
The Director of Planning and Building shall review each application and shall prepare a recommendation thereon which shall be filed with the Planning and Zoning Commission and made available to the applicant at least five (5) days prior to the public hearing.  
Sec. 5.450. - Action by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall act on the application within twenty (20) days following the closing of the public hearing. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine whether, in its opinion, the change is consistent with the objectives of this Ordinance and with the Comprehensive Plan, and shall recommend to the City Council that the Conditional Use Permit be enacted, enacted in modified form or be denied.  
Sec. 5.460. - Review and Evaluation Criteria. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall review and evaluate Conditional Use Permit applications using the following criteria: 
Conformance with applicable regulations and standards established by the Zoning Regulations. 
Compatibility with existing or permitted uses on abutting sites, in terms of building height, bulk and scale, setbacks and open spaces, landscaping and site development, access and circulation features. 
Potentially unfavorable affects or impacts on other existing or permitted uses on abutting sites, to the extent such impacts exceed those which reasonably may result from use of the site for a permitted use. 
Modifications (including variance from property development regulations) to the site plan which would result in increased compatibility, would mitigate potentially unfavorable impacts, would be necessary to conform to applicable regulations and standards and would protect the public health, safety, morals and general welfare. 
Safety and convenience of vehicular and pedestrian circulation in the vicinity, including traffic reasonably expected to be generated by the proposed use and other uses reasonable and anticipated in the area; existing zoning and land uses in the area. 
Protection of persons and property from erosion, flood or water damage, fire, noise, glare and similar hazards and impacts. 
Location, lighting, and type of signs; the relation of signs to traffic control and adverse effect of signs on adjacent properties. 
Adequacy and convenience of off-street parking and loading facilities. 
Determination that the proposed use is in accordance with the objectives of these Zoning Regulations and the purposes of the zone in which the site is located. 
Determination that the proposed use will comply with each of the applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations. 
Determination that the proposed use and site development, together with any modifications applicable thereto, will be compatible with existing or permitted uses in the vicinity. 
Determination that any conditions applicable to approval are the minimum necessary to minimize potentially unfavorable impacts on nearby uses and to ensure compatibility of the proposed use with existing or permitted uses in the same district and the surrounding area. 
Determination that the proposed use, together with the conditions applicable thereto, will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity.  
Sec. 5.461. - Review and Evaluation Criteria for Historic Shopping District. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall review and evaluate Conditional Use Permits applications for all Standardized Businesses within the Historic Shopping District using the following criteria: 
A.  Affirmative finding that the existence of such business will not: 
(1)  Materially alter the general characteristic of the surrounding area of the small town German and Hill Country environment; 
(2)  Detract from the uniqueness of, nor materially alter the identity of, the Historic Shopping District; 
(3)  Contribute to the nationwide trend of standardized offerings; or 
(4)  Impair the intent of this ordinance or the comprehensive plan of the City; and 
B.  Affirmative finding that the business will: 
(1)  Add diversity to the mix of businesses in the area including type of service, amusement, product, price range and the like; and 
(2)  Complement those businesses already in the Historic Shopping District; and 
(3)  Help promote and foster the local economic base as a whole; or 
(4)  Is currently existing in the District or is regionally or locally based or is serving a community need or local demand; and 
C.  The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend and the Council shall require that a Standardized Business: 
(1)  Will not utilize or contain the features or attributes of a Standardized Business as defined above except the service, product or amusement, and a sign, no more than two square feet in size showing the franchise or business affiliation, if desired; 
(2)  Be pedestrian oriented as opposed to automobile oriented, to encourage walking in the HSD; 
(3)  Utilize a unique visual appearance that reflects or compliments the Historic character of the HSD, and not project a visual appearance that is homogeneous with its elements in other communities; and 
(4)  Not be in such close proximity to Standardized Businesses to significantly destroy a mix of standardized businesses with other businesses. 
D.  The Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend and the Council may place other reasonable conditions upon the granting of the application which may not be specifically set out herein provided that such conditions promote the goals of this ordinance. It is specifically permitted that the City Council may place restrictions upon the operation of the business such as hours of operation to conform generally with other businesses in the area or the requirement of the addition of architectural features to maintain the character and architectural look of the area. 
E.  The burden of proof in conditional use proceedings shall be upon the applicant. The Council may require the applicant to submit a traffic study, prepared by a Registered Professional Engineer, approved by the Board, or to submit any other reasonable substantiation of the elements of the application. 
F.  The fact that a use may be more profitable or that a structure may be more valuable if the conditional use granted shall not be grounds for issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 18-002, § 5.461, 4-21-2008)  
Sec. 5.470. - Actions by the City Council. 
Within forty (40) days following receipt of the recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, the City Council shall hold at least one public hearing on the Conditional Use Permit. Notice shall be given as prescribed in Section 5.800. Within twenty (20) days following the closing of a public hearing, the City Council may grant a Conditional Use Permit as the Permit was applied for in a modified form or subject to conditions, or may deny the application. The City Council shall notify the applicant of its decision.  
Sec. 5.471. - Conditions. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission, in considering and determining its recommendation, and the City Council, on any request for a Conditional Use Permit, may require from the applicant's plans, information, operation data and expert evaluation concerning the location, function and characteristics of any building or use proposed. The City Council may, in the interest of the public welfare and to ensure compliance with this Ordinance, establish conditions of operation, location, arrangement and construction of any use for which a permit is authorized or may allow a variance from property development standards. In authorizing the location of any of these uses listed as Conditional Use Permits, the City Council may impose such development standards and safeguards as the conditions and location indicate important to welfare and protection of adjacent property from excessive noise, vibration, dust, smoke, fumes, gas, odor, explosion, glare, offensive view or other undesirable or hazardous conditions. The City Council, in approving or conditionally approving a Conditional Use Permit, may set forth in its decision reasonable conditions which will ensure the intent and purposes of the Zoning Regulations and avoid the creation or detrimental affect upon abutting properties which may include, but not limited to the following: 
Duration of use 	Time period in which the proposed use shall be developed or constructed 
Fences, hedges and walls 	Surfacing of parking areas 
Regulation of noise, vibration, odors, etc. 	Regulation of time for certain activities 
Regulation of signs 	Requiring maintenance of the grounds 
Regulation of use or uses 	Special yards, spaces and buffers 
Requiring street, service road or alley dedications and improvements or appropriate bonds 	Regulation of locations of vehicular ingress and egress 
 
Including such other conditions that will make possible the development occurs in an orderly and efficient manner, and in conformity with the intent and purposes of applicable ordinances.  
Sec. 5.480. - Protest Provisions. 
If the Planning and Zoning Commission has not recommended approval of the Conditional Use Permit Request, or if there is a protest against the rezoning signed by the owners of twenty (20) percent of the property immediately adjoining the same and extending two hundred (200) feet there from, such rezoning shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths (¾) of the members of the City Council.  
Sec. 5.481. - Suspension and Revocation. 
Upon violation of any applicable provision of this ordinance or, if granted subject to conditions, upon failure to comply with conditions, a Conditional Use Permit shall be suspended after thirty (30) days written notification to the owner of a use or property subject to a Conditional Use Permit. 
Discontinuance. A conditional use permit is automatically terminated upon a change in use, upon discontinuance, being defined as non-operation or non-use for 365 successive days. Discontinuance may be, but not required to be, evidenced by termination of utility service, the failure to maintain regular hours of operation, the utilization of the premises for other purposes, abandonment or by other reasonable means. 
Upon failure to start construction or establish a use within two (2) years of approval of a conditional use permit.  
Sec. 5.490. - Prior Special Permits and Covenants. 
A use legally established pursuant to a Specific Use Permit prior to the date of adoption of these Zoning Regulations shall be deemed a pre-existing conditional use and shall be permitted to continue, provided that it is operated and maintained in accord with any conditions prescribed at the time of its establishment. 
Alteration or expansion of a pre-existing specific use shall be permitted only upon the granting of a Conditional Use Permit as prescribed in these regulations, provided that alterations not exceeding $2,500 in value as determined by the Director of Planning and Building, shall be without the granting of a Conditional Use Permit. 
A Conditional Use Permit shall be required for the construction of a structure housing a pre-existing use if the structure is destroyed by fire or other calamity, but specific act of God or by the public enemy to an extent greater than fifty percent (50%). The extent of damage or partial destruction shall be based upon the ratio of the estimated cost of restoring the structure to its condition prior to such damage or partial destruction to the estimated cost of duplicating the entire structure as it existed prior thereto. Estimates for this purpose shall be made by or shall be reviewed and approved by the Director of Planning and Building and shall be based on the minimum cost of construction in compliance with the Building Code.  
Sec. 5.500. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. 
The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers: 
Variances. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of the Zoning Property Development Regulations and Sign Ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provision of the Zoning Regulations will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of the Zoning Regulations shall be observed and substantial justice done. See Section 5.600. 
Administrative Appeals. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative official in the enforcement of the Zoning Regulations. See Section 5.700.  
Sec. 5.600. - VARIANCE PROCEDURE. 
This procedure is intended to provide relief from the terms of the Zoning Property Development Regulations and Sign Ordinance when, because of special circumstances applicable to the property, the strict application of the Zoning Property Development Regulations and Sign Ordinance deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning classification, and to ensure that any adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and the district in which such property is situated.  
Sec. 5.610. - Application. 
Application for a Variance shall be filed with the Director of Planning and Building. The application shall include the following: 
Name and address of the owner or applicant. 
Address and legal description of the property. 
If the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, a statement that the applicant is the authorized agent of the owner. 
A statement describing the Variance requested and the reasons why it complies with the criteria for Variances provided in Section 5.650. 
Site plans, preliminary building elevations, preliminary improvement plans or other maps or drawings, sufficiently dimensional as required to illustrate the following, to the extent related to the Variance application: 
Existing and proposed location and arrangement of uses on the site, and on abutting sites within fifty (50) feet. 
Existing and proposed site improvements, buildings and other structures on the site, and any off-site improvements related to or necessitated by the proposed use. Building elevations shall be sufficient to indicate the general height, bulk, scale and architectural character. 
Existing and proposed topography, grading, landscaping, screening, irrigation facilities and erosion control measures. 
Existing and proposed parking, loading and traffic and pedestrian circulation features, both on the site and any off-site facilities or improvements related to or necessitated by the proposed use. 
The Director of Planning and Building may request additional information necessary to enable a complete analysis and evaluation of the variance request, and a determination as to whether the circumstances prescribed for the granting of a Variance exist. 
The application shall be accompanied by a fee established by the City Council. A single application may include requests for Variances for more than one regulation applicable to the same site, or for similar Variances on two or more adjacent parcels with similar characteristics.  
Sec. 5.620. - Report of the Director of Planning and Building. 
The Director of Planning and Building shall review and prepare a report on the application. The report shall be filed with the Board of Adjustment and made available to the applicant at least five (5) days prior to the public hearings.  
Sec. 5.630. - Public Hearing and Notice. 
The Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing within forty-five (45) days on each application for a Variance. Notice shall be given as prescribed in Section 5.800. The Board shall adopt rules governing the conduct of its public hearings, including rules for the presentation of evidence.  
Sec. 5.640. - Action by the Board of Adjustment. 
The Board of Adjustment shall act upon the application not more than twenty (20) days following the close of the public hearing on a Variance. The Board may grant a variance as the Variance was applied for or in modified form, or subject to conditions, or the application may be denied. A Variance may be revocable, may be granted for a limited time period, or may be granted subject to conditions as the Board may prescribe. The Board shall notify the applicant of its decision. 
The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board of Adjustment shall be necessary to grant a Variance.  
Sec. 5.650. - Findings. 
Basic Criteria. The Board of Adjustment may grant a Variance if it makes affirmative findings of fact on each of the following criteria: 
The Zoning Regulations applicable to the property do not allow for a reasonable use. 
The plight of the owner of the property is due to unique circumstances existing on the property, and the unique circumstances were not created by the owner of the property and are not merely financial, and are not due to or the result of general conditions in the zoning district in which the property is located. 
The variance will not alter the character of the area adjacent to the property, will not impair the use of adjacent conforming property and will not impair the purposes or regulations to the Zoning District in which the property is located. 
Parking: Additional Criteria. The City Council may grant a Variance to a regulation prescribed by this ordinance with respect to the number of off-street spaces or loading facilities required if it makes findings of fact that the following additional criteria are also satisfied: 
Neither present nor anticipated future traffic volumes generated by the use of the site or the uses of sites in the vicinity reasonably require strict or literal interpretations and enforcement of the specific regulation. 
The granting of the Variance will not result in the parking or loading of vehicles on public streets in such a manner as to interfere with the free flow of traffic of the streets. 
The granting of the Variance will not create a safety hazard or any other condition inconsistent with the objectives of this ordinance. 
The Variance shall run with the use or uses to which it pertains, and shall not run with the site.  
Sec. 5.652. - Signs: Additional Criteria. 
The Board may grant a variance to a regulation prescribed by the Sign Ordinance with respect to the placement of signs, the height of signs or the area of signs if it affirmatively finds each of the following: 
That a sign is being replaced. For the purposes of this Section, replacement shall include the erection of a new or different sign due to the removal of another sign for any reason, including the change of name of a business whether from change of ownership, business being conducted, or otherwise, the change of a sign for a continuing business containing the same or different information as the sign being replaced, and the replacement of signs due to damage or vandalism. 
That all structures on the property for which the sign is proposed that would impede the replacement of a sign were constructed prior to February 17, 1986. 
That it is impractical to abide by existing placement, height or area regulations due to the placement, size of construction of existing structures in relationship to the physical characteristics of the site. For purposes of illustration, physical characteristics may include topography of the site or surrounding sites, structures on surrounding sites, traffic conditions, street layouts and existing natural vegetation. 
That the other types of signs which are permitted by this Ordinance cannot practically be used. In making this determination of practicality, the Board may consider 
The undesirability of altering a historic site to accommodate a sign which would be permitted with no variance under this Ordinance; or 
That alternatives permitted by this Ordinance would involve extensive reconstruction of structures; or 
That alternatives permitted by this Ordinance are prohibitively expensive; or 
That alternatives permitted by this Ordinance will not effectively identify the subject of the sign. 
That the proposed sign has been reviewed by the Historic Review Board if applicable. 
That the proposed variance is as close to the requirements of the sign ordinance as is feasible.  
Sec. 5.660. - Effective Date of Variance. 
A decision of the Board of Adjustment on a Variance shall be effective immediately.  
Sec. 5.670. - Lapse of Variance. 
Unless a longer time period shall be specifically established as a condition of approval, a Variance shall lapse and shall become void one year following the date on which the Variance became effective, unless prior to the expiration of one year a building permit is issued and construction is commenced and diligently pursued toward completion on the site which was the subject of the Variance application, or a certification of occupancy is issued for the site or structure which was the subject of the Variance if no building permit or certificate of occupancy is required. 
A Variance subject to lapse may be renewed by the Board for an additional period of one year, provided that prior to the expiration date, a written request for renewal is filed with Board. 
The Board may grant or deny any application for renewal.  
Sec. 5.671. - Suspension and Revocation. 
Upon violation of any applicable provision of this ordinance, or, if granted subject to conditions, a Variance shall be suspended after thirty (30) days written notification to the owner of the use or property to the Variance.  
Sec. 5.680. - Variance to Run With Land or Structure. 
Unless pertaining to off-street parking and loading regulations, or otherwise specified at the time a Variance is granted, a Variance shall run with the land and shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the site or structure to which it applies.  
Sec. 5.690. - Variance Appeal Procedure. 
Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustment, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department or board of the City may present to a court of record a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within ten days after the filing of the decision in the office of the Board of Adjustment.  
Sec. 5.700. - ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS PROCEDURES. 
This procedure is intended to afford review of administrative actions taken pursuant to the Zoning Regulations where such actions may be in error. 
Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, or board of the City affected by any administrative decision of the Director of Planning and Building. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days after the decision, by filing with the Director of Planning and Building, and with the Board of Adjustment a notice of appeal, which shall specify the grounds thereof. The Director of Planning and Building shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.  
Sec. 5.710. - Fee. 
The appeal shall be accompanied by the fee set forth in Appendix A of this Code. The fee shall be refunded to the applicant if the Board of Adjustment renders a decision if favor of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 23-016, 9-16-2013)  
Sec. 5.720. - Stay of Proceedings. 
An appeal from the action of the Director of Planning and Building shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of such action unless the Director of Planning and Building certifies to the Board of Adjustment after the notice of appeal has been filed with him/her, that by reason of the fact stated in the certificate a stay would, in his/her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In the event the Director of Planning and Building shall make and file such certificate, his/her action shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order that may be granted by the Board of Adjustment or by a court of record, upon application of the party aggrieved by the action of the Director of Planning and Building and after notice to him/her and upon due cause shown.  
Sec. 5.730. - Public Hearing and Notice. 
The Board of Adjustment shall hold a hearing within 45 days on the appeal. Notice shall be given as prescribed in Section 5.800. Upon the hearing of such appeal, any interested party may appear in person or by an agent or by an attorney.  
Sec. 5.740. - Action. 
The Board of Adjustment shall act on the appeal within 20 days following the closing of the public hearing. In exercising the powers set out in this section, the Board of Adjustments may, in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the Director of Planning and Building from whose action the appeal is taken. The Board shall notify the applicant of its decision. 
The concurring vote of four members of the Board of Adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement decision, or determination of the Director of Planning and Building or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which it is required to pass under this subsection.  
Sec. 5.800. - PUBLIC NOTICE PROCEDURE AND FEES. 
Notice of a public hearing for consideration of a Rezoning, Text Amendment, Conditional Use Permit, Comprehensive Land Use Change, Variance or Administrative Appeal shall be as follows:  
Sec. 5.810. - Procedure. 
Notice shall be given by publication of a legal notice in a newspaper of general circulation in Fredericksburg, Texas at least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
Notice shall be given by mail to the applicant at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. 
Notice shall be given by mail to the owner of each site within 200 feet of the subject property at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. 
At the option of the Director of Planning and Building, notice may be given by mail to the owner of any site more than 200 feet from the subject property at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. 
At the option of the Director of Planning and Building, notice may be given by mail to any neighborhood organization having a potential interest in the application. 
At the option of the Director of Planning and Building, notice may be given by posting a notice on or adjacent to the subject property at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. 
Fees 
Fees per Appendix A of the Code of Ordinances.  
Sec. 5.821. - Time of Payment. 
The fees are due and payable at the time of the initial request or the application and entitle the applicant to consideration only and not affirmative disposition.  
Sec. 5.822. - Waivers. 
The intent of this section is further to ensure that no citizen or group is denied access to due process of law through an inability to pay for such services. When an individual or group requests an action under this Ordinance for which a fee is required, the City Council is hereby authorized to inquire into hardships which may be caused by this payment of such fees and may instruct that all or part of such fee is to be waived.  
Sec. 5.823. - Refunds. 
The fees established shall be non-refundable to the applicant, except as provided in Section 5.710.  
Sec. 5.900. - ZONING-ANNEXED TERRITORY. 
All territory hereafter annexed to the City of Fredericksburg shall be concurrently zoned in accordance with the Land Use Plan in accordance with the provisions of this Section. 
SECTION 6 
ENFORCEMENT  
Sec. 6.100. - NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES. 
A Nonconforming status shall exist under the following provisions of this ordinance. 
When a use or structure which does not conform to the regulations prescribed in the district in which such use or structure is located was in existence and lawfully operating prior to the effective date of this Ordinance and has been operating since without discontinuance. 
When at some subsequent date a use or structure which does not conform to the regulations prescribed in the district in which such use or structure is located was in existence at the time of annexation to the City of Fredericksburg and has since been in regular and continuous use. 
(Ord. No. 23-007, 5-20-2013)  
Sec. 6.110. - Continuance of a Nonconforming Use. 
Residential Districts 
Enlargement. A non-conforming use shall not be enlarged, expanded, extended or changed. 
Conversions. A non-conforming use may be continued as the same classification, or may be changed to a use of a more restricted classification upon approval of a conditional use permit. If it is changed to a use in a more restricted classification or to a conforming use, it cannot be changed back to its original non-conforming use. For purpose of this paragraph, the phrase "same classification" means: uses permitted in the same district; a "more restricted classification" means: use in a district having more restricted use (i.e., C-2 vs. C-1); and provided that: 
The new use is similar to or less intensive than that of the old use in terms of noise generated, outdoor storage, customer activity and impact on other conforming uses in the area, and that the new use comply with the parking requirements of this ordinance as applicable to newly established uses. 
Termination. 
If a non-conforming use or any portion thereof is voluntarily discontinued for a period of 90 days, any future use of such land or portion thereof shall be in conformity with the regulations of the district in which such land or portion thereof is located. 
Non-conforming use is terminated upon a change in use other than as provided herein. 
Non-conforming use is terminated upon destruction of a structure occupied by a non-conforming use unless it is permitted to be rebuilt as provided herein. 
Other Districts 
Enlargement. A non-conforming use may be enlarged within the boundary of the lot in which the non-conforming use has legally operated upon approval of a Conditional Use Permit (section 5.400). 
Provided, however, a Conditional Use Permit shall not be required, and the enlargement may occur, upon submission and approval of a Site Plan if the enlargement involves only a one-time increase in the size of the building in which the same use is operated of not more than 25 percent. 
Any enlargement or extension, whether requiring a Conditional Use Permit or not, shall be required to come into in compliance with all city ordinances, codes, or policies and development regulations which may apply to the property (examples without limitation: landscape, parking, curb cuts, setbacks), and the non-conforming use may be continued only for so long as the property remains in compliance with all applicable City Ordinances and Codes, including those prohibiting nuisances. All Existing non-conforming single family residential uses may be enlarged without the necessity of obtaining a Conditional Use Permit. 
Conversions. A non-conforming use may be continued as the same classification, or may be changed to a use of a more restricted classification upon approval of a conditional use permit. If it is changed to a use in a more restricted classification or to a conforming use, it cannot be changed back to its original non-conforming use. For purpose of this paragraph, the phrase "same classification" means: uses permitted in the same district; a "more restricted classification" means: use in a district having more restricted use (i.e., C-2 vs. C-1); and provided that: 
The new use is similar to or less intensive than that of the old use in terms of noise generated, outdoor storage, customer activity and impact on other conforming uses in the area. 
The new use complies with the parking requirements of this ordinance as applicable to newly established uses. 
Termination. A nonconforming use is terminated under the following conditions: 
Upon a change in use other than as provided herein. 
Upon discontinuance, being defined as non-operative or non use for a period of at least 365 successive days. Discontinuance may be, but is not required to be, evidenced by termination of utility service, the failure to maintain regular hours of operation, the utilization of the premises for other purposes, abandonment or by any other reasonable means. 
Upon destruction of a structure occupied by a nonconforming use except if it is permitted to be rebuilt as provided herein. 
Replacement. If a structure occupied by a nonconforming use is destroyed by fire, the elements or other cause, it may not be rebuilt except to conform to the provisions of this Ordinance. In the case of partial destruction of a nonconforming use not exceeding 75 percent of its tax roll assessed value, reconstruction will be permitted but the size or function of the nonconforming use shall not be expanded. 
(Ord. No. 23-007, 5-20-2013; Ord. No. 24-024, 12-1-2014)  
Sec. 6.120. - Continuance of Nonconforming Structures. 
Subject to all limitations herein set forth, any nonconforming structure may be occupied and operated and maintained in a state of good repair, but no nonconforming structure shall be enlarged or extended. 
A nonconforming structure in which only permitted uses are operated may be enlarged or extended if the enlargement or extension can be made in compliance with all the provisions of this chapter established for structures in the district in which the nonconforming structure is located. Such enlargement shall also be subject to all other applicable city ordinances. 
Termination of nonconforming structures: 
Damage to structures. The right to operate and maintain any nonconforming structure shall terminate and shall cease to exist whenever the nonconforming structure is damaged in any manner and from any cause whatsoever and the cost of repairing such damage exceeds 75 percent of the tax roll assessed value of such structure on the date of such damage. 
Obsolescence of structure. The right to operate and maintain any nonconforming structure shall terminate and shall cease to exist whenever the nonconforming structure becomes obsolete or substandard under an applicable ordinance of the municipality and the cost of placing such structure in lawful compliance with the applicable ordinance exceeds 75 percent of the tax roll assessed value of such structure on the date that the proper official of the municipality determines that such structure is obsolete or substandard. 
Determination of replacement cost. In determining the replacement cost of any nonconforming structure there shall not be included therein the cost of land or any factors other than the nonconforming structure itself. 
(Ord. No. 23-007, 5-20-2013)  
Sec. 6.200. - CREATION OF BUILDING SITE. 
No permit for the construction of a building or buildings upon any tract or plot shall be issued until a building site, building tract or building lot has been created by compliance with one of the following conditions: 
The lot or tract is part of a plat of record, properly approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, and filed in the plat records of Gillespie County, Texas. 
The site plot or tract is all or part of a site plan officially approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, which site plan provides all utility and drainage easements, alleys, streets and other public improvements necessary to meet the normal requirements for platting, including the designation of building areas and such easements, alleys, and streets have been required and properly dedicated and the necessary public improvements provided. 
The plot, tract or lot faces upon a dedicated street and was separately owned prior to the effective date of this Ordinance or prior to annexation to the City of Fredericksburg, whichever is applicable, in which event a building permit for only one main building may be issued on each such original separately owned parcel without first complying with 6.200 as provided herein.  
Sec. 6.210. - Completion of Building. 
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in plans, construction or designated use of a building actually under construction at the time of the passage of this ordinance and which entire building shall be completed within one year from the date of the passage of this ordinance.  
Sec. 6.300. - VIOLATION OF ZONING ORDINANCE. 
It shall be a violation of this Ordinance for any person, firm or corporation to neglect, refuse to comply with, or resist the enforcement of any provision of this Ordinance or any requirements pursuant thereto, or in any way use, change, or construct a building or structure in nonconformity with zoning approval. Each day that such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
Violation of this Ordinance shall be brought into compliance, abated, removed, or taken to Municipal Court for judgment. In all such cases that the court rules to allow a structure to remain in nonconformity with this Ordinance, there shall be a pro forma action by the Board of Adjustment permitting such use. Such action shall be consistent with the court's ruling, and thereafter said use shall be considered as a legal nonconforming use and be subject to the provisions thereof.  
Sec. 6.310. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall, upon conviction, be fined a sum not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); and each and every day that the provisions of this ordinance are violated shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the said penalty provided for, the right is hereby conferred and extended upon any property owner owning property in any district, where such property owner may be affected or invaded, by a violation of the terms of the ordinance, to bring suit in such court or courts having jurisdiction thereof and obtain such remedies as may be available at law and equity in the protection of the rights of such property owners.  
Sec. 6.400. - ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS. 
6.410 Duty 
It shall be the duty of the Director of Planning and Building or his/her designee or other officials so designated by City Council to enforce this Ordinance. 
6.420 Building Permits and Plans 
No building or structure shall be erected, enlarged, or structurally altered until a building permit has been issued by the Director of Planning and Building. 
6.430 Certificate of Occupancy 
Certificate of Occupancy approving a structure or use of land shall be required for all of the following prior to occupancy: 
Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or structurally altered; 
Change in use of an existing building to a use of a different classification; 
Occupancy and use of vacant land; 
Change in the use of land to a use of a different zoning district; and 
Change in the use of a nonconforming use. 
SECTION 7 
SUPPLEMENTAL SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS  
Sec. 7.000. - PURPOSE. 
These regulations are intended to govern regulations applicable within each district and to establish additional regulations and exceptions thereto.  
Sec. 7.100. - SITE PLAN REVIEW PROCEDURE. 
The purpose of this procedure is to provide for review and evaluation of site development, and design features and to afford a procedure for mitigation of potentially unfavorable effects on adjacent land uses or within the site.  
Sec. 7.110. - Jurisdiction. 
The Director of Planning and Building shall be responsible for the administration of the Site Plan review procedure. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall be responsible for review, evaluation and action on all site plans submitted. The City Council shall be responsible for review evaluation and action on all site plans submitted as an appeal from Planning and Zoning Commission decision.  
Sec. 7.111. - Uses and Zoning Districts Requiring Site Plan Review. 
The following shall follow the Site Plan Review procedure prior to use, change in use or issuance of a building permit: 
Multi-family residential developments greater than four (4) units regardless of size of property; or 
Manufactured Home Park; or 
Any development involving property containing area greater than: 
One acre in the C-2, Industrial, or PF Districts, or 
19,000 Square feet in the C-1 and CBD District. 
Any development of any size that changes from one use category to another use category that cannot fully comply with the zoning district site development regulations. A development for the purpose of requiring Site Plan Review shall mean any improvement of property with one general plan or scheme regardless of how many lots or parcels of land are involved, or regardless of ownership structure.  
Sec. 7.120. - Application and Fee. 
The application for Site Plan Review shall be filed with the Director of Planning and Building fourteen (14) days prior to the meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission and shall not be considered filed until complete. The application shall be signed by the owner, the applicant, and lienholder(s) if any, and shall include the following: 
Name and address of the owner of the property and the applicant for Site Plan Review. 
Address and legal description of the property. 
Proof of title showing the owner and lien holders, if any. 
A brief description of the proposed use, including information pertinent to the review criteria and findings in Section 5.485 (Review and Evaluation Criteria). 
A site plan, twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inches, drawn to scale, and sufficiently dimensional as necessary which shall show the following: 
The data, scale, north point, title, name of owner and name of person preparing the site plan. 
The location and dimension of boundary lines, easements, and required yards and setbacks of all existing and proposed buildings and land improvements. 
The location, height and intended use of existing and proposed buildings on the site, and the approximate location of existing buildings on abutting sites within fifty (50) feet. 
The location of existing and proposed improvements including parking and loading areas, pedestrian and vehicular access, utility or service areas, fencing and screening and lighting. 
The center line of existing water courses, drainage features and location and size of existing and proposed streets and alleys, and the one hundred (100) year floodplain. 
The number of existing and proposed off-street parking and loading spaces and a calculation of applicable minimum requirements. 
For sites with an average slope greater than ten percent (10%), a plan showing existing and proposed topography and grading and proposed erosion control measures. Contour intervals shall be five (5) feet minimum. 
The location and size of proposed signs, if known. 
The location and size of the existing and proposed landscape areas. 
An application for a Site Plan Review shall be accompanied by the fee set forth in Appendix A of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 23-016,9-16-2013)  
Sec. 7.130. - Action by the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
The site plan shall be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission no later than the first available regular meeting date; but in no event later than forty-five (45) days after the date of filing.  
Sec. 7.131. - Review and Evaluation Criteria. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission and the Director of Planning and Building as advisor to the Planning and Zoning Commission shall review and evaluate site plans using the following criteria: 
Conformity with applicable regulations and standards established by the Zoning Regulations. 
External elements of the site plan compatibility with existing or permitted uses on abutting sites or within the area of the proposed development, and compatibility of the development of off site physical features including but not limited to the review of the following: 
Access and Circulation 	Open Spaces 
Adjacent street network 	Planned or future development of the area 
Buffers 	Public facilities 
Building height, bulk, scale and orientation 	Setbacks 
Landscaping 	Utilities 
 
Internal elements of the site plan including but not limited to the following: 
Arrangements of Buildings, Usages and Access Management 	Parking Areas 
Drainage improvement/grading plan 	Permanence of use and availability of alternate uses 
Driveways 	Provisions for handicapped access 
Elevation of view of any required or proposed screening; including height, materials, percent of screening, and transitional elements 	Refuse collection 
Exterior lighting 	Setback 
Fire hydrant location and spacing 	Sidewalks 
Landscaping and open space plan, with a description of types and quantity of plant materials to be used 	Sight clearance at intersections/driveways 
Loading facilities 	Size 
Location height and design features on all signs 	Vehicular and pedestrian circulation 
Lot arrangements 	
 
Modifications to the site plan which would result in increased compatibility, or would mitigate potentially unfavorable impacts, or would be necessary to conform to applicable regulations and standards.  
Sec. 7.132. - Approval of Site Plan and Modifications. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission may require modification of a site plan as a prerequisite for approval (or allow a variance of Property Development Regulation for Section 7.111 D). Such modifications may include, but shall not be limited to, provisions for special yards, open spaces, buffers, fences, walls, and screening; for installation and maintenance of landscaping and erosion control measures; improvements of access and circulation; rearrangements of structures or activities within the site; location and character of signs and such other site plan features as necessary to ensure compatibility with surrounding existing, permitted or proposed physical features or uses or improve internal design based upon the results of the commission's application of the review and evaluation criteria.  
Sec. 7.133. - File Copy. 
The Director of Planning and Building shall maintain a copy of the approved site plan available for public inspection.  
Sec. 7.134. - Effective Date. 
The decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be effective ten (10) days after the date a decision is rendered unless appealed pursuant to Section 7.140 (Appeal to the City Council).  
Sec. 7.140. - Appeal to the City Council. 
A decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission may be appealed to the City Council by applicant or any other person within ten (10) days after the date of decision by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The appeal must be written and must identify the specific reasons for and basis of the appeal. The appeal shall be delivered to the City Secretary either personally within the ten (10) days or by United States mail postmarked within the ten (10) day period. 
Not more than forty (40) days following the filing of an appeal, the City Council shall hear the appeal of that applicant at a regular or special meeting of the City Council. The City Council shall review the action of the Planning and Zoning Commission and shall determine only whether or not the Planning and Zoning Commission acted within its authority under the guidelines set forth herein, and whether the decision of the Planning and Zoning was based upon the evidence presented to it which would fairly support the decision made with regard to the appealed issue. 
If the City Council concludes that the Planning and Zoning Commission acted without sufficient evidence, the City Council may grant the appeal and modify the site plan accordingly, or the City Council may grant the appeal and resubmit the site plan to Planning and Zoning for its further action to be within thirty (30) days from the date of the City Council meeting at which it is resubmitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission.  
Sec. 7.150. - Lapse of Approval. 
Unless a longer time shall be specifically established as a condition of approval, a Site Plan approval shall lapse and become void two (2) years following the date on which such approval became effective unless, prior to the expiration of two (2) years a building permit is issued and construction is commenced and diligently pursued toward completion, or a certificate of occupancy is issued for the use, or the site is occupied in accordance with the Site Plan if no building permit or certificate of occupancy is required. 
A Site Plan approval may be renewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission for an additional period of one (1) year, provided that prior to the expiration date, a written request for renewal is filed with the Director of Planning and Building. The application may be granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission upon its determination that no significant changes have occurred in the application of the criteria established in Section 7.131 above.  
Sec. 7.160. - Modification of Site Plan. 
Sections 7.111 through 7.150 shall apply to an application for modification, expansion or other change in an approved Site Plan, provided that minor revisions or modifications may be approved by the Director of Planning and Building if he/she determines that the circumstances or conditions applicable at the time of original approval have not changed and that the requested changes would not materially alter the Site Plan. Minor changes shall be noted on the master city or file copy of the Site Plan by the Board and shall be dated and signed by him or her.  
Sec. 7.170. - Suspension and Revocation. 
Upon violation of any term or feature of an approved Site Plan, the owner, or owners, of the site shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this ordinance and subject to all the fines and penalties hereof. The Site Plan may be enforced by any proceeding at law or in equity, and further, violations of an approved Site Plan will result in loss of certification of occupancy which shall not be restored until the violation is abated.  
Sec. 7.180. - Approval to Run with the Land. 
A Site Plan approval pursuant to these provisions shall run with the land and shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the site or structure which was the subject of the application.  
Sec. 7.190. - Site Plan Review Related to Other Approvals. 
The Site Plan review procedure is hereby declared to be subject to all provisions of this Zoning Ordinance and other City development codes and ordinances; and when in conflict therewith, anything contained within an approved Site Plan shall yield to such other provisions and shall be revised accordingly. 
If the proposed development which is the subject of a site plan application requires subdivision approval, annexation, rezoning, including conditional use permit, then each of said proceedings shall be conducted concurrently as nearly as practical. 
In the event the access of street dedications within an approved subdivision are based upon a particular circulation and access plan, and the same is noted on the subdivision plat, then in the event such circulation or access is altered or modified, the Planning and Zoning Commission may require that the subdivision plat be amended with regard to access or street dedications in accordance with the subdivision ordinance of the City of Fredericksburg.  
Sec. 7.200. - LOT STANDARDS. 
Required Lot Area 
The required area of a lot or parcel of land shall not be less than the area indicated in the various zones contained in this Ordinance, except as hereinafter provided. 
Boundary Lines 
Where a lot or parcel of land, which would otherwise have been shown as one (1) lot, is divided into two (2) or more lots because of City boundaries, the required area shall mean the total area of the parcel of land. 
Easement 
Where a lot or parcel of land subject to a street or highway easement, or other public or private easement where the owner of the servient tenancy does not have the right to use the entire surface area of the lot or parcel of land, such may be accepted as having the required area as indicated by the zone, provided that the required area for a lot or parcel of land is of the minimum lot size designated and the area covered by any such easement contains not more than ten percent (10%) of the required area. 
Lot Reduction 
No person shall divide any lot or parcel of land nor convey any lot or parcel of land or any portion thereof, if, as a result of such division or conveyance the area of any lot or parcel of land so reduced, or any lot or parcel of land so created, is in violation of the requirements of the zone in which it is located. 
Public Use Reduction 
Where a lot or parcel of land has the required area and after creation of such lot or parcel of land a part thereof is acquired for a public use other than for street or highway purposes, in any manner including dedication, condemnation or purchase, and if the remainder of such lot or parcel of land has at least eighty percent (80%) of the required area, such remainder shall be considered as having the required area. 
Street Reduction 
Where a lot or parcel of land has the required area, and after the creation of such lot or parcel of land, a part thereof is required for street or highway purposes exclusively, in any manner including dedication, condemnation or purchase, and if the remainder of such lot or parcel of land has at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the required area, then such remainder shall be considered as having the required area.  
Sec. 7.210. - Required Lot Width and Length. 
The required width and length of a lot or parcel of land shall not be less than the width and length indicated in this Ordinance except as hereinafter provided.  
Sec. 7.220. - Designation of Lot Lines. 
Where the identification or designation of the front, side or rear lot line is in doubt, as in the following situation, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine the identity or designation of lot lines: 
Corner lots or parcels of land with two (2) streets and/or highway frontages approximately equal in length. 
Through lots or parcels of land fronting on two (2) or more streets and/or highways.  
Sec. 7.230. - Dimensions Reduced By Public Use. 
If a lot or parcel of land has the required width or length and after creation of such lot or parcel of land a portion of it is acquired for public use in any manner including, but not limited to, dedication, condemnation, or purchase and if the remainder of such lot or parcel of land has at least seventy percent (70%) of the required width, but in no event less than thirty-five (35) feet, such remainder shall be considered as having the required width.  
Sec. 7.240. - Creation of a Parcel. 
No person shall divide any lot or parcel of land nor convey any lot or parcel of land or any portion thereof if, as a result of such conveyance, the width or length of any lot or parcel of land so reduce or any lot or parcel of land so created, is in violation of the required lot width and length of the zone in which the property is located.  
Sec. 7.300. - YARD AND SETBACK REGULATIONS.  
Sec. 7.310. - Purpose. 
Minimum yard requirements (setbacks) are established (see Appendix B) to ensure safety, light, air, privacy, building separation and open areas appropriate to each use and district, and to minimize impacts of uses and structures on one site upon adjoining sites.  
Sec. 7.320. - Special Front Yard Regulations. 
Where the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets is divided by two or more zoning districts, the front yard shall comply with the requirements of the most restrictive district for the entire frontage. 
Where a building line has been established by plat or ordinance and such line requires a greater or lesser front yard setback than is prescribed by this Ordinance for the district in which the building line is located, the required front yard shall comply with the building line so established by such ordinance or plat. 
The front yard shall be measured from the property line to the front face of the building, vertical supports of the covered porch or covered terrace, or attached accessory building. Eaves and roof extensions may project into the required front yard for a distance not to exceed four (4) feet and subsurface structures, fences, walls, platforms, or slabs may not project into the front yard to a height greater than forty-eight (48) inches above the average grade of the yard. 
Attached accessory buildings shall have a front yard not less than the main building. Detached accessory buildings shall be located in the area defined as the rear yard. 
Where lots have double frontage, running through from one street to another, a required front yard shall be provided on both streets unless a building line for accessory buildings has been established along one frontage on the plat or by ordinance, in which event only one required front yard need be observed. 
If twenty-five percent (25%) or more of the frontage on one side of a street between two intersecting streets in any residential district is improved with buildings, prior to the effective date of this ordinance, that have been observed an average front yard line varying from the standards herein established, then the average front yard existing in the block shall be observed, provided however, that this regulation shall not be interpreted as requiring a front yard line of more than twenty-five (25) feet.  
Sec. 7.330. - Special Side Yard Regulations. 
Every part of a required side yard shall be open and unobstructed, except for the ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses, cornices and roof overhangs and other architectural features projecting not to exceed three (3) feet into the required side yard, and root caves projecting not to exceed thirty-six (36) inches into the required side yard.  
Sec. 7.340. - Special Rear Yard Regulations. 
Every part of a required rear yard shall be open and unobstructed to the sky from a point thirty (30) inches above the general ground level of the graded lot, except for accessory buildings as permitted in Section 8.270, and the ordinary projections of window sills, belt courses, cornices, and roof overhangs and other architectural features projecting not to exceed three (3) feet into the required rear yard.  
Sec. 7.400. - MEASURE OF DISTANCES GENERALLY. 
Distances between structures, or between a structure and any property line, setback line, or other line or location prescribed by the Zoning Regulations shall be measured to the exterior face of the nearest wall or vertical support of the structure. Where a structure does not have a vertical wall or support, the point of measurement shall be as determined by the Director of Planning and Building, consistent with the purposes of the Zoning Ordinance and the provisions of the Building Code.  
Sec. 7.500. - HEIGHT REGULATIONS. 
Height limitations are established to ensure that buildings and structures shall not exceed heights generally compatible with purposes of the district and other uses therein, and shall not unnecessarily impact upon the privacy, views, or desirability of development of adjoining sites.  
Sec. 7.510. - Measurements of Height. 
Building. The height of a building shall be measured from the average of the highest and lowest grade adjacent to the building, to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, deck line of a mansard roof, or to the height of the highest gable on a pitched or hipped roof. 
Building Segment. The height of buildings having visually distinct segments, such as stepped or terrace construction or building segments connected by lower portions of the structure, shall be measured separately for each segment of the building. 
Linear Structures and Features. The height of linear features, such as fences, wall, hedges, screen plantings or line features shall be the average height measured from grade to the highest portion of such feature at all points along the feature. For purposes of applying maximum or minimum requirements, a linear feature which has an average height for its entire length in conformity with such requirements and does not exceed the requirement by more than fifteen percent (15%) at any point shall be deemed to comply.  
Sec. 7.520. - Permitted Exceptions to Height Limits. 
The following structures and features may exceed the maximum height for the district in which they are located, subject to limits specified herein: 
The following structures may exceed the height limit of any district by not more than fifteen percent (15%), or such height as may be necessary to comply with generally accepted engineering practices for stacks and vents, or any applicable Federal or State law, regulation, guideline or order, whichever is greater: 
Parapet walls, chimneys, vents and mechanical or safety features such as fire towers, stairways, elevator penthouses, heating and cooling equipment and protective covers. 
Ornamental towers, cupolas, domes and spires not designed for occupancy. 
The following structures are exempt from the height limit: 
Radio and television receiving antennae of the type customarily used for home radio and television receivers. 
Flagpoles. 
Radio towers operated by licensed amateur radio operators no more than sixty (60) feet in height plus fifteen (15) feet for antennae. A Conditional Use Permit shall be required to exceed tower and antennae height of sixty (60) feet and fifteen (15) feet respectively.  
Sec. 7.530. - Fences, Walls and Visibility. 
All fences, walls, shrubs, trees, signs or other obstructions shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the following standards: 
(a)  All fences, walls, and hedges, located in front of the minimum required front yard line as specified herein, shall not be constructed or maintained to a height exceeding four (4) feet above the grade of the lot. 
(b)  All fences and walls located to the rear of the minimum required front yard setback shall not exceed eight feet in height. Fences or walls which conform to the minimum front, side and rear yards for buildings may be erected to any maximum height specified for a building on the lot or tract where such fence or wall is located 
(c)  In addition to the provisions of (a) and (b) above, the following will apply to corner lots. 
No fence, wall, shrub, tree, sign or other obstruction shall encroach into the area hereinafter defined as the twenty-five (25) foot visibility triangle. The limbs and foliage of trees existing as of April 1, 2009, may remain if an unobstructed cross-visibility at a level between three (3) feet and seven (7) feet in height from the road surface allowing for a four (4) foot visual clearance is maintained. 
The twenty-five (25) foot visibility triangle is derived by measuring back twenty-five (25) feet along the curb (or edge of paved street if there is no curb) from the street corner of both streets, or other rights of way, that forms the point of intersection of the projection of the curb lines (or street paving if there is no curb) from the property. When both distances are measured, they will create two sides of the triangle. Then both sides of the triangle shall be connected by a line between both measured points. This completes the third side of the triangle and gives a line of angle to follow. All fences, walls, shrubs, trees, signs or other obstructions shall be located behind the measured triangle. 
All fences, walls, shrubs, trees, signs or other obstructions shall be located behind the measured triangle. Only grass and/or groundcover will be permitted inside the triangle. 
 
A.  Front yard set back is determined by the recorded lot orientation, not by address or orientation of structure. 
B.  Maximum height for the front yard fence is [four feet] (4'). This includes any gates, arbors, entrances or other structures built into the fence. 
C.  Maximum fence height other than the front yard is eight [feet] (8'). 
D.  Fences and landscaping on corner lots must adhere to the Twenty-five[-foot] (25') triangle requirement. As shown above, a fence shall be built on an angle. There shall not be any landscaping within the triangle area, other than ground cover and/or grass. 
(d)  Vegetation on or within the Right-of Way, overhanging the paved street area, shall be maintained at a vertical clearance of fourteen (14) feet. 
(Ord. No. 19-006, § 7.530, 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 7.540. - Curbs. 
Street curbs shall be constructed for all un-curbed lots or tracts subject to a Conditional Use Permit, Zoning Change, Site Plan Review, or Building Permit. (For undeveloped properties and expansions or changes of existing developed properties requiring an increase in off-street parking or vehicle reuse area.)  
Sec. 7.600. - RESIDENTIAL DENSITY. 
Residential density regulations are established to coordinate the intensity of residential development with existing and planned public service and utility capabilities, to ensure residential development compatible with existing and anticipated uses of nearby property, and to promote the growth, population distribution, and development policies of the Comprehensive Plan.  
Sec. 7.610. - Townhouse and Condominium Standards. 
A.  Townhouse Residential. Townhouse residential use is a permitted use in the R-2 and R-3 districts. Townhouse residential use is permitted in the C-1, C-2 and CBD districts with a Conditional use permit. All Townhouse residential uses must meet the following limitations: 
1.  Minimum Lot Size: 2,500 square feet, per dwelling unit. 
2.  Minimum Lot Width: 20 feet per dwelling unit. 
3.  Minimum Lot Depth: 100 feet. 
4.  Minimum Front Yard Setback: 20 feet. 
5.  Minimum Interior Side Yard Setback: 7½ feet, measured from the unattached side wall of an end unit to the interior side lot line. Within a townhouse project there shall be at least 15 feet of separation or combined side yard between each group of townhouses. 
6.  Minimum Exterior Side Yard Setback: 20 feet, measured from the unattached side wall of an end unit to the side lot line abutting a street. 
7.  Minimum Rear Yard Setback: 10 feet. 
8.  Maximum Building Length: No group of attached townhouses shall exceed 200 feet in length. 
9.  Coverage: No more than 55 percent of the total site area may be covered with buildings and required parking spaces. The remaining 45 percent may include driveways, sidewalks, patios, grass and other landscaped areas. 
10.  Private Yards: Each lot shall include a front yard with not less than 300 square feet of area. Not more than 50 percent of the required private yard may be occupied by a driveway. Parking spaces shall not be included in the computation of the required private yard area. A wall or solid fence not less than five feet in height is required on side lot lines where the required private yard adjoins such lot lines. A patio cover or roof may cover up to 25 percent of the private yard. 
11.  Maximum Density: 3,600 square feet of site area per dwelling unit. 
12.  Parking and Driveways: 
a.  Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each townhouse. 
b.  No driveway located in front of a townhouse lot shall exceed 21 feet in width. 
c.  One-way common driveways shall be at least ten feet in width, and two-way driveways shall be at least 18 feet in width. 
d.  Each building shall be directly accessible from a public street or from an unobstructed fire lane. 
e.  Individual driveways shall not open onto streets with a functional classification of collector or greater. When townhouse units are located on a collector street, the driveway entrances shall be limited to providing access to a common interior driveway located at the rear of the townhouses. 
13.  Other requirements: Each townhouse shall be located on an individual lot. There shall be at least four connected units in each project. 
B.  Condominium Residential. Condominium residential use is a permitted use in the R-2 and R-3 districts. Condominium residential use is permitted in the C-1, C-2 and CBD districts with a Conditional use permit. All Townhouse residential uses must meet the following limitations: 
1.  Minimum of four dwelling units. 
2.  Minimum site area for condominium residential use shall be 14,000 square feet. 
3.  Maximum residential density for condominium use shall be 3,500 square feet of site area for each dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 18-014, § 7.610, 12-1-2008)  
Sec. 7.700. - LOT COVERAGE REGULATIONS. 
Lot coverage limitations are established to ensure that building coverage and impervious surface coverage of each lot are compatible with the nature of uses allowable in each district, with environmental objectives of the Comprehensive Plan, and to avoid overcrowding of sites with buildings and paved or impermeable surface materials.  
Sec. 7.710. - Measurement. 
Building coverage of a lot shall be deemed the total horizontal area of all buildings and roofed or covered spaces on the lot, expressed as a percent to total lot area. Eaves and roof overhangs extending not more than three (3) feet from the supporting walls or members of a building shall not be counted as building coverage. 
Impervious coverage of a lot shall include the total horizontal area of all buildings, roofed or covered spaces, paved surface areas, walkways and driveways, and any other site improvements or structures contributing to run-off greater than would occur on the site in its natural state. Pools, including but not limited to swimming pools, reflecting pools and fountains, are excluded from this calculation. 
Subsurface areas shall be excluded from building coverage and impervious coverage calculations. 
The 100 year flood plain area of a lot shall not be included in the calculation of building coverage or impervious coverage.  
Sec. 7.800. - OFF-STREET PARKING PROCEDURES.  
Sec. 7.810. - Title and Purposes. 
Section 7.800 through 7.865 shall be known as the Off-Street Parking Regulations. These regulations require off-street and loading facilities proportional to the need created by each use in order to ensure functionally adequate, aesthetically pleasing, and secure off-street parking facilities. Development regulations and design standards are intended to ensure the usefulness of parking facilities, protect the public safety and, where appropriate, to mitigate potential adverse impacts on adjacent land uses.  
Sec. 7.820. - Basic Regulations: Vehicle Parking/Loading & Unloading. 
Off-street parking facilities shall be provided for any new building constructed for any new use established. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided for any addition or enlargement of an existing building or use, and for any change of occupancy or manner of operation that would result in additional parking spaces being required, provided that the additional parking shall be required only for such addition, enlargement, or change and not for the entire building or use. 
Facilities being used for off-street parking on the effective date of the Zoning Ordinance shall not be reduced in capacity to less than the number of spaces prescribed, nor altered in design or function to less than the minimum standards prescribed in the Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. 
For sites with more than one use and for adjacent sites served by a common parking facility, the parking requirement shall be the total number of spaces required for each site or use, except as adjusted pursuant to Section 7.850. 
Parking facilities constructed or substantially reconstructed subsequent to the effective date of the Zoning Regulations, whether or not required, shall conform to the design Standards set forth in Section 7.860. 
All required facilities shall be maintained for the duration of the use requiring such areas. Such facilities shall be used exclusively for the temporary parking of passenger automobiles, motor vehicles, or light trucks not exceeding one ton in capacity, and shall not be used for the sale, display, or storage of merchandise, or for the storage or repair of vehicles or equipment. 
All required parking facilities shall be located on the same site as the use for which such facilities are required, except as authorized pursuant to Section 7.850. 
No use shall be required to provide more spaces than prescribed by these regulations or prescribed by the Director of Planning and Building in accordance with these Zoning Regulations, or prescribed pursuant to a Conditional Use Permit or a Variance. Where parking spaces are provided in excess of such requirements, the spaces may be considered as meeting the requirement for another use pursuant to Section 7.850. 
Head in parking which requires backing onto a public street, that is, parking which does not provide off-street space for turning a vehicle, is prohibited except in the R-2, R-3 and C-1 districts upon local streets only, provided that such parking does not exceed five (5) spaces and is located at least sixty (60) feet from any intersection of such local street and an arterial or collector street. Such parking shall be considered off-street parking. 
Uses or changes in use requiring three (3) or less off-street parking spaces in the CBD Zoning District shall be exempt from providing off-street parking. In the case of expansions of use, the normal parking requirements hereof will apply to the entire property, and the parking spaces exempted under this Subsection I as well as any additionally required ones will be provided at the time of expansion. 
Adequate loading and unloading facilities shall be provided onsite. Loading and unloading of commercial vehicles or customer vehicles on residential streets is prohibited. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Table 7.863, a minimum of five (5) parking spaces shall be provided for any single industrial use located individually on a site and served by a separate parking facility, and a minimum of ten (10) parking spaces shall be provided for any two or more industrial uses located on the same site and served by a common parking facility. 
There shall be no off-street parking requirement for any use occupying a historic structure as defined and listed site in the Fredericksburg Historic Resource Survey. Expansions and enlargements shall be subject to all provisions of Section 7.800.  
Sec. 7.825. - Special Provisions Applicable To Central Fredericksburg. 
A.  Special parking requirements shall apply within designated portions of Central Fredericksburg in order to further enhance the unique historical character and discourage inharmonious parking facilities in such historical districts or on sites occupied by historic structures and to reduce intrusion on pedestrian-oriented street frontages by parking facility access. 
B.  The Special parking requirements and provisions in this Section shall apply to all areas of blocks 15, 16, 21, 22, 27, 28, 33, 34, 42, 43, 47, 48, 52, 53, 57, 58, 67 and 68 of the Fredericksburg Addition, and which is further described as those blocks bordered by Austin Street, San Antonio Street, Elk Street and Bowie Street. 
C.  Special Provisions. 
1.  For those businesses which construct their own off-street, off-premises parking, the distance to the parking lot may be extended fifty percent (50%) in addition to the provisions in Section 7.850. 
2.  When any existing building is: (1) converted to another use; or (2) has the usable floor area within the existing building perimeter enlarged, rehabilitated or remodeled, without enlarging said building perimeter, then said building conversion or improvement shall not require additional off-street parking, other than the number of existing off-street parking spaces which are utilized by said building. 
3.  For new buildings or expanded building space, the following uses shall provide fifty percent (50%) of the off-street parking requirements of Table 7.863. 
4.  The provisions as provided herein shall not apply for sites where a historic structure is removed and a new building built. 
5.  The Special Parking Provisions shall not apply to properties utilized as Bed and Breakfasts, hotels, motels, or other lodgings. 
(Ord. No. 25-017, 9-21-2015; Ord. No. 2019-10, § 1, 4-15-2019)  
Sec. 7.830. - Schedule of Off-Street Parking Requirements. 
Parking facilities for each use shall be provided in accordance with the minimum requirements prescribed in Table 7.863. 
Where the application of Table 7.863 results in a fractional requirement, a fraction of 0.5 or greater shall be resolved to the higher whole number. 
For the purposes of this section, requirements shall be based on gross floor area, but shall not include enclosed or covered areas used for off-street parking or loading. 
Where requirements are established on the basis of seats or person capacity, the Standard Building Code provisions applicable at the time of determination shall be used to define capacity. 
Facilities requiring accessibility to the handicapped shall provide parking spaces as determined by the Standard Building Code.  
Sec. 7.840. - Parking for Compact Cars. 
In each parking facility of fifty (50) or more spaces, a minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) and a maximum of forty percent (40%) of the spaces may be designed and reserved for small or compact cars. Spaces for compact vehicles shall be located in a manner affording desirability and usability equivalent to standard spaces. Compact parking spaces shall be located in groups of not less than five (5) contiguous spaces, and shall be identified by appropriate directions and marking.  
Sec. 7.850. - Off Site or Remote Parking. 
The Planning and Zoning Commission may approve (by the Site Plan Review) location of a portion of the parking required for a use on another site, pursuant to this section. 
Off site parking shall be located within 300 feet of the use which it serves, measured as the shortest practical walking distance from the nearest off site parking space to the nearest entrance to the building or use which it serves. 
In determining whether to approve off site parking, the Planning & Zoning Commission shall consider all relevant factors, including: 
The location of the use and the proposed off site parking. 
Existing and potential parking demand created by other uses in the vicinity. 
The characteristics of the use, including employee and customer parking demand, hours of operation and projected convenience and frequency of use of the off site parking. 
Adequacy, convenience and safety of pedestrian access to off site parking. 
Traffic patterns on adjacent streets, and proposed access to the off site parking. 
The report and recommendation of the Director of Planning and Building and the Director of Public Works. 
The Commission may require such guarantees as it deems necessary to ensure the continued availability and usability of any off site parking. 
Handicapped parking spaces shall not be located in an off site parking facility.  
Sec. 7.860. - Design Standards. 
Standards. Design standards are established by this section to set basic minimum dimensions and guidelines for design construction, and maintenance of parking and loading facilities. 
Parking Space Dimensions. The following basic dimensions shall be observed for parking spaces. 
Each standard parking space shall consist of a rectangular area not less than 8.5 wide and 18.5 feet long. Each compact parking space shall consist of a rectangular area not less than 7.5 feet wide and 15.0 feet long. Each space shall have a vertical clearance of not less than 7.5 feet. Each space shall be independently accessible. 
Each parking space designated for use by the handicapped shall consist of a rectangular area not less than 12.5 feet wide and 18.5 feet long, shall have a vertical clearance not less than 7.5 feet, shall be located in an area not exceeding a two percent (2%) slope, and shall be located near and convenient to a level or ramp entrance accessible to handicapped persons. Parking spaces for the handicapped shall be signed and restricted for use by the handicapped only. 
Each parking space shall have adequate drives, aisles, and turning and maneuvering areas for access and usability, and shall at all times have access to a public street or alley. 
Parking Facility Design. Minimum parking facility design standards are illustrated in Table 7.862. Additional supplemental guidelines and standards for parking facility design, internal layout, acceptable turning radii and pavement slope, vehicular and pedestrian circulation, and other design features may be adopted by resolution of the Planning and Zoning Commission, upon recommendation of the Director of Planning and Building. 
Paving and Drainage. The following basic standards shall be observed: 
In all districts parking and loading facilities shall be an all weather surface. Materials may be pervious (see Appendix D for impervious coverage requirements). All parking and loading facilities shall be appropriately marked with lines, buttons, or other approved markers. 
All parking facilities shall be graded and provided with permanent storm drainage facilities, meeting the construction specifications set by the City Engineer. Surfacing, curbing and drainage improvements shall be sufficient to preclude free flow of water onto adjacent properties or public streets or alleys and to provide adequate drainage. 
Curbing shall be provided along the parking facility area for all streets upon which it fronts. 
Safety Features. Parking facilities shall meet the following standards: 
Safety barriers, protective bumpers or curbing, and directional markers shall be provided to ensure safety, efficient utilization, protection of landscaping and prevention of encroachment onto adjoining public or private property. 
Visibility of and between pedestrians, bicyclists and motorists shall be ensured when entering individual parking spaces, when circulating within a parking facility and when entering and exiting a parking facility. 
Internal circulation patterns, and the location and traffic directions of all access drives, shall be designed, designated and maintained in accordance with accepted principles of traffic engineering and traffic safety. 
All ingress and egress shall be constructed in accordance with Section G, Access Standards. 
Lighting. Lights provided to illuminate any parking facility or paved area shall, to the maximum extent feasible, be designed to reflect away from any residential use. 
Access Standards. 
The width of a residential access from a public street to an off-street parking area or other vehicular use area shall not exceed twenty-one (21) feet. Exception: A residence with an attached three car garage may have up to thirty-one (31) feet. 
The width of a commercial, industrial, or civic use access, from a public street to an off-street parking area or other vehicular use area, shall not exceed forty (40) feet. 
No more than one access shall be permitted for any street frontage up to two hundred (200) lineal feet except that single family residential lots located in residential zoning districts are permitted two accesses provided the lot has a minimum of one hundred (100) feet of street frontage along the side of the lot which is to contain two accesses. Properties situated at the corner of two intersecting public streets shall provide a minimum corner clearance calculated as street frontage divided by five (5), but in no case less than twenty-five (25) feet. 
No more than two (2) accesses shall be permitted for any street frontage over two hundred (200) lineal feet but less than six hundred (600) lineal feet of street frontage. The distance between access or from the corner of two intersecting public streets shall provide a minimum separation as calculated by street frontage divided by five (5), but in no case more than one hundred (100) feet. 
Any frontage over six hundred (600) lineal feet is considered a special design requiring special engineering review and determinations, and more than two (2) accesses may be permitted only if deemed appropriate by the Planning and Zoning Commission (or the Director of Planning and Building if the development plan need not to be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission). 
Existing developed properties that do not have street curbs and street curbs are planned to be constructed, and a single driveway or two (2) driveways clearly exist (i.e.: each drive has a specific location and separate function) then the requirements as provided herein shall not apply. In no case shall there be more than two (2) accesses for frontage less than two hundred (200) feet. The second driveway shall be closed at the time of curbing if it imposes or creates a potential hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic as determined by the Director of Planning and Building. 
The above standards shall be applicable to any property constituting a separate tract or platted lot or which has or will be developed jointly or under one site plan. 
Refuse Collection and Storage. 
All businesses shall provide suitable trash and refuse storage areas which are designed and constructed to prevent view from the street and to prevent refuse from being displaced about the site, into adjacent properties or public right-of-way and to permit safe, easy removal of refuse by truck or hand. 
_____
TABLE: 7.861 
MINIMUM PARKING FACILITY STANDARDS 
A Angle of Parking (Degrees) 	B Width of Stall 	C Depth of Stall 90 to Aisle 	D Width of Aisle 	E Width of Stall Parallel To Aisle 	F Width Module 
 
Parking Spaces 					
30 	8.5 	16.9 	12.5 	17.0 	47 
45 	8.5 	17.5 	13.0 	12.0 	48 
60 	8.5 	19.0 	18.0 	9.8 	56 
75 	8.5 	19.5 	25.0 	8.8 	64 
90 	8.5 	18.5 	28.0 	8.5 	65 
90 	9.0 	18.5 	26.0 	9.0 	63 
90 	9.5 	18.5 	25.0 	9.5 	62 
 
Parking Spaces 					
30 	7.5 	14.0 	12.5 	15.0 	41 
45 	7.5 	15.9 	13.0 	10.6 	45 
60 	7.5 	16.7 	18.0 	8.7 	52 
75 	7.5 	16.4 	18.0 	7.8 	51 
90 	7.5 	15.0 	18.0 	7.5 	48 
 
Parking Spaces 					
0 	8.5 	8.5 	12.5 	22.0 	30 
		Width 		Length 	
 
_____
 
_____
PARKING FACILITY STANDARDS 
DIAGRAM ILLUSTRATES FACILITY MEASUREMENTS AS REQUIRED BY TABLE 7.861 
TABLE: 7.863 
OFF-STREET PARKING 
All requirements based on gross square feet. 
USE CLASSIFICATION 	MINIMUM OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS 
	
Single Family Residential 	2 spaces per dwelling unit 
Patio Home Residential 	2 spaces per dwelling unit 
Duplex Residential 	1 space per dwelling unit 
Townhouse Residential 	2 spaces per dwelling unit 
Condominium Residential 	2 spaces per dwelling unit 
Multiple Family Residential and Group Residential 	Efficiency: 1 space per dwelling unit One Bedroom: 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit Two or more bedrooms: 2 spaces per dwelling unit 
Manufactured Home Residential 	2 spaces per Manufactured Home Space or lot 
COMMERCIAL USE TYPES 	
Administrative and Business Offices 	1 space per 400 square feet 
Agricultural Sales and Services 	See Schedule A 
Automotive Rentals 	See Schedule A 
Automotive Repair Services 	2 spaces per mechanic or repair stall whichever is greater 
Automotive Sales 	See Schedule A 
Automotive Washing 	Queue Line space equivalent to 1 times the service capacity of the use 
Building Maintenance Services 	See Schedule A 
Business Support Services 	See Schedule A 
Business or Trade School 	1 space per 5 person capacity 
Campground 	1 space per camping unit 
Cocktail Lounge 	1 space per 3 persons capacity 
Commercial Off-Street Parking Facility 	No requirement 
Communications Services 	1 space per 500 square feet 
Construction Sales and Services 	See Schedule A 
Consumer Convenience Services 	See Schedule B 
Consumer Repair Services 	1 space per 400 square feet 
Convenience Storage 	1 space per 2000 square feet 
Convenience Store/Self Serve Gasoline 	1 space per 300 square feet and 1 space per gasoline pump 
Dance Halls/Meeting Halls 	1 per 40 square feet or 2 per 6 seats for patron use 
Dance Halls (Liquor Sales) 	1 per 4 patron seating 
Drive through facility, as an ancillary use 	May be adjusted through the Site Plan Review or Conditional Use procedure 
Equipment Repair Services 	See Schedule A 
Equipment Sales 	See Schedule A 
Exterminating Services 	1.5 spaces per 1000 square feet 
Financial Services 	1 space per 400 square feet 
Food Sales 	1 space per 300 square feet 
Funeral Services 	1 space per 4 person capacity 
General Retail Services 	1 per 400 square feet 
Hotel/Motel 	First 50 Rooms: 1.10 spaces per room Each additional room over 50 rooms: 1.0 space per room Other use activities within hotel/motel: 100% of Table 7.863 requirements 
Indoor Entertainment 	1 per 100 square feet or 1 space per 4 seats 
Indoor Sports and Recreation 	1 per 400 square feet 
Kennels 	1 space per 750 square feet of kennel space 
Laundry Services 	1 space per 200 square feet or 4 customer spaces and 1 space per employee, whichever is greater 
Liquor Sales 	1 space per 400 square feet 
Medical Offices 	1 space per 300 square feet of exam, testing, waiting rooms & offices 
Outdoor Entertainment 	See Schedule B 
Outdoor Sports and Recreation 	See Schedule B 
Pawn Shop Services 	1 space per 400 square feet 
Personal Improvement 	1 space per 300 square feet 
Personal Services 	1 space per 300 square feet 
Pet Services 	1 space per 400 square feet 
Professional Offices 	1 space per 400 square feet 
Research Services 	1 space per 400 square feet 
Restaurant 	1 space per 4 seats, plus cocktail lounge requirements 
Restaurant, Drive-In/Fast Food 	3 spaces per each 100 square feet within the customer service and dining area 
Scrap and Salvage Services 	See Schedule A 
Service Station 	1 space per 2 gas pumps plus 1 space per service person 
Shopping Center 	1 space per 200 square feet 
Stables 	See Schedule B 
Vehicle Storage 	No requirement 
Veterinary Services 	1 space per 500 square feet 
INDUSTRIAL USE TYPES (See Section 7.820) 	
Basic Industry 	See Schedule A 
Custom Manufacturing 	See Schedule A 
General Warehousing 	See Schedule A 
Light Manufacturing 	See Schedule A 
Limited Warehousing 	See Schedule A 
Resource Extraction 	1 per employee based on the largest shift plus 25% to cover shift change 
Stockyards 	1 per employee based on the largest shift 
CIVIC USE TYPES 	
Administrative Services 	1 space per 400 square feet 
Aviation Facilities 	See Schedule B 
Cemetery 	See Schedule B 
Club or Lodge 	1 space per 5 persons capacity 
College and University Facilities 	See Schedule B 
Community Recreation 	1 space per 5 persons capacity 
Convalescent Services 	1 space per 4 beds patient capacity, plus 1 space per 2 employees (Maximum shift) 
Cultural Services 	1 per 400 square feet 
Day Care Services 	1½ space per teacher, administrator, or day care provider 
Detention Facilities 	See Schedule B 
Guidance Services 	1 per 400 square feet 
Hospital Services (General) 	1 space per bed 
Hospital Services (Limited) 	1 space per 200 square feet of examination, treating, waiting rooms and offices 
Local Utility Services 	See Schedule B 
Maintenance and Service Facilities 	See Schedule A 
Major Utility Facilities 	See Schedule A 
Military Installations 	See Schedule B 
Park and Recreation Services 	See Schedule B 
Postal Facilities 	See Schedule B 
Public and Private Primary Educational Facilities 	2 spaces per classroom plus public assembly requirement for auditorium or assembly hall 
Public and Private Secondary Educational Facilities 	1½ off-street parking space per classroom and one space for each three students anticipated to be enrolled in the 11th and 12th grades 
Public Assembly 	1 space per 5 persons capacity 
Railroad Facilities 	See Schedule B 
Religious Assembly (Church) 	1 space per 4 seats in sanctuary 
Safety Services 	See Schedule B 
Transportation Terminals 	See Schedule B 
AGRICULTURAL USE TYPES 	
Horticulture 	1 per 1000 square feet 
 
TABLE: 7.864 
SCHEDULE A 
Specific off-street parking requirements to be determined by the Director of Planning and Building based on the following minimum requirements for applicable functions or activities associated with each use: 
ACTIVITY 	REQUIREMENT 
Office or administration activity 	1 space per 400 square feet 
Indoor sales, service or display 	1 space per 750 square feet 
Outdoor sales, service or display 	1 space per 1200 square feet 
Indoor storage, warehousing, equipment servicing or manufacturing 	1 space per 1,000 square feet or 1 space per employee, based on the largest shift 
Outdoor storage, equipment servicing or manufacturing 	1 space per 2,300 square feet 
 
TABLE: 7.865 
SCHEDULE B 
The minimum off-street motor vehicle parking and loading requirements for uses subject to Schedule B shall be determined by the Director of Planning and Building. In making such determination, the Director of Planning and Building shall consider the requirements applicable to similar uses, the location and characteristics of the use, and appropriate traffic engineering and planning data.  
Sec. 7.900. - LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING REGULATIONS. 
The purpose of landscaping and screening requirements is to improve certain set-back and yard areas, including off-street vehicular parking and open-lot sales and service areas, for all uses other than single-family, duplex, triplex or four-plex residential uses, and to aid in stabilizing the environment's ecological balance by contributing to the process of air purification, oxygen regeneration, ground water recharge and storm water runoff retardation, while at the same time aiding in noise, glare and heat abatement, and to protect and preserve the appearance, character and value of surrounding neighborhoods.  
Sec. 7.910. - Specific Definitions. 
The following specific definitions shall apply to the landscaping and screening regulations contained in this Ordinance. 
Landscaping. Landscaping shall consist of any of the following or combination thereof: material such as, but not limited to grass, ground covers, shrubs, flowers, vines, hedges, trees, native plant materials, planters, brick, stone or natural forms, water forms, aggregate or other landscape features, but not including the use of smooth concrete or asphalt. The use of brick, stone, aggregate or other inorganic materials shall not predominate over the use of organic plant material. 
Shrubs. Self-supporting, woody species as normally grown in Gillespie county. 
Dripline. The periphery of the area beneath a tree that would be encompassed by perpendicular lines dropped from the furthermost edges of the crown of the tree.  
Sec. 7.920. - Landscaping Requirements. 
Landscaping requirements for certain yard areas and off-street parking, and other vehicular use areas (other than single-family, duplex, triplex, and fourplex residential uses) are as follows: 
a.  All areas used for the display or parking of any and all types of vehicles, boats or heavy construction equipment, whether such vehicles, boats or equipment are self-propelled or not (herein referred to as "off-street parking areas"), and all areas upon which vehicles traverse the property as a function of the primary use (hereinafter referred to as "other vehicular use areas"), including, but not limited to, activities of a drive-in nature such as filling stations, grocery stores, banks and restaurants shall conform to the minimum landscaping requirements herein provided. Exceptions include: (1) Areas used for parking or other vehicular uses under, on, or within buildings; (2) Parking areas and other vehicular use areas serving One-Family, Duplex, Triplex, or Fourplex uses as normally such residential areas are voluntary landscaped; and (3) Expansion and changes on the use of existing improved properties requiring an increase in off-street parking spaces and/or vehicle use area of less than twenty-five percent (25%) more than the number of off-street parking spaces existing at the time of the proposed expansion or change in use. 
b.  Installation. All landscaping shall be installed in a good workmanship like manner and according to accepted good planting procedures with the quality of plant materials as herein described. All elements of landscaping, except plant material other than hedges, shall be installed so as to conform to all other applicable ordinances or City Codes. Landscaped areas shall require protection from vehicular encroachment as herein provided. Landscaping may be installed within the next planting season if the time of development is an inappropriate time to plant, but all landscaping must be installed no later than one year from date of occupancy of the property. 
c.  Maintenance. The owners, tenants and their agents, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping provided for under this ordinance. All landscaping shall be maintained in good condition so as to present a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance and shall be kept free from refuse and debris. All landscaped areas shall be provided with either: (1) a readily available water supply with at least one outlet located within one hundred (100) feet of all plant material maintained; or (2) an underground sprinkler system. Landscaped areas adjacent to pavement areas shall be protected with curbs or equivalent barricades. 
d.  Plant Material. 
1.  Trees. Trees shall be species having an average mature spread of crown of at least (15) feet and having a trunk(s) which can be maintained in a clean condition over five (5) feet of clear wood. Trees having an average mature spread crown less than fifteen (15) feet may be substituted by grouping the same so as to create the equivalent of a fifteen (15) foot crown spread. Tree species shall be a minimum of one and one-half (1½) inch diameter. 
2.  Shrubs and Hedges. Shrubs shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) inches in height when measured immediately after planting. Except as provided for herein, hedges shall be planted and maintained so as to form a continuous, unbroken, and solid visual screen within a reasonable time after planting. 
3.  Vines. Vines shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches in height immediately after planting and may be used in conjunction with fences, screens, or walls to meet physical barrier requirements as herein specified. 
4.  Ground Covers. Ground covers used in lieu of grass in whole or in part shall be planted in such a manner as to present appearance and reasonably complete coverage within three (3) months after planting. 
5.  Lawn Grass. Grass areas shall be planted in species normally grown as permanent lawns in Fredericksburg. Grass areas may be sodded, plugged, sprigged, or seeded except that solid sod shall be used in swales or other areas subject to erosion. In areas where other than solid sod or grass seed is used, rye grass seed shall be sown for immediate effect and protection until further coverage is otherwise achieved. 
e.  Required Landscaping Adjacent to Public Right-of-Way. 
On the site of a building or open lot use providing an off-street parking area or other vehicular use area, where such area will not be entirely screened visually by an intervening building or structure from any abutting right-of-way, excluding dedicated alleys, there shall be provided landscaping between such area and such right-of-way, as follows: 
A strip of land at least five (5) feet in depth located between the abutting right-of-way and the off-street parking area or other vehicular use area which is exposed to an abutting right-of-way shall be landscaped. Such landscaping shall include one tree for each fifty (50) lineal feet or fraction thereof of right-of-way (street) frontage. Such trees shall be located between the abutting right-of-way and off-street parking area or other vehicular use area and shall be planted in a planting area of at least twenty-five (25) square feet with each dimension at least (5) feet in length. In addition, a hedge, wall, or other durable landscape barrier of at least two (2) feet in height shall be placed along the perimeter of such landscaped strip. If such durable barrier is of non-living material, for each ten (10) feet thereof, one shrub or vine shall be planted abutting such barrier but need not be spaced ten (10) feet apart. Such shrubs or veins shall be planted along the street side of such barrier unless they are of sufficient height at the same time of planting to be readily visible over the top of such barrier. The remainder of the required landscaped areas shall be landscaped with grass, ground cover or other landscape treatment, excluding paving. 
All property other than the required landscaped strip lying between the right-of-way and off-street parking area or other vehicular use area shall be landscaped with grass or other ground cover. 
Necessary access from the public right-of-way through all such landscaping shall be permitted to service the parking or other vehicular use areas. 
f.  Perimeter Landscaping Related to Abutting Properties. 
On the site of a building or structure or open lot use providing an off-street parking area or other vehicular use area, where such areas will not be entirely screened visually by an intervening building or structure from abutting property, that portion of such area not so screened shall be provided with a wall, fence, hedge or other durable landscape barrier not greater than eight (8) feet in height, nor less than three and one-half (3½) feet in height to form a continuous screen between the off-street parking area or other vehicular use area and such abutting property. Such landscape barrier shall be located between the common lot line and the off-street parking areas or other vehicular use areas are accomplished. 
If such barrier consists all or in part of plant materials, such plant materials shall be planted in a planting strip of not less than two and one-half (2½) feet in width. 
In addition, one tree shall be provided for each seventy-five (75) lineal feet of such landscape barrier or fractional part thereof. Such trees shall be located between the common lot line and the off-street parking area or other vehicular use area. Each such tree shall be planted in at least twenty-five (25) square feet of planting area with each dimension at least five (5) feet in length. Each such planting area shall be landscaped with grass, ground cover or other landscape material, excluding paving, in addition to the required tree. 
The provisions of this subsection shall not be applicable in the following situations: 
Where a property line abuts a dedicated alley, or to those portions of the property that are opposite a building or other structure, located on the abutting property. 
Where a proposed parking area or other vehicular use abuts an existing hedge, wall or other durable landscape barrier on an abutting property, said existing barrier may be used to satisfy the landscape barrier requirements of this subsection, provided that said existing barrier meets all applicable standards of this Ordinance and protection of hedges against vehicular encroachment is provided. 
Where the abutting property is zoned for business uses, only the tree provision with its planting area as prescribed in this subsection shall be required; however, the number of trees may be reduced to one (1) tree for each one hundred twenty-five (125) lineal feet or fractional part thereof. 
g.  Parking Area Interior Landscaping. 
Off-street parking areas shall have at least ten (10) square feet of interior landscaping for each parking space, excluding those spaces abutting a perimeter for which landscaping is required by other sections hereof and excluding all parking spaces which are directly served by an aisle abutting and running parallel to such a perimeter. In addition, other vehicular use areas shall have one (1) square foot of landscaped area for each one hundred (100) square feet or fraction thereof of paved area for the first 50,000 square feet, excluding the first 5,000 square feet of paved area, plus one (1) square foot of landscape area for each two hundred (200) square feet or fraction thereof of paved area for all paved area over 50,000 square feet; provided, however, in areas zoned for industrial use these requirements shall be reduced by 50%. 
Where the property contains both parking areas and other vehicular use areas, the two types of areas may be separated for the purposes of determining the other vehicular use first multiplying the total number of parking spaces by four hundred (400) and subtracting the resulting figure from the total square footage of the paved area. Each separate landscaped area shall contain a minimum of fifty (50) square feet, with each dimension at least five (5) feet in length, and shall include at least one (1) tree having a clear trunk at least five (5) feet in height, with the remaining area adequately landscaped with shrubs, ground cover or other authorized landscaping material not to exceed three (3) feet in height. 
The total number of trees shall not be less than one (1) for each one hundred (100) square feet or fraction (over one-half) thereof of required interior landscaped area. 
Such landscaped areas shall be located in such a manner as to divide and break up the expanse of paving. 
In other vehicular use areas where the strict application of this subsection will seriously limit the function of said area the required landscaping may be located near the perimeter of the paved area, including such perimeters which may be adjacent to a building on the site. Such interior landscaping that is relocated as herein provided shall be in addition to the perimeter landscaping requirements of subsection 7.920e. of this Ordinance. 
The front of a vehicle may encroach upon any interior landscaped area where said area is at least three and one-half (3½) feet in depth adjacent to the abutting parking space and protected by wheel stops or curbing. Two (2) feet of said landscaped area may be part of the required depth of each abutting parking space. 
Parking lot storm drainage shall be designed so as to direct water from paved areas to the landscaped areas to allow absorption into the permeable ground prior to discharge into the Public Street or storm drainage system. This should be accomplished in a manner not likely to result in erosion. 
h.  Sight Distance for Landscaping Adjacent to Public Right-of-Way and Points of Access. 
When an access intersects a public right-of-way, all landscaping within the triangular areas described below shall be placed so as to provide unobstructed cross-visibility at a level between three (3) feet and seven (7) feet in height from the street level. Trees which have limbs and foliage trimmed in such a manner that no limbs or foliage extend into the cross-visibility area described above may be allowed within the triangular area or allowed to protrude into the triangular area if they are otherwise located so as not to create a traffic hazard. No landscaping, other than grass or ground cover, shall be located within three (3) feet from the edge of any access or street pavement. 
The triangular areas above referred to are: 
The area of property on each side of an access way which is within a triangle two sides of which are each fifteen (15) feet in length, one measured along the access way from the point of its intersection with the public street curb (or street pavement edge if there is no curb) and the other measured along the curb (or street pavement if there is no curb) from its intersection with the access way, and the third side of the triangle being a line connecting the ends of the two (2) other sides. 
 
Landscape Preservation. The existing natural landscape, especially plants, shrubs and trees native to the area, shall be preserved to the extent reasonable and feasible. Indiscriminate clearing or stripping of natural vegetation is prohibited. Landscape to be removed or retained shall be reviewed as part of the site plan approval process by the Planning and Zoning Commission or as part of the building permit process by the Director of Planning and Building in the event that site plan review is not required. No landscaping may be removed before approval of the site plan or building permit. The criteria to be applied by the Planning and Zoning Commission or by the Director of Planning and Building as appropriate, as typographical constraints on design, drainage, ingress and egress, utilities and other factors reasonably related to health, safety and welfare of the public, the nature and quality of the landscaping installed to replace existing natural landscaping and such other factors as may be relevant and proper. 
Protection of Trees. 
No person or entity shall remove, contribute to the removal or endanger any tree having a trunk circumference of thirty inches (30") or more, measured four (4) feet above natural grade level which is situated within the boundaries of the area to which the landscape requirements apply as set out in Section 7.900 above, without a tree removal permit from the Director of Planning and Building. Removal and endangerment include uprooting, severing the main trunk of the tree or any act which may reasonably be expected to cause the tree to die including without limitation damage inflicted upon the root system by machinery, storage or materials or soil compaction; substantially changing the natural grade above the root system or around the trunk; excessive pruning; paving with concrete asphalt or other impervious materials in a manner which may reasonably be expected to kill the tree, or a lack of adequate protection during the construction process. 
Trees which are designated on an approved site plan or an approved building permit for removal are exempt from the requirement of a removal permit. 
The Director of Planning and Building shall issue a removal permit for all trees that are, in his determination, so located as to prevent reasonable access to the property or to prevent reasonable use of the property, that constitute a hazard to life or property which cannot be reasonable mitigated without removing the tree, if the tree is dying, dead or diseased to the point that it constitutes a danger to other trees or that it cannot be reasonably be restored to sound condition. Approval for removal is automatically granted ten (10) working days after the application is filed, if not denied during such time. 
Planting a replacement tree or trees or other landscaping may be required as a condition of approving an application for removal of a protected tree if there is adequate space for additional landscaping than is required of a new development under this Ordinance. 
If a tree is removed without a permit or in the determination of the Director of Planning and Building, dies due to injury, endangerment or improper planting, the tree shall be replaced with a tree of similar species, trunk size and height. If a replacement tree is not available or cannot be transplanted the owner shall submit an alternative plan for additional landscaping to the Director of Planning and Building for approval. All replacement shall be completed within twelve (12) months after removal of the protected tree. 
The Director of Planning and Building may rely on the certification of a qualified arboriculturist in making any of the determinations required of him or her in this section. 
(Ord. No. 19-006, § 7.920, 4-20-2009)  
Sec. 7.930. - Credits Toward Landscaping Requirements. 
In instances were healthy plant material exists on a site prior to its development, in whole or in part, for purposes of off-street parking or other vehicular use areas, the Director of Planning and Building may adjust the application of the herein described standards to allow credit for such plant material if, in his opinion, such an adjustment is in keeping with and will preserve the intent of this Section. Any credit shall be in accordance with the following: 
Each square foot of landscaped area which is permeable and within the area encompassed by the dripline of a tree of at least four (4) inches in trunk diameter, measured four (4) feet above the ground level, shall count as one and one-half (1½) square feet of landscaped area for the purpose of satisfying the minimum requirements of Subsection 7.920f. of this Ordinance. 
Each square foot of landscaped area which is permeable and within the area encompassed by the dripline of a tree of at least eight (8) inches in trunk diameter, measured four (4) feet above the ground level, shall count as two (2) square feet of landscaped area for the purpose of satisfying the minimum requirements of Subsection 7.920f. 
The foregoing credits shall be subject to the following limitations and conditions: 
1.  Tree dripline area shall not qualify for credit under this subsection if: 
Less than one-half (½) of the dripline is permeable cover; or 
There have been any damaging changes in the original grade of the dripline under the tree. 
2.  The total calculated landscaped credit around the tree shall be limited to the total square footage of area within the dripline. 
3.  Neither over lapping dripline areas nor areas contiguous to the dripline areas which overlap shall be counted twice. 
4.  Permeable pavers shall be considered a permeable cover.  
Sec. 7.940. - Screening Requirements and Standards. 
Other areas not covered by Subsection 7.920.e. of this Ordinance shall be subject to the requirements of this Section. Minimum landscape screening requirements shall be provided in the following situations: 
Multiple Family, greater than four (4) units, and manufactured home use along property lines abutting a Single Family District. 
Commercial Use along property lines abutting any Residential District. 
Civic Use along property lines abutting a more restrictive district in which the use is not permitted. 
Surrounding Multiple Family, greater than four (4) units, Commercial, Industrial or Civic trash storage areas or support services systems. 
Manufactured Home Parks along property lines abutting a public street, right-of-way, or single family residential development. 
Screening shall be provided by installation and maintenance thereafter of a visual screen or buffer of one of the following types: 
A solid wood and/or masonry fence or wall at least six (6) feet but not greater than eight (8) feet in height. 
A hedge-like screen of evergreen plant material capable of attaining a minimum height of eight (8) feet at maturity, planted initially at a minimum of four (4) foot centers and with a minimum height of three and one-half (3½) feet.  
Sec. 7.950. - Other Applicable Regulations. 
The provisions of this Section shall be subject to other applicable regulations where such regulations are more restrictive and not otherwise inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance.  
Sec. 7.960. - Plan Approval. 
Prior to issuance of a building permit, a site plan of the tract involved shall be submitted to the Director of Planning and Building. The site plan shall contain the following information: 
1.  The date, scale, North point, title, and name of owner of the tract. 
2.  The location of existing boundary lines and dimensions of the tract. 
3.  The approximate center line of existing water courses; the approximate location of significant drainage features; and the location and size of existing and proposed streets and alleys, existing and proposed utility easements on or adjacent to the lot, and existing and proposed sidewalks adjacent to the street. 
4.  The location, size and type (tree, shrub, ground cover or grass) of proposed landscaping in each proposed landscaped area, and the location and size of proposed landscaped areas. 
5.  The location and species of existing trees in the R.O.W., yard and parking lots having trunks four (4) inches or larger in diameter and the approximate size of their crowns. 
6.  Information necessary for verifying whether the required minimum landscaped area has been met under this Ordinance and whether a particular area qualifies for credit under Section 7.930 of this Ordinance. 
7.  Statement as to the ratio of the total calculated impervious area to total lot area. 
8.  An indication of how the applicant plans to protect the existing trees, that are proposed to be retained, from damage during construction. 
9.  The location of sprinklers and water outlets. 
10.  The certification of a Professional Engineer, Surveyor, Landscape Architect or full time B. Professional Building Designer that the plans satisfy the requirements of this Section. 
The Director of Planning and Building shall not issue a building permit or Certificate of Occupancy unless the requirements of this Section are satisfied.  
Sec. 7.970. - Graphic Application of Landscaping Requirements. 
The following graphic diagram depicts the requirements of this Section. The diagram is designed as a guide and shall not replace the other provisions of this Section. Where there is a discrepancy or conflict between the diagram and the other provisions of this Section, the other provisions of this Ordinance shall prevail. 
 
GRAPHIC APPLICATION OF LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS 
Requirements of Section 7.920 Keyed To Diagram: 
Landscaping Adjacent to Public Right-of Way. 
Minimum of 5 ft. wide strip adjacent to Right-of-Way boundary with a hedge wall or other durable landscape barrier of at least 2 ft. height, plus one (1) tree per each 50 ft. of street frontage. 
All other areas between Right-of-Way and off-street vehicular use area shall be grass or ground cover. 
Perimeter Landscaping Related to Abutting Properties. 
A hedge or fence per specifications is required when abutting property is zoned for non-business use, and one (1) tree per 75 LF required. 
A hedge or fence is not required when abutting property is zoned for business use, but one (1) tree per 125 LF required. 
Parking Area Interior Landscaping. 
10 sq. ft. per each interior parking space: 10 x 18 = 180 SF. 
Other vehicular use area (20,000 total paved area) - (32 spaces x 400) = 8,000 less exclusion (5,000SF) = 3,000 SF ;div; 100 = 30 SF >> 180 SF + 30 SF = 210 SF Total. 
Minimum landscaped area of 50 sq. ft. with one (1) tree. 
Minimum number of trees = 1 per 100 sq. ft. of interior area (210 ;div; 100 = 2 Trees).  
Sec. 7.980. - Screening Requirements. 
A hedge or fence is required when a business use is adjacent to a non-business zone, and trash storage is required to be fully screened. 
SECTION 8 
TEMPORARY/ACCESSORY USE REGULATIONS  
Sec. 8.000. - TEMPORARY USES. 
Provisions authorizing temporary uses for areas not in the public right-of-way are intended to permit occasional, temporary uses and activities when consistent with the purposes of the zoning regulations and when compatible with other nearby uses. 
(Ord. No. 14-001, § 8.000, 1-19-2004)  
Sec. 8.100. - TEMPORARY USE TYPES. 
The following types of temporary uses may be authorized, subject to specific limitations herein and such additional conditions as may be established by the Director of Development Services for the City of Fredericksburg or his or her designee "Director." 
A.  Model homes or apartments and related real estate sales and display activities located within the subdivision or residential development to which they pertain. 
B.  New subdivisions or apartments and related real estate sales and display activities located within the subdivision or residential development to which they pertain. 
C.  A temporary sales office for use in development of a new subdivision may be established and operated within the subdivision for a period not to exceed four (4) years from the date of the first construction permit issued in the subdivision or until ninety-five percent (95%) of the lots therein are sold, whichever occurs first; provided that extension of time may be granted by the Board of Adjustment on application duly made for a special exception or temporary permit to continue such temporary use. 
D.  Public, religious, patriotic, or historic assemblies, displays or exhibits, including festivals, benefits, fund-raising events or similar uses which typically attract a mass audience shall require any use district other than residential. (Exception: religious assembly in residential districts) and shall not be subject to the provisions of Subsection M below. 
E.  Circuses, carnivals, rodeos, fairs, or similar transient amusement or recreational activities not closer than two hundred (200) feet to an existing dwelling shall require any use district classification other than residential and shall be subject to the provisions of Subsection M below. 
F.  Outdoor art and craft shows and exhibitors shall require any use district classification other than residential, and shall be subject to the provisions of Subsection M below. 
G.  Christmas tree sales lots shall require any use district classification other than residential and other than Historic Overlay District (HO). 
H.  One house trailer or mobile home to serve as a dwelling my be permitted on a construction site during construction, upon application to the Director setting out the need therefor, to provide security against theft or vandalism of materials or equipment or other property left on the site during night time. This permit shall allow no more than one such dwelling per construction site, shall be effective for no more than six months, and shall be renewable, upon application, for no more than one additional six month period. Denial of such a permit may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment. 
I.  Seasonal retail sale of agricultural or horticultural products raised or produced on or off the premises. To be limited to 120 days per calendar year and shall be subject to the provisions of Subsection M below. 
J.  Additional Temporary uses determined to be similar to the foregoing by the Building Official which may be subject to the provisions of Subsection M below. 
K.  Outdoor special sales, including swap meets, flea markets, parking lot sales or similar activities, limited to locations in commercial or industrial districts, and when operated not more than three days in the same week or more than five days in the same month or more than two weekends in the same month per location, and shall be subject to the provisions of Subsection M below. 
L.  Temporary use of mobile trailer units or similar portable structures including tents and like structures for non-residential uses, located in districts other than the Historic Overlay District (HO) where the use is a permitted use, and limited to a maximum period of six months. Exception: KIOSK located in the Historic Overlay District (HO) where the use is a permitted use. (KIOSK as used herein is meant as an informational, non-manned structure). Permitted Mobile Food establishments are governed by Chapter 8 Article V. of this Code of Ordinances and are therefore not Temporary Use Types for the purposes of this section. 
M.  No temporary type structures shall be placed in the Historic Overlay District (HO). Temporary structures shall include mobile trailer units, portable structures, sun shades of whatever material, tents, tarps, or umbrellas. EXCEPT: The use of umbrellas or similar detached (portable), non structural sun shading devices ("Cover") by a restaurant for that restaurant's outdoor eating and serving areas shall be permitted under the following circumstances: 
(1)  The covered area shall be specifically defined with impervious surface in place, and 
(2)  No advertising, logos, or words which would violate the City's sign ordinance or any other law or statute shall appear on the Cover, and any advertising which does meet the City's sign ordinance shall be included in the overall allowable signage for the business, and 
(3)  The color shall be an approved color under the City of Fredericksburg's Historic Preservation Ordinance, and pictures, stripes, floral or other designs, if any, shall be approved by the Historic Review Board of the City of Fredericksburg, which shall approve or disapprove the Cover based on whether or not it is in keeping with the historic nature of the District, and whether or not it detracts from the building it serves or the surrounding buildings or uses. 
(4)  If the Cover is not an umbrella that is commonly used in outdoor dining as defined below, all aspects of the particular shading device shall be subject to review and approval by the Historic Review Board of the City of Fredericksburg, which shall approve or disapprove the Cover based on whether or not it is in keeping with the historic nature of the District, and whether or not it detracts from the building it serves or the surrounding buildings or uses. 
(5)  Umbrella, for the purposes of this section, is defined as a light, portable cover for protection from rain or sun consisting of fabric held on a collapsible frame of any shape having a diameter or cross-measurement in any direction of no more than 13 feet. 
N.  Small sales carts that are man-powered only, and not larger than five feet by six feet fully extended, that are colored and styled in keeping with the Historic District in the determination of the Director shall be permitted in the Historic Overlay District (HO). Regulation of small sales carts shall be by the Director who shall also determine that those using the same abide by the laws and regulations that are relevant. The Director shall be permitted to place other reasonable restrictions and requirements upon the use of such sales carts. The use of sales carts shall be limited to the time periods set forth in Section K. above. 
O.  Uses permitted under sections E, F, J, K, L and N above shall require issuance of a permit for each location by the Director prior to setting up or commencement of sales. Such permit shall ensure compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other ordinances and health regulations. The Director shall not issue a permit unless each applicant or vendor provides proof of sales tax permits and permission of the owner of the location for which the permit is issued for the intended use. The Director may establish procedural rules and application forms requiring relevant information to implement this permit process and may place limits on changes to permits, set-up and take-down times and the like. The initial permit fee will be $25.00 per month. Permits shall not be issued less than five days nor more than three months in advance of the time period for which they will be used. 
(Ord. No. 14-001, § 8.100, 1-19-2004; Ord. No. 19-011, § 8.100, 9-21-2009; Ord. No. 25-004, 5-4-2015)  
Sec. 8.200. - ACCESSORY USE REGULATIONS. 
The purpose of these provisions is to establish the relationship among the principal and accessory uses and to establish provisions governing the conduct of accessory uses.  
Sec. 8.210. - Principal Use Including Accessory Use. 
Principal uses specified as permitted uses or conditional uses for a district by the Zoning District Regulations shall be deemed to include accessory uses and activities identified by these regulations and such other accessory uses that are necessarily and customarily associated with and are appropriate, incidental, and subordinate to such principal uses. Accessory uses in each district, except as otherwise provided in these regulations.  
Sec. 8.220. - Accessory Uses: Residential Use Types. 
Residential use types include the following accessory uses, activities and structures on the same site or lot. Residential accessory activities and meetings shall not generate guest traffic to the site exceeding ten vehicles during any two days or 24-hour period per week or 30 vehicles during any one week. 
Private garages and parking for the principal use. 
Recreational activities and facilities for use by residents. 
Religious study meetings. 
Playhouses, patios, cabanas, porches, gazebos, swimming pools and incidental household storage buildings. 
Radio and television receiving antennas and dish-type receivers of satellite signals. 
Solar collectors. 
One guest house or rental unit, which rental unit need not be separate from the main dwelling, in the R-1 single family residential district on a lot containing 10,000 square feet or more of area provided that the owner of the property actually lives on the property as his or her primary residence. All other development requirements (as an example: additional parking space requirements) shall apply. 
Keeping of dogs and cats and similar small domestic animals as household pets. 
Garage or yard sales - no more than three (3) in any one year and not exceeding three (3) consecutive days. 
Home Occupations in compliance with Section 8.300. 
Bed and Breakfast. Tourist lodging services within rooms of the property owner's principal residence or one (1) separate guest house, per Section 8.200 as provided herein, within a single property served by a single water and electrical meter and subject to the limitations of home occupations. Section 8.300. 
EXCEPTION: In a single family residential district the primary residence may be used as a Bed and Breakfast without it being the property owner's principal residence but limited to one (1) single Bed and Breakfast rental, dwelling unit per property. A Bed and Breakfast use may be evidenced by association with a Bed and Breakfast Accommodation and Reservation Service. To qualify as a Bed and Breakfast the owner must provide proof of the collection and payment of State and local Hotel/Motel Occupancy Tax to the city upon request. 
Registered Family Homes. 
Other necessary and customary uses determined by the Director of Planning and Building to be appropriate, incidental and subordinate to a principal use. 
(Ord. No. 18-014, § 8.220, 12-1-2008)  
Sec. 8.230. - Accessory Uses: Commercial and Industrial Types. 
Commercial or industrial use types include the following accessory uses, activities, and structures on the same site or lot: 
Any other commercial or industrial use type that is not listed as a permitted use in the same district, and complies with all of the following criteria: 
Is operated primarily for the convenience of employees, clients or customers of the principal use. 
Occupies less than ten percent of the total floor area of the use. 
Is located and operated as an integral part of the principal use and does not comprise a separate business use or activity. 
Single family residential use whether detached or contained in the commercially used structure. 
(Ord. No. 23-007, 5-20-2013)  
Sec. 8.240. - Accessory Uses: Civic Use Types. 
Civic use types include accessory uses and activities necessarily and customarily associated with the purpose and function of the civic use as a principal use, including, but not limited to, the following on the same site or lot: 
Refreshment stands and food and beverage sales of a convenience nature in uses involving public assembly. 
Cafeterias, dining halls, and similar eating and beverage services operated incidental to principal uses and primarily for the convenience of employees, residents, clients, patients or visitors thereof. 
Gift shops, newsstands and similar commercial activities operated incidental to principal uses and primarily for the convenience of employees, residents, clients, patients or visitors thereof. 
Parking for the principal use.  
Sec. 8.250. - Temporary Accessory Building. 
Residential. A maximum of two (2) temporary buildings which are not attached permanently to a foundation, each of which does not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square-feet in gross floor area, and ten (10) feet in height, shall be permitted as accessory buildings on a residential lot, provided that such buildings are secured to the ground in a manner approved by the Director of Planning and Building. 
Commercial and Industrial. A maximum of two (2) temporary buildings which are not attached permanently to a foundation, each of which does not exceed five hundred (500) square-feet in gross floor area, and ten (10) feet in height, shall be permitted as accessory buildings on a lot zoned C-2 or more permissive, provided that such buildings are located to the rear of the main building, and are secured to the ground in a manner approved by the Director of Planning and Building.  
Sec. 8.260. - Permanent Accessory Building. 
Permanent accessory buildings and structures shall be permanently attached to a slab or foundation.  
Sec. 8.270. - Yards and Accessory Buildings. 
All accessory buildings shall be subject to the following setback provisions: 
Front Yard. Accessory buildings shall have a front yard not less than the main building. 
Side Yard. There shall be a side yard not less than five (5) feet from any side lot line, or easement line, except that adjacent to a side street, the side yard shall never be less than fifteen (15) feet. 
Rear Yard. There shall be a rear yard not less than three (3) feet from any lot line, alley line or easement line, except that if no alley exists, the rear yard shall not be less than ten (10) feet as measured from rear lot line.  
Sec. 8.300. - HOME OCCUPATIONS. 
Home occupations accessory to residential use shall be subject to the following limitations: 
The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling unit which is the bona fide residence of the practitioner (s), or entirely within only one accessory garage building (not including a carport). 
No person other than a family member who resides in the dwelling unit shall participate in the home occupation on the premises. 
The residential character of the lot and dwelling shall be maintained. Neither the interior nor the exterior of the dwelling shall be structurally altered so as to require compliance with nonresidential construction codes to accommodate the home occupation. No additional buildings shall be added on the property to accommodate the home occupation. 
The home occupation shall not generate customer related vehicular traffic. 
No direct selling of merchandise shall occur on the premises. 
No equipment or materials associated with the home occupation shall be displayed or stored where visible from anywhere off the premises. 
The occupation shall not produce external noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, glare, fumes, electrical interference or waste run-off outside the dwelling unit or on the property surrounding the dwelling unit. 
No vehicle used in connection with the home occupation which requires a commercial driver's license to operate shall be parked on the premises or on any street adjacent to the residentially zoned property. 
The home occupation shall not be advertised by any signs on the premises, including business signs on vehicles, nor shall the street address of the home be advertised through signs, billboards, television, radio, newspapers or other forms of direct advertising. 
Nothing herein shall be construed to allow the following businesses or occupations as home occupations: animal hospitals, animal breeding, clinics, hospitals, contractor yards, dancing schools, junk yards, restaurants, rental outlets, vehicle repair shops or massage parlors. 
Deliveries from commercial suppliers may not be made more than once each week, and deliveries shall not restrict traffic circulation.  
APPENDICES TO ZONING ORDINANCE 
Appendices A (Adopting Ordinance), B (Site Regulations), C (Individual Zoning Classifications), and D (Schedule of Uses) to the Zoning Ordinance are reserved from repeal, and are available for public review at city hall or at the city government website.  
APPENDIX C - DESIGN MANUAL[1] 
Design Manual for Siting and Criteria for the Installation of Wireless Micro Network Nodes, Network Node, Node Support Poles and Related Ground Equipment in Public Rights-of-Way 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Appendix C Design Manual, as adopted by the city council. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Design Manual. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 284 
 
I. - Purpose 
 
1.1 - Purpose. 
A.  The City of Fredericksburg encourages the deployment of state-of-the-art small cell wireless technology within the City for the many benefits it promises the citizens of Fredericksburg including increased connectivity and reliable networks and services. 
B.  The standards and procedures provided in this Design Manual are adopted to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public by minimizing and reducing impacts to public safety within the City's Right-of-Way and to minimize and reduce impacts to the City, its residents and visitors; and for the general health and welfare of the public. 
C.  Due to the increasing number of facilities in the City's Right-of-Way, the City has adopted Article V "Right-of-Way Management" in Chapter 35 of the City of Fredericksburg Code of Ordinances which is applicable to all public service providers including Wireless Service Providers or Network Providers (collectively, "Providers") as defined by Chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code. 
D.  In addition, the City has adopted this Design Manual to provide technical criteria and details necessary for Providers seeking to install and construct network nodes and node support poles in the City's Right-of-Way. 
E.  Providers shall adhere to the requirements found in the "Right-of-Way Management" Article V in Chapter 35 of the City of Fredericksburg Code of Ordinances and this Design Manual for the placement of their facilities within the City's Right-of-Way. 
F.  This Design Manual is to be considered in conjunction with Article V, "Public Rights-of-Way Management". To the extent of any conflict with Article V, "Public Rights-of-Way Management" and this Design Manual, the Design Manual shall control with regard to a Provider.  
II. - Definitions 
 
2.1 - Generally. 
This Design Manual adopts the definitions set forth in Chapter 35, Article V., Section 35-127. "Definitions" as if copied herein verbatim.  
III. - Requirements Regarding Size, Height, Placement, and Operation of Micro Network Nodes, Network Nodes, Node Support Poles and Related Equipment 
 
3.1 - A network node must conform to the following requirements. 
A.  Antenna: 
1.  Each antenna that does not have exposed elements and is attached to an existing structure or pole: 
(a)  Must be located inside an enclosure of not more than six cubic feet in volume; 
(b)  May not exceed a height of three feet above the existing structure or pole; and 
(c)  May not protrude from the outer circumference of the existing structure or pole by more than two feet. 
2.  If an antenna has exposed elements and is attached to an existing structure or pole, the antenna and all of the antenna's exposed elements: 
(a)  Must fit within an imaginary enclosure of not more than six cubic feet; 
(b)  May not exceed a height of three feet above the existing structure or pole; and 
(c)  May not protrude from the outer circumference of the existing structure or pole by more than two feet. 
B.  The cumulative size of other wireless equipment associated with the network node attached to an existing structure or pole may not: 
1.  Be more than 28 cubic feet in volume; or 
2.  Protrude from the outer circumference of the existing structure or a node support pole by more than two feet. 
C.  Ground-based enclosures, separate from the pole, may not be higher than three feet six inches from grade, wider than three feet six inches, or deeper than three feet six inches. 
D.  Pole-mounted enclosures may not be taller than five feet. 
E.  The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume under the above-referenced subsections (A) through (D): 
1.  Electric meters; 
2.  Concealment elements; 
3.  Telecommunications demarcation boxes; 
4.  Grounding equipment; 
5.  Power transfer switches; 
6.  Cut-off switches; and 
7.  Vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services. 
F.  Equipment attached to node support poles may not protrude from the outer edge of the node support pole by more than two feet. 
G.  Equipment attached to a utility pole must be installed in accordance with the National Electrical Safety Code, subject to applicable codes, and the utility pole owner's construction standards. 
State Law reference— § 284.003, Texas Local Government Code.  
3.2 - Equipment Cabinets. 
A network provider must ensure that the vertical height of an equipment cabinet installed as part of a network node does not exceed the height limitation set forth in section 3.1 above, subject to the approval of the pole's owner if applicable. 
State Law reference— § 284.106, Texas Local Government Code.  
3.3 - Interference. 
A.  A network provider shall operate all network nodes in accordance with all applicable laws, including regulations adopted by the Federal Communications Commission. 
B.  A network provider shall ensure that the operation of a network node does not cause any harmful radio frequency interference to a Federal Communications Commission-authorized mobile telecommunications operation of the municipality operating at the time the network node was initially installed or constructed. On written notice, a network provider shall take all steps reasonably necessary to remedy any harmful interference. 
State Law reference— § 284.304, Texas Local Government Code.  
3.4 - General Construction and Maintenance Requirements. 
A network provider shall construct and maintain Network Nodes and Node Support Poles in a manner that does not: 
(1)  Obstruct, impede, or hinder the usual travel or public safety on a public right-of-way; 
(2)  Obstruct the legal use of a public right-of-way by other utility providers; 
(3)  Violate nondiscriminatory applicable codes; 
(4)  Violate or conflict with the municipality's publicly disclosed public right-of-way design specifications; or 
(5)  Violate the federal Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. Section 12101 et seq.). 
State Law reference— § 284.102, Texas Local Government Code.  
3.5 - Notice. 
A network provider to provide at least ten (10) days' advance notice to the director before performing the following work: 
A.  A network provider's routine maintenance of micro network nodes, network nodes, node support poles and related ground equipment that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalk or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way. 
B.  Replacement or upgrade to a network node or pole with a node or pole that is substantially similar in size or smaller that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way, but only if: 
1.  The replacement or upgrade does not include replacement of an existing node support pole; and 
2.  The replacement or upgrade does not defeat existing concealment elements of a node support pole. 
C.  The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro network nodes that are strung on cables between existing poles or node support poles in compliance with the National Electric Safety Code. 
D.  A network provider may replace or upgrade a pole only with the approval of the pole's owner. 
State Law reference— § 284.1579(d), Texas Local Government Code.  
3.6 - Ground Equipment. 
The Network Provider may not install ground equipment where ground equipment already occupies a footprint of twenty-five (25) square feet or more.  
IV. - Permitting 
 
4.1 - Attachment to Existing Poles. 
A.  Construction Permit Application Fee. Section 35-183, Article V. 
B.  Aerial Map showing the location of the existing pole to which the network node is proposed to be attached, and a street view image. 
C.  Plans and drawings prepared by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Texas that has evaluated the existing pole or infrastructure for structural stability to carry proposed network nodes and can bear the wind load without pole modification or whether the installation will require pole re-enforcement. If pole re-enforcement is necessary, Provider shall provide engineering design and specification drawings for the proposed alteration to the existing pole. Any pole re-enforcement or replacement shall be at Provider's sole cost. All re-enforcement or replacement poles shall match the character of the pre-existing pole in order to blend into the surrounding environment and be visually unobtrusive. City reserves the right to deny a certain type of pole due to its differences. 
D.  Scaled dimensioned drawings or pictures of the proposed attachments of the network node to the existing poles or structures as well as any other proposed equipment associated with the proposal, indicating the spacing from existing curb, driveways, sidewalk, and other existing light poles and any other poles or appurtenances. This shall include a before-and-after image of the pole and all proposed attachments and associated standalone equipment. 
E.  Scaled dimensioned construction plans indicating the current Right-of-Way line and showing the proposed underground conduit and equipment, and its spacing from existing utilities. The drawings shall also show a sectional profile of the Right-of-Way and identify all existing utilities and existing utility conflicts. 
F.  If a City pole is proposed, the City pole ID number shall be provided. 
G.  The applicant needs to provide analysis that the proposed network node shall not cause any interference with City public safety radio system, traffic signal light system, or other communications components. It shall be the responsibility of the Provider to evaluate, prior to making the application for the permit, the compatibility between the existing City infrastructure and the Provider's proposed infrastructure. A network node shall not be installed in a location that causes any interference. Network nodes shall not be allowed on City's public safety radio infrastructure. 
H.  A traffic control plan, SWPPP, and trench safety plan may also be required based on the proposed scope of work. 
I.  The City issued Right-of-Way permit authorizes use of its Right-of-Way. Providers/applicants are responsible for obtaining permission on non-city-owned infrastructure. If the project lies within the State Right-of-Way, the applicant must provide evidence of a permit from the State. 
J.  Notification to adjacent residential developments/neighborhoods within 300 feet is required on all node attachments on City infrastructure. 
K.  The Provider's proposal shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Any facilities located off pole must remain in cabinetry or enclosed structure underground, except for the electric meter pedestal. Facilities on pole shall be concealed or enclosed as much as possible in an equipment box, cabinet, or other unit that may include ventilation openings. There shall be no external cables or electric wire/cables on pole or structures or aerial wires or cables extending from the pole or structure. 
2.  The electrical meter shall not be mounted on a City's metal pole or structure. Provider shall use 240 voltage when connecting to any City infrastructure and provide key to meter upon inspection. 
3.  All attachments to a pole that are projecting, or any equipment or appurtenance mounted on the ground, shall comply with TAS, ADA and shall not obstruct an existing or planned sidewalk or walkway. 
4.  All proposed projecting attachments to the pole shall provide a minimum vertical clearance of eight (8) feet. If any attachments are projecting towards the street side, it shall provide a minimum vertical clearance of 16 feet. 
5.  The color of the network nodes shall match the existing pole color such that the network nodes blend with the color of the pole to the extent possible. City reserves the right to deny a certain style of node due to its difference in color to pole. 
6.  There shall be no other pole, with small cell attachments permitted/under application review, within 300 feet of the subject pole.  
4.2 - Installation of New Poles. 
Prior to installation or modification of a node support pole, Provider shall complete and submit to the City a Commercial Building Permit application for the new pole, as well as a Right-of-Way Permit application. Along with standard required documents, the following items will also be required for the ROW Permit application: 
A.  Construction Permit Application Fee. Section 35-183, Article V. 
B.  Map showing intended location of the node support pole. Aerial Map showing the location of the proposed new pole, and a street view image. 
C.  The applicant will need to provide analysis showing that the proposed new node Support pole is spaced at least three hundred (300) linear feet from another existing pole that is capable of supporting network nodes along the proposed location, unless otherwise approved by the City in writing. 
D.  Scaled dimensioned drawings or pictures of the proposed node support pole as well as any other proposed equipment associated with the proposal, indicating the spacing from existing curb, driveways, sidewalk, light poles, and any other poles or appurtenances. This shall include a before-and-after street view image. The after-image needs to include the proposed pole and all proposed attachments and associated standalone equipment. 
E.  Scaled dimensioned construction plans indicating the current Right-of-Way line and showing the proposed underground conduit and equipment, its spacing from existing lines. The drawings shall also show a sectional profile of the Right-of- Way and identify all existing utilities and existing utility conflicts. 
F.  A traffic control plan, SWPPP ("storm water pollution prevention plan"), and trench safety plan may also be required based on the proposed scope of work. 
G.  The applicant needs to provide analysis that the proposed network node shall not cause any interference with City public safety radio system, traffic signal light system, or other communications components. It shall be the responsibility of Provider to evaluate, prior to making application for permit, the compatibility between the existing City infrastructure and Provider's proposed infrastructure. A network node shall not be installed in a location that causes any interference. Network nodes shall not be allowed on City's public safety radio infrastructure. 
H.  If the project lies within the State Right-of-Way, the applicant must provide evidence of a permit from the State. 
I.  Notification to adjacent residential developments/neighborhoods within 300 feet is required on all node support poles owned by provider. 
J.  The Provider's proposal shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Any facilities located off pole must remain in cabinetry or enclosed structure underground. Facilities on pole shall be concealed or enclosed as much as possible in an equipment box, cabinet, or other unit that may include ventilation openings. There shall be no external cables or electric wire/cables on pole or structures or aerial wires or cables extending from the pole or structure. Shroud poles, as shown in the below image, are encouraged. 
 
2.  The electrical meter shall not be mounted on City's poles or structures. Provider shall coordinate voltage and provide electrical wiring diagrams along with the Building Permit or Electrical Permit when connecting to any City infrastructure and provide key to meter upon inspection. 
3.  The pole and all attachments to the pole that are projecting, or any equipment or appurtenance mounted on the ground shall comply with TAS, ADA and shall not obstruct an existing or planned sidewalk or walkway. 
4.  Wooden poles are prohibited. All new poles are required to be break-away and black powder-coated. All attachments for the network nodes shall also match the color of the network support pole. All network support poles shall match the existing poles in the surrounding block or district in which the network support pole is located in order to blend into the surrounding environment and be visually unobtrusive. City reserves the right to deny a certain type of pole due to its differences. 
5.  Upon approval of the permit, the Provider shall call for locates. If City of Fredericksburg Water/Wastewater Department locates are needed, Provider is required to notify the City and the designated location service.  
4.3 - Electrical Permit. 
A.  Provider shall be responsible for obtaining any required electrical power service to the network nodes and node support poles or structures. Provider's electrical supply shall be separately metered from the City and must match City infrastructure voltage. 
B.  Provider shall provide City with the electrical permit and provide sealed engineered drawings for conduit size, circuit size, calculations for Amp, distances running, etc.  
V. - Network Node and Node Support Pole Requirements 
 
5.1 - Installation. 
Provider shall, at its own cost and expense, install the network nodes and node support poles in a good and workmanlike manner and in accordance with the requirements promulgated by the Design Manual, "Public Right-of-Way Management" Chapter 35, Article V., Construction Permit Application Fee and all other applicable laws, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations of the City, the state, and the United States ("Laws"), as such may be amended from time to time. Provider's work shall be subject to the regulation, control and direction of the City. All work done in connection with the installation, operation, maintenance, repair, modification, and/or replacement of the network nodes and node support poles shall be in compliance with all applicable Laws.  
5.2 - Inspections. 
A.  The City may perform visual inspections of any network nodes and node support poles located in the Right-of-Way as the City deems appropriate without notice. If the inspection requires physical contact with the network nodes or node support poles, the City shall provide written notice to the Provider within five (5) business days of the planned inspection. Provider may have a representative present during such inspection. 
B.  In the event of an emergency situation, the City may, but is not required to, notify Provider of an inspection. The City may take action necessary to remediate the emergency situation and the City shall notify Provider as soon as practically possible after remediation is complete.  
5.3 - Placement. 
A.  Parks. Placement of network nodes and node support poles in any Parks, Park roads, sidewalk, or property is prohibited unless such falls within the definition of Public right-of-way in Chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code and the placement complies with applicable Laws, private deed restrictions, and other public or private restrictions on the use of the Park. 
B.  City Infrastructure. Provider shall neither allow nor install network nodes or node support poles on any City property that falls outside the definition of Public Right-of-Way in Chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code. 
C.  Residential Streets. Provider shall neither allow nor install network nodes or node support poles in Right-of-Way that is adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is not more than 50 feet wide and adjacent to single-family residential lots or other multifamily residences or undeveloped land that is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions. 
D.  Historic District and Historic Shopping District Overlay, ("Historic District"). A Network Provider must obtain advance written approval from the city manager before collocating new Network Nodes or installing new Node Support Poles in a Historic District Overlay. As a condition for approval of new Network Nodes or new Node Support Poles in a Historic District, the City requires reasonable design or concealment measures for the new Network Nodes or new Node Support Poles. Therefore, any request for installations in a Historic District, must be accompanied with concealment measures in the permit applications. The City requests that a Network Provider explore the feasibility of using certain camouflage measures to improve the aesthetics of the Network Nodes, Node Support Poles, or related ground equipment, or any portion of the nodes, poles, or equipment, to minimize the impact to the aesthetics on Decorative Poles or in a Historic District. 
E.  Historic Landmarks. A Network Provider is discouraged from installing a Network Node or Node Support Pole within 300 feet of a historic site or structure or Historic Landmark recognized by the City, state or federal government (see, for example, and not limited to §442.001(3) of the Texas Government Code, and 16 U.S.C. §470), as of the date of the submission of the permit. 
F.  Decorative Poles. Provider shall neither allow nor install network nodes on a Decorative Pole as defined by Chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code, unless approved by the City in writing. This standard shall be applicable to all the new decorative poles in the Historic District or Historic Shopping District Overlay currently, as well as any others citywide in the future. The City may only entertain proposals, if they are stealth. See examples below. 
 
G.  Poles. Wireless Facilities on node support poles shall be installed at least eight (8) feet above the ground. If any attachments are projecting towards the street side, it shall provide a minimum vertical clearance of 16 feet. Each new, modified, or replacement pole or node support pole installed in a public right-of-way shall not exceed the lesser of (1) 10 feet in height above the tallest existing pole located within 500 linear feet of the new pole in the same public right-of-way; or (2) 55 feet above ground level. §§284.103, 284.208 Texas Local Government Code. 
H.  Right-of-Way. Node support poles and ground equipment shall be placed, as much as possible, within two feet of the outer edge of the Right-of-Way line. Node support poles and ground equipment or network nodes shall not impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic in the Right-of-Way. If a node support pole and ground equipment or network node is installed in a location that is not in accordance with the plans approved by the City and impedes pedestrian or vehicular traffic or does not comply or otherwise renders the Right-of-Way non-compliant with applicable Laws, including the American Disabilities Act, then Provider shall remove the node support poles, ground equipment or network nodes. §§ 284.003, 284.102 Texas Local Government Code. 
I.  Undergrounding Areas. A network provider, in relation to installation for which the city has approved a permit application, must comply with undergrounding requirements, including the city's ordinances, zoning regulations, state law, private deed restrictions, and other public or private restrictions that prohibit installing above-ground structures in a public right-of-way without first obtaining zoning or land use approval. Areas of the city may be designated from time to time by the city as underground areas in accordance with filed plats, or conversions of overhead to underground areas, as may be allowed by law. This subsection does not prohibit a network provider from replacing an existing structure. §284.107, Texas Local Government Code. 
J.  Camouflage. Camouflage is required by the City in Historic Districts, as provided in this Design Manual. It is also the City's preference that all new Node Support Poles be camouflaged, except those located in an area zoned as industrial. Node Support Poles are not allowed in residential areas of districts that are zoned industrial. Companies must submit their proposal for camouflage with the permit application.  
5.4 - Fiber Connection. 
Provider shall be responsible for obtaining access and connection to fiber optic lines or other backhaul solutions that may be required for its node support poles or network nodes.  
5.5 - Generators. 
Provider shall not allow or install generators or back-up generators in the Right-of-Way.  
5.6 - Equipment Dimensions. 
Provider's node support poles and network nodes shall comply with the dimensions set forth in Chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code.  
5.7 - Tree Maintenance. 
Provider, its contractors, and agents shall obtain written permission from the City before trimming trees hanging over its node support poles and network nodes to prevent branches of such trees from contacting node support poles and network nodes. When directed by the City, Provider shall trim under the supervision and direction of the Parks Director. The City shall not be liable for any damages, injuries, or claims arising from Provider's actions under this section.  
5.8 - Signage. 
A.  Provider shall post its name, location identifying information, and emergency telephone number in an area on the cabinet of the node support poles and network nodes that is visible to the public. Signage required under this section shall not exceed 4" x 6", unless otherwise required by law (e.g. RF ground notification signs) or the City. 
B.  Except as required by Laws or by the utility pole owner, Provider shall not post any other signage or advertising on the node support poles and network nodes, or utility pole.  
5.9 - Overhead Lines Prohibited. 
In Underground Utilities, Provider shall neither allow nor install overhead lines connecting to node support poles. All overhead lines connecting to the node support pole where other overhead telecommunications or utility lines are or are planned to be buried below ground as part of a project shall be buried below ground.  
5.10 - Repair. 
Whenever the installation, placement, attachment, repair, modification, removal, operation, use, or relocation of the node support poles or network nodes, or any portion thereof is required and such installation, placement, attachment, repair, modification, removal, operation, use, or relocation causes any property of the City to be damaged or to have been altered in such a manner as to make it unusable, unsafe, or in violation of any Laws, Provider, at its sole cost and expense shall promptly repair and return such property to its original condition. If Provider does not repair such property or perform such work as described in this paragraph, then the City shall have the option, upon five (5) days' prior written notice to Provider or immediately if there is an imminent danger to the public, to perform or cause to be performed such reasonable and necessary work on behalf of Provider and to charge Provider for the reasonable and actual costs incurred by the City. Provider shall reimburse the City for the costs. Sec. 35-156, Chapter 35, Article V.  
5.11 - Graffiti Abatement. 
As soon as practical, but not later than fourteen (14) days from the date Provider receives notice thereof, Provider shall remove all graffiti on any of its node support poles and network nodes located in the Right-of-Way.  
5.12 - Inventory. 
A.  Provider shall maintain a list of its network nodes and node support poles and provide City an Inventory of locations within ten (10) days of installation. The Inventory of network nodes and node support poles shall include GIS coordinates, date of installation, City pole ID number (if applicable), type of pole used for installation, pole owner, and description/type of installation for each network node and node support pole installation. 
B.  Upon City's written request, Provider shall provide a cumulative Inventory within thirty (30) days of City's request. Concerning network nodes and node support poles that become inactive, the Inventory shall include the same information as active installations in addition to the date the network node and/or node support pole was deactivated and the date the network node and/or node support pole was removed from the Right-of-Way. City may compare the Inventory to its records to identify any discrepancies.  
5.13 - Reservation of Rights. 
A.  The City reserves the right to install, and permit others to install, utility facilities in the Rights-of-Way. In permitting such work to be done by others, the City shall not be liable to Provider for any damage caused by those persons or entities. 
B.  The City reserves the right to locate, operate, maintain, and remove City traffic signal poles in the manner that best enables the operation of its traffic signal system and protect public safety. 
C.  The City reserves the right to locate, operate, maintain, and remove any City pole or structure located within the right-of-way in the manner that best enables the City's operations.  
5.14 - Coordination of Traffic Signal Maintenance Activities and Emergency Response. 
Provider will provide City a key to each meter box at the time of inspection and have the ability to temporarily cut-off electricity to its facilities for the safety of maintenance personnel. In the event of failure of components of the traffic signal system for whatever reason, including damage resulting from vehicular collisions, weather related events, or malicious attacks, City will respond to restore traffic signal operations as a matter of public safety. Should the events that result in damage or failure of the traffic signal system also affect Provider's network nodes, Provider shall have the sole responsibility to repair or replace its network nodes and shall coordinate its own emergency efforts with the City.  
VI. - Interference with Operations 
 
6.1 - No Liability. 
A.  The City shall not be liable to Provider for any damage caused by other Providers with Wireless Facilities sharing the same pole or for failure of Provider's network nodes for whatever reason, including damage resulting from vehicular collisions, weather related events, or malicious attacks. 
B.  The City shall not be liable to Provider by reason of inconvenience, annoyance or injury to the network nodes or node support poles or activities conducted by Provider therefrom, arising from the necessity of repairing any portion of the Right-of-Way, or from the making of any necessary alteration or improvements, in, or to, any portion of the Right-of-Way, or in, or to, City's fixtures, appurtenances or equipment. The City will use reasonable efforts not to cause material interference to Provider's operation of its network nodes or node support poles.  
6.2 - Signal Interference with City's Communications Infrastructure Prohibited. 
A.  No interference. In the event that Provider's network nodes interferes with the City's traffic signal system, public safety radio system, or other City communications infrastructure operating on spectrum where the City is legally authorized to operate, Provider shall promptly cease operation of the network nodes causing said interference upon receiving notice from the City and refrain from operating. Provider shall respond to the City's request to address the source of the interference as soon as practicable, but in no event later than twenty-four (24) hours of receiving notice. 
B.  Protocol for Responding to Event of Interference. The protocol for responding to events of interference will require Provider to provide the City an Interference Remediation Report that includes the following items: 
1.  Remediation Plan. Devise a remediation plan to stop the event of inference; 
2.  Time Frame for Execution. Provide the expected time frame for execution of the remediation plan; and 
3.  Additional Information. Include any additional information relevant to the execution of the remediation plan. 
In the event that interference with City facilities cannot be eliminated, Provider shall shut down the network nodes and remove or relocate the network node that is the source of the interference as soon as possible to a suitable alternative location made available by City. 
C.  Following installation or modification of a network node, the City may require Provider to test the network node's radio frequency and other functions to confirm it does not interfere with the City's Operations.  
VII. - Abandonment, Relocation and Removal 
 
7.1 - Abandonment of Obsolete Network Nodes and Node Support Poles. 
Provider shall remove network nodes and node support poles when such facilities are abandoned regardless of whether or not it receives notice from the City. Unless the City sends notice that removal must be completed immediately to ensure public health, safety, and welfare, the removal must be completed within the earlier of ninety (90) days of the network nodes and node support poles being abandoned or within ninety (90) days of receipt of written notice from the City. When Provider removes or abandons permanent structures in the Right-of-Way, the Provider shall notify the City in writing of such removal or abandonment and shall file with the City the location and description of each network node or node support pole removed or abandoned. The City may require the Provider to complete additional remedial measures necessary for public safety and the integrity of the Right-of-Way.  
7.2 - Relocation and Removal at Provider's Expense. 
A.  Provider shall remove and relocate its network nodes and node support poles at its own expense to an alternative location not later than one hundred twenty (120) days after receiving written notice that removal, relocation, and/or alteration of the network nodes and/or node support poles is necessary due to: 
1.  Construction, completion, repair, widening, relocation, or maintenance of, or use in connection with, any City construction or maintenance project or other public improvement project; or 
2.  Maintenance, upgrade, expansion, replacement, removal or relocation of the City's pole or structure upon which Provider's network nodes are attached; or 
3.  The network node or node support pole, or portion thereof, is adversely affecting proper operation of traffic signals, streetlights or other City property; 
4.  Closure of a street or sale of City property; or 
5.  Projects and programs undertaken to protect or preserve the public health or safety; or 
6.  Activities undertaken to eliminate a public nuisance; or 
7.  Provider fails to obtain all applicable licenses, Permits, and certifications required by Law for its network nodes or node support poles; or 
8.  Duty otherwise arising from applicable law. 
B.  Provider's duty to remove and relocate its network nodes and node support poles at its expense is not contingent on the availability of an alternative location acceptable for relocation. City will make reasonable efforts to provide an alternative location within the Right-of-Way for relocation, but regardless of the availability of an alternative site acceptable to Provider, Provider shall comply with the notice to remove its network nodes and node support poles as instructed. 
C.  The City may remove the network node and/or node support pole if provider does not remove such within one hundred twenty (120) days. In such case, Provider shall reimburse City for the City's actual cost of removal of its network nodes and node support poles within 30 days of receiving the invoice from the City.  
7.3 - Removal or Relocation by Provider. 
A.  If the Provider removes or relocates at its own discretion, it shall notify the City in writing not less than 10 business days prior to removal or relocation. Provider shall obtain all Permits required for relocation or removal of its network nodes and node support poles prior to relocation or removal. 
B.  The City shall not issue any refunds for any amounts paid by Provider for network nodes and node support poles that have been removed.  
7.4 - Restoration. 
Provider shall repair any damage to the Right-of-Way, and the property of any third party resulting from Provider's removal or relocation activities (or any other of Provider's activities hereunder) within 10 days following the date of such removal or relocation, at Provider's sole cost and expense, including restoration of the Right-of-Way and such property to substantially the same condition as it was immediately before the date Provider was granted a Permit for the applicable location, including restoration or replacement of any damaged trees, shrubs or other vegetation. Such repair, restoration and replacement shall be subject to the sole, reasonable approval of the City.  
7.5 - Provider Responsible. 
Provider shall be responsible and liable for the acts and omissions of Provider's employees, temporary employees, officers, directors, consultants, agents, Affiliates, subsidiaries, sub lessees, and subcontractors in connection with the performance of activities within the City's right-of-way, as if such acts or omissions were Provider's acts or omissions.  
VIII. - General Provisions 
 
8.1 - As Built Maps and Records. 
Network Provider shall maintain accurate maps and other appropriate records of its Network Node facilities, Node Support Poles and related ground equipment as they are actually constructed in the public rights-of-way, including, upon request, the use of Auto CAD/GIS digital format. Network Provider will provide additional maps to the City upon request.  
8.2 - Ownership. 
No part of a Micro Network Node, Network Node, Node Support Pole and related ground equipment erected or placed on the public right-of-way by a Network Provider will become, or be considered by the City as being affixed to or a part of, the public right-of-way. All portions of the Micro Network Node, Network Node, Node Support Pole and related ground equipment constructed, modified, erected, or placed by Network Provider on the public right-of-way will be and remain the property of the Network Provider and may be removed by Network Provider at any time, provided the Network Provider shall notify the director prior to any work in the right-of-way, as provided in Chapter 35, Article V. 
