CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF GILMER, TEXAS 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
M	MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION
CC	Tallahassee, Florida     2001
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
GILMER, TEXAS 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Everett Dean 
Mayor 
____________ 
Danny Robinson, At Large 
William Hornsby, District #1 
Toney Putman, District #2 
Joe Woodson, Mayor Pro-Tem, District #3 
Johnny Taylor, District #4 
City Council 
____________ 
Thom Smyser 
City Manager 
____________ 
Mike Martin 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Mary Bates 
City Secretary 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
GILMER, TEXAS 
____________ 
R.D. Cross 
Mayor 
____________ 
Sara Dumas, At Large 
Eric King, District #1 
David Sowell, District #2 
Randy McDaniel, Mayor Pro-Tem, District #3 
Teathel Hollis, District #4 
City Council 
____________ 
Jeff Ellington 
City Manager 
____________ 
Mike Martin 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Kathy Davidson 
City Secretary 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Gilmer, Texas. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER	CHT:1
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE	CHTCT:1
CODE	CD1:1
CODE APPENDIX	CDA:1
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES	CCT:1
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE	SLT:1
CHARTER INDEX	CHTi:1
CODE INDEX	CDi:1
 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Alyce A. Whitson, Senior Code Attorney, and John Welch, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mary Bates, City Secretary, Michael Martin, City Attorney and the other members of the city staff for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Gilmer, Texas. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Gilmer, Texas. 
©  Copyrighted material.
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Gilmer, Texas. 2001. 
ORDINANCE NO. 01-002 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF GILMER, TEXAS; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GILMER: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Gilmer, Texas," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 94, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before October 5, 2000, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to review any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00; provided, however, that the violation of any provision of this Code or any ordinance, resolution, rule, or regulation that governs fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000.00. Where the offense is one for which a penalty is fixed by state law, the penalty for such offense shall be the same as fixed by state law. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, administrative adjudication and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after October 5, 2000, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective April 12, 2001. 
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the City Council of the City of Gilmer this 12th day of April, 2001. 
	By: _____
   Mayor
ATTEST:
____________ 
City Secretary 	
  
PART I - CHARTER 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Gilmer, as adopted by referendum on January 23, 1997. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
ARTICLE 1. - INCORPORATION, FORM OF GOVERNMENT, AND BOUNDARIES 
 
Section 1.01. - Incorporation. 
The citizens of the City of Gilmer in Upshur County, Texas, within the corporate limits as now established, or hereafter established in the manner prescribed by this Charter, shall be, and shall continue to be, a municipal body politic and corporate in perpetuity under the name of the "City of Gilmer."  
Section 1.02. - Form of Government. 
The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be known as "Council-Manager" government. Pursuant to its provisions and, subject only to the limitations imposed by the State constitution, by statutory laws of Texas, and by this Charter, all powers of the City shall be vested in an elective Council, hereinafter referred to as the "Council", which shall enact local legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies, appoint the City Manager, who in turn shall execute the laws and administer the government of the City.  
Section 1.03. - Boundaries. 
The boundaries and limit of the City of Gilmer, until changed in the manner herein provided, shall be the same as have heretofore been established and exist on the date of the adoption of this Charter, which boundaries are more fully set out and described by metes and bounds in a book called Official Record Describing the Metes and Bounds of the City of Gilmer, which is now and shall hereafter be in the office of the City Secretary of the City of Gilmer.  
Section 1.04. - Extension of Boundaries. 
The boundaries of the City of Gilmer may be enlarged and extended by the annexation of additional territory, irrespective of size and configuration, in any of the methods hereinafter designated: 
(a)	Extension of City Limits by Petition: Whenever a majority of the legally qualified property owners who are citizens of the State of Texas and inhabitants of any territory adjoining the City of Gilmer, or in case there are no qualified voters in said territory, then, when persons owning a majority of the land in the area to be annexed, may present a written petition requesting annexation to the Council and shall attach to said petition an affidavit of one or more of their number to the effect that said petition is signed by a majority of such qualified voters or, in the case there are no qualified voters, said affidavit shall be to the effect that there are no qualified voters in said territory and that the persons signing the petition own a majority of the land in said territory; and, thereupon the Council, at regular session or in special session held not sooner than thirty (30) days after the presentation of said petition, may, by ordinance, annex such territory to the City of Gilmer and thenceforth the said territory shall be a part of the City of Gilmer and the inhabitants thereof shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges of other citizens and shall be bound by the acts, ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of said City. 
(b)	Annexation of Unoccupied Lands on Petition of Owners: The owner or owners of any land which is without residents adjacent to the City may, by petition in writing to the City Council, request the annexation of such contiguous and adjacent land describing it by metes and bounds. The City Council shall thereafter, and not less than five (5) days and not more than ninety (90) days after the filing of such petition, hear such petition and the arguments for and against the same, and grant or refuse such petition as the City Council may see fit. If the City Council grants such petition, it may by proper ordinances receive and annex such territory as a part of the City. 
(c)	Annexation by Amendment to Charter: The boundary limits of the City may be fixed and additional territory added or annexed thereto by amendment to the Charter of the City. 
(d)	Extending Limits by Action of the City Council: The City Council shall have power by ordinance to fix the boundary limits of the City of Gilmer and to provide for the extension of said boundary limits and the annexation of additional territory lying adjacent to said City, with or without the consent of the inhabitants in such territory or the owners thereof, not inconsistent with the procedural rules prescribed by law applicable to the cities operating under charters adopted or amended under Article 11, Section 5, of the Constitution of the State of Texas. 
(e)	Annexation by Any Other Method Provided by Law: Additional territory may be annexed to the City in any manner and by any procedure that may now be provided by law or that may be hereafter provided, or in such manner as shall be provided, by ordinances or resolutions of the City Council. Same shall be in addition to the methods hereinabove provided. 
(f)	Annexed Territory to Become Part of the City: Upon completion of any one of the procedures described in paragraphs (a) through (e) above, the territory so annexed shall become a part of the City and said land and its residents and future residents shall be provided, within a timely manner[,] with all the rights and privileges of other citizens of the City and shall be bound by the acts, ordinances resolutions and regulations of the City. 
State Law reference— Annexation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 42.001 et seq.  
Section 1.05. - Rule for Contraction of Boundaries. 
Whenever there exists within the corporate limits of the City of Gilmer any territory not suitable or necessary for orderly planning and development of the City, the City Council may, upon a petition signed by the majority of the qualified voters residing in such territory, if the same be inhabited, or without any such petition, if the same be uninhabited, by ordinance duly passed, discontinue said territory as a part of said City. Said petition and ordinance shall specify accurately the metes and bounds of the territory sought to be eliminated from the City and shall contain a plat designating such territory so that the same can be definitely ascertained. When said ordinance has been duly passed, the same shall be entered upon the minutes and records of the City and, from and after the entry of such ordinances, said territory shall cease to be a part of said City, but said territory shall still be liable for its pro rata share of any debts incurred while said area was a part of said City. Further, the City shall continue to levy, assess, and collect taxes on the property within said territory to pay the indebtedness incurred while said area was a part of the City as though the same had not been excluded from the boundaries of the City,[;] provided however, that in the event such disannexation shall be initiated unilaterally by the City without application of the residents residing within such areas to be disannexed or the owners thereof, then, in such event, the City shall not continue to levy, assess, and collect taxes on such disannexed area as herein provided or in accordance with laws and codes of the State of Texas.  
Section 1.06. - Industrial Districts. 
The City of Gilmer may form industrial districts in accordance with laws and codes of the State of Texas.  
ARTICLE 2. - POWERS OF THE CITY 
 
Section 2.01. - Specific Powers. 
The City of Gilmer shall have all powers now or hereafter granted to municipalities by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, together with all of the implied powers necessary to carry into execution such granted powers. 
The City may: 
(a)	Use a corporate seal;
(b)	Sue and be sued;
(c)	Contract and be contracted with;
(d)	Cooperate with the government of the State of Texas or an agency or any political subdivision thereof, or with the Federal government or any agency thereof, to accomplish a lawful purpose for the advancement of the interest, welfare, health, morals, comfort, safety, and convenience of the City and its citizens; 
(e)	Acquire property within or without its corporate limits for any municipal purpose in fee simple, or in any lesser interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise, lease or condemnation, and subject to the provisions of this Charter; 
(f)	Sell, lease, mortgage, hold, manage, improve, control, and police any such property as may now or hereafter be owned by it, shall have the right to lease or let its property whether inside or outside of the city limits; provided however, the City shall not sell, convey, mortgage, or otherwise alienate any public utility without prior approval of the voters of the City; 
(g)	Exercise the power of eminent domain where necessary or desirable to carry out any of the powers conferred upon it by this Charter, or by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas; 
(h)	Assess, levy, and collect taxes for general and special purposes on all lawful subjects of taxation; 
(i)	Borrow money in the faith and credit of the City by the issuance and sale of bonds, warrants, or notes of the City; 
(j)	Borrow money on the revenue of municipally owned utilities or other municipal enterprises by the issuance of bonds and notes secured by such revenues; 
(k)	Appropriate the funds of the City for all lawful purposes;
(l)	Regulate and control the use, for whatever purpose, of the streets and other public places; 
(m)	Make and enforce all police, health, sanitary, and other regulations; pass ordinances and enact such regulations as may be expedient for the protection and maintenance of good government, peace, and welfare of the City for the performance of the functions thereof, and for the order and security of its residents; and provide suitable penalties for the violations of any ordinance enacted by the City of Gilmer; and, except as prohibited by the Constitution and laws of this state or restricted by this Charter, the City may exercise all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever. 
The powers hereby conferred upon the City shall include, but are not restricted to, the powers conferred expressly and permissively by the Home Rule Amendment of the Constitution of Texas, known as the Enabling Act and including other laws and codes of the State of Texas, as now or hereafter amended, all of which are hereby adopted. In addition to the powers enumerated herein, and subject only to the limitations imposed by the State Constitution, the State laws, and this Charter, the City shall have, without the necessity of express enumeration in this Charter, each and every power which, by virtue of the Constitution of Texas, the people of the City are empowered by election to grant to or confer upon the city by expressly and specifically granting and enumerating the same herein. All such powers, whether expressed or implied, shall be exercised and enforced in the manner prescribed in this Charter; or when not prescribed herein, in such manner as shall be provided by the ordinance of the Council.  
Section 2.02. - General Powers. 
The enumeration of the particular powers set forth herein shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive, but in addition to the powers enumerated herein or implied hereby or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, the City shall have and may exercise all power of local self-government and all other powers which, under the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, it would be competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate. Said authority shall include the right to condemn property for such purposes. The City shall have and possess the power of condemnation for any municipal or public purposes even though not specifically enumerated in this Charter.  
Section 2.03. - Streets and Public Property. 
The City shall have exclusive dominion, control, and jurisdiction in, upon, over, and under the public streets, sidewalks, alleys, highways, public squares, and public ways within the corporate limits of the City, and in, upon, over, and under all public property of the City. With respect to each and every public street, sidewalk, alley, highway, public square, public park, or other public way within the corporate limits of the City, the City shall have the power to establish, maintain, improve, alter, abandon, or vacate the same; to regulate the use thereof; and to abate and remove in a summary manner any encroachment thereon.  
Section 2.04. - Street Development and Improvement. 
The City shall have the power to develop and improve, or cause to be developed and improved, any and all public streets, sidewalks, alleys, highways, and other public ways within the corporate limits of the City by laying out, opening, narrowing, widening, straightening, extending, lighting, and establishing building lines along the same; by purchasing, condemning, and taking property therefore by filling, grading, raising, lowering, paving, repaving, and repairing, in a permanent manner, the same; and by constructing, reconstructing, altering, repairing, and realigning curbs, gutters, drains, sidewalks, culverts, and other appurtenances and incidentals in connection with such development and improvement authorized hereinabove, or any combination or parts thereof. The cost of such development and improvement may be paid partly by assessments levied as a lien against the property abutting thereon and against the owners thereof, and such assessments may be levied in any amounts and under any procedure not prohibited by State Law. 
As an alternate and cumulative method of developing, improving, and paving any and all public streets, sidewalks, alleys, highways, and other public ways within its corporate limits, the City shall have the power and authority to proceed in accordance with applicable laws of the State of Texas.  
ARTICLE 3. - THE CITY COUNCIL 
 
Section 3.01. - Number, Selection, and Term of Office. 
The legislative and governing body of the City of Gilmer shall consist of a Mayor and five (5) Councilmembers, and said body shall be the only elective officers of the City. The Mayor and one Councilmember will be elected at large with the remaining four Councilmembers being elected by district. The Mayor and Councilmembers shall be known as the "City Council of the City of Gilmer". However all references in this Charter to the entire council will mean the five (5) elected councilmembers. In the manner provided in Article 7, the Mayor and Councilmembers shall be elected for a term of two (2) years or until their successors have been elected and shall take office as provided in Article 7. Upon adoption of this Charter, all duly elected or appointed Councilmembers or Mayor shall remain in office until [their] term of office expires. 
No elective officer may serve more than three (3) consecutive terms as either a Councilmember and/or Mayor. Persons serving three (3) consecutive terms as a Councilmember and/or Mayor must remain out of office one (1) term before being eligible to serve as a Councilmember and/or Mayor. Serving one-half or more of any portion of a term shall be counted in determining the number of terms served. Provisions contained in the paragraph relating to term limits shall not take effect until the first municipal election in May after the adoption of this Charter, or at the same time the Charter is adopted; provided such Charter is adopted at a municipal election in May. 
(Ref. of 8-12-2000, prop. 1) 
Section 3.02. - Prohibiting Holding or Running for Other Office. 
No person elected to the City Council shall, during the term for which they were elected, be appointed to any office or position in the service of the City. If a member of the Council, a member of any Board or Commission appointed by the Council, or any appointive officer or employee of the City is elected or appointed to any publicly elected office, other than re-election to the same position on the City Council, they shall immediately forfeit their place, position, or employment with the City, except such individual may be a Notary Public or member of the National Guard or naval or military reserve or a retired member of the Armed Forces.  
Section 3.03. - Qualifications. 
Each of the five (5) Councilmembers and Mayor shall: 
(a)	Be a citizen of the United States of America;
(b)	Be a registered qualified voter of the State of Texas and at least 21 years of age;
(c)	Not be convicted of a felony or crime involving moral turpitude;
(d)	Have resided for at least one (1) year immediately preceding the election date at which they are candidates within the corporate limits of the City of Gilmer; if seeking election for a single member district they must reside in that district for at least one (1) year immediately preceding the election date; 
(e)	Not be employed by the City at the time they declare to be a candidate as a Councilmember or Mayor; 
(f)	If elected, shall hold no other public office except that of Notary Public or a member of the National Guard or naval or military reserve; and 
(g)	Not be disqualified by reason of any provision of any other sections of this Charter.
A Councilmember or Mayor shall forfeit his/her office if he or she: 
(a)	Lacks at any time during his/her term of office, any qualifications for the office prescribed by this Charter or by law; 
(b)	Willfully violates any express prohibition of this Charter;
(c)	Is convicted of a felony offense or a crime involving moral turpitude;
(d)	Is placed under the terms and conditions of the Adult Probation Department and/or community supervision department of the State of Texas pursuant to a final Court order for any felony offense or crime involving moral turpitude; or 
(e)	Fails to attend three (3) consecutive regular meetings of the Council without first being excused by the Council. 
If the Mayor or any member of Council refuses to voluntarily comply with the above regulations, the City Council shall, at its next regular meeting, declare a vacancy to exist and shall fill said vacancy in accordance with this Charter.  
Section 3.04. - Council to Be the Judge of the Qualification of its Own Members. 
The City Council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its own members, and for such purpose shall have power to subpoena witnesses and require the production of records. The Council shall, within five (5) calendar days after a regular or special election, either at a called meeting of said council, called for that purpose, or at the next regular meeting, canvass the returns and declare the results of such election.  
Section 3.05. - Vacancies. 
If a member of the Council is appointed or elected to any public office other than the specific office then held, he/she shall forfeit his/her office or place on the Council as of the date of such appointment or election. 
A single vacancy in the Council shall be filled within thirty (30) days of the occurrence of the vacancy by a majority vote of the remaining members of the Council by selection of a person qualified for the position as described in this Charter. This appointee shall serve until the position can be filled at the next regular City election. 
When more than one vacancy shall develop at any one time, a special election shall be called by the Council for the next date available under the Texas Election Code to fill the vacancies in the same manner as described herein for regular elections. However, if such vacancies occur within ninety (90) days of a regular election, then no special election shall be called and remaining Councilmembers shall appoint qualified persons to fill the vacancies until the regular election. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Charter to the contrary if, at any time, the membership of the Council is reduced to less than three (3), the remaining members may, by majority action, appoint additional members to raise the membership to three (3). These appointees shall serve until the positions can be filled at the next regular or special City election.  
Section 3.06. - Compensation. 
Salary of elective officers. The salaries of the Mayor and City Council shall be set by the city Council. 
Compensation of appointive officers. Appointive officers shall receive such compensation as may be provided for them by the City Council.  
Section 3.07. - Mayor. 
The Mayor shall preside over the meetings of the Council, and perform such other duties consistent with the office as may be imposed upon him/her by this Charter, and by ordinances and resolutions passed in pursuance thereof. The Mayor may participate in the discussion of all matters coming before the Council, but may only cast a vote during a tie vote and at such point, he/she shall have the deciding vote. The Mayor shall sign, after authorization by the Council, all contracts, conveyances made or entered into by the City, all bonds, warrants and any other obligations issued under the provisions of this Charter and in the manner prescribed in the ordinance authorizing the signing of any such obligation. The Mayor shall be recognized as the official head of the City by the courts for the purpose of serving civil process, by the Governor for the purpose of enforcing military law, and for all ceremonial purposes.  
Section 3.08. - Mayor Pro-Tem. 
The City Council, at its first meeting after election of Councilmembers, shall elect one of its number as Mayor Pro-Tem, and he/she shall perform all the duties of the Mayor in the absence or disability of the Mayor.  
Section 3.09. - Powers of the Council. 
All powers of the City, the determination of all matters of policy and authority to pass all laws and ordinances relating to its municipal affairs, shall be vested in the City Council; provided, however, that the City Council shall have no power to exercise the powers which are expressly conferred upon other City officers by this Charter. Without limitation of the foregoing, and among the other powers that may be exercised by the City Council, the following are hereby enumerated for greater certainty: 
(a)	Appoint and remove the City Manager as hereinafter provided. A formal evaluation of the City Manager will be performed at the first regular City Council meeting in January of each year. Furthermore, the City Manager's evaluation will be a required agenda item for the first meeting in January. The Council shall formally evaluate the performance of the City Manager and suggest items for improvement and priorities for the coming year. In addition, the Council may conduct as many evaluations as they deem necessary during the year. This shall be handled in executive session as a personnel matter; 
(b)	Establish, create, consolidate, or abolish administrative departments and distribute the work of divisions, upon recommendation of the City Manager; 
(c)	Adopt the City budget;
(d)	Authorize the issuance and sale of bonds by a bond ordinance;
(e)	Inquire into the conduct of any office, department, or agency of the City and make investigations as to municipal affairs; 
(f)	Provide for such additional boards and commissions, not otherwise provided for in this Charter, as may be deemed necessary, and appoint the members of all such boards and commissions. Such boards and commissions shall have all powers and duties now or hereafter conferred and created by this Charter, by City ordinance, or by State law; 
(g)	Adopt and modify the zoning plan, and a building code, including electrical and plumbing codes, of and for the City and to require building permits; 
(h)	Adopt and modify the official map of the City. (The official map is and shall be maintained by the City Secretary in the City Hall in the City of Gilmer); 
(i)	Adopt, modify, and carry out plans proposed by the City Planning and Zoning Commission for the clearance of slum districts and rehabilitation of blighted areas; 
(j)	Adopt, modify, and carry out plans proposed by the City Planning and Zoning Commission for the replanning, improvement, and redevelopment of any area or district which may have been destroyed in whole or in part by disaster; 
(k)	Regulate, license, and fix the charges or fares made by any person, firm, or corporation owning, operating, or controlling any vehicle of any character used for the carrying of passengers for hire or the transportation of freight for hire on the public streets and alleys of the City; 
(l)	Provide for the establishment and designation of fire limits, and prescribe the kind and character of buildings or structures or improvements to be erected therein; and provide for the erection of fireproof buildings within said limits; and provide for the condemnation of dangerous structures or buildings or dilapidated buildings, or buildings calculated to increase the fire hazard, and prescribe the manner of their removal or destruction, within said limits; 
(m)	Fix the salaries and compensation of the City officers and employees;
(n)	Approve changes to the personnel policy and procedures of the City as recommended by the City Manager; 
(o)	Provide for a sanitary sewer and water system, and require property owners to connect their premises with the water and sewer systems, and provide the penalties for failure to make sanitary sewer connections; 
(p)	Provide for sanitary garbage disposal, and set fees and charges therefore, and provide penalties for failure to pay such fees and charges; 
(q)	To define nuisances and to prohibit same, and provide penalties for violations;
(r)	Provide for all necessary public utilities and set fees and charges therefore and provide penalties for misuses of same; 
(s)	Exercise exclusive dominion, control, and jurisdiction (including the right to close and abandon streets and alleys) in, upon, over, and under the public streets, avenues, sidewalks, alleys, highways, boulevards and public grounds of the City; and provide for the improvement of same as provided by applicable laws of the State of Texas; 
(t)	Regulation of railroads and railroad right-of-way. The City Council shall have the power by ordinance to direct and control, within the city limits, the speed of engines, locomotives, and motor cars operating on railroad tracks, the length of trains, the construction of railroad tracks, turnouts and switches, maintenance and repair of crossings, the regulation of the grade thereof and the use of the streets for switching or stopping cars. If improvements be ordered constructed in any part of any area used or occupied by the tracks or facilities of any railroad, then the City Council shall have power to assess the whole cost of improvements in such area and the added costs of improvements in the area adjacent thereto made necessary by such use or occupancy, against such railway or utility affected by such improvements and shall have power, by ordinance, to provide for the enforcement of such assessment; 
(u)	Compromise and settle any and all claims, demands and lawsuits of every kind and character in favor of, or against, the City of Gilmer; 
(v)	To require bonds, both special and general, of all contractors and others constructing or building for the City, and set up standards, rules and regulations therefore; 
(w)	To pass ordinances defining and prohibiting misdemeanors and vagrancy, and provide penalties for violations; 
(x)	To provide and/or arrange for any and all "civil defense measures" and "public shelter measures" for the City of Gilmer, Texas, and for the citizens thereof, deemed necessary for the public welfare; and 
(y)	To name and designate an "Official Newspaper" for the City of Gilmer, Texas, and to cause only the caption of duly enacted ordinances and resolutions to be published, except as provided otherwise by law. 
(Ref. of 8-12-2000, prop. 2) 
Section 3.10. - Meetings of the Council. 
The Council shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting a month and may hold as many other meetings as may be necessary for the transaction of the business of the City. All regular meetings shall be held at the City Hall or at such other places within city limits as will permit the attendance of the general public. All meetings will be held in accordance with open meeting laws of the State of Texas.  
Section 3.11. - Special Meetings. 
The Mayor or any three (3) members of the Council may call special meetings by giving notice to the City Secretary who shall notify each member of the Council of the time of such meeting and purpose thereof. Only matters mentioned in the call shall be considered.  
Section 3.12. - Nepotism. 
No person related within the second degree by affinity (marriage) or third degree by consanguinity (blood) to the Mayor or any member of the Council or the City Manager or Department Heads shall be appointed to any permanent paid office, position, clerkship, or other service of the City.  
Section 3.13. - Prohibitions of appointment to City Manager. 
No Councilmember or Mayor shall be appointed City Manager during the term for which he has been elected Councilmember or Mayor, nor within two (2) years after the expiration of his term. 
(Ref. of 8-12-2000, prop. 3) 
Section 3.14. - Council Not to Interfere in City Manager Appointments and Removals. 
Section 3.14.1. Administration. Neither the City Council nor any of its members shall direct or request the appointment of any person to, or his removal from, office by the City Manager or by any of his subordinates, or in any manner take part in the appointment or removal of officers in the administrative service of the City. However, the Council may consult and advise with the City Manager, make inquiry regarding the appointments or removals and may express their opinion in regard thereto. 
Section 3.14.2. Executive. In regard to administrative and executive duties under the City Manager, the Council and its members shall deal solely through the City Manager, either publicly or privately. Willful violation of the foregoing provisions of this Charter by any member of the Council shall constitute misconduct and shall authorize the Council by a vote of the majority of its membership to expel such offending member of the Council if found guilty after public hearing, and thereby creates a vacancy in the place held by such member. 
(Ref. of 8-12-2000, prop. 4) 
Section 3.15. - Rules of Procedure. 
The Council shall, by ordinance, determine its own rules and order of business and the rules shall provide that citizens of the City shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard at any meeting. The Council shall provide for the minutes being taken and records of all meetings, and such minutes shall be a public record. Three (3) Council Members shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of transaction of business and no action of the Council shall be valid or binding unless adopted by the affirmative vote of a majority of the members present. All meetings of the City Council shall be open to the public as provided by state law, and minutes of all proceedings shall be kept, to which any citizen may have access at all reasonable times and which shall constitute one of the archives of the City. The vote upon the passage of all ordinances and resolutions shall be taken by "Ayes" and "Nays" made in open meeting by a canvass of the Council, and the vote of each Councilmember shall be entered upon the minutes and every ordinance or resolution, upon its final passage, shall be recorded in a book kept for that purpose and shall be authenticated by the signature of the presiding officer and the City Secretary. 
State Law reference— Public meetings, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 551.001 et seq.; public records, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 552.001 et seq.  
Section 3.16. - Procedure to Enact Legislation. 
The City Council shall legislate by ordinance, and the enacting clause of every ordinance shall be: "Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Gilmer". Every ordinance enacted by the Council shall be signed by the Mayor or Mayor Pro-Tem and shall be filed with and recorded by the City Secretary. The descriptive caption of all ordinances enacted by the Council shall be read in open meeting of the Council at one (1) regular or special Council meeting. All ordinances, unless otherwise provided by law or by the terms of such ordinance, shall take effect in accordance with Article 3, Section 3.17.  
Section 3.17. - Publication of Ordinances. 
Except as otherwise provided by law or by this Charter, the City Secretary shall give notice of the proposed enactment of every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine or forfeiture for any violation of any of its provisions and of every other ordinance required by law, or this Charter, to the public, by causing the said ordinance, or its caption and penalty, to be published at least one time at least seven (7) days prior to the final passage thereof in the official newspaper of the City. The affidavit of such publication by the publisher of such newspaper, taken before any officer authorized to administer oaths and filed with the City Secretary, shall be conclusive proof of the legal publication and promulgation of such ordinance in all courts. Such enacted ordinance shall take effect upon publication as required by law.  
Section 3.18. - Adoption and Ratification of Existing City Ordinances and Prior City Actions. 
All ordinances of the City of Gilmer adopted prior to the adoption of this Charter and not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter shall remain in full force and effect until altered, amended or repealed by the City Council. All official actions taken by the City of Gilmer, its City Councils or other City officials, and all previous elections, contracts, bonds, warrants, and other evidences of indebtedness and any annexations, prior to the adoption of this Home Rule Charter, are hereby adopted, validated confirmed and ratified.  
Section 3.19. - Code of Ordinances. 
The City Council shall have power to cause the ordinances of the City of Gilmer to be printed in code form and shall have the same arranged and digested as often as the Council may deem advisable; however, failure to print the ordinances as herein provided shall not affect the validity of same.  
Section 3.20. - Bonds for Employees. 
The City Manager and the City Secretary, and such other City officers and employees as the City Council may require, shall, before entering upon the duties of their office, enter into a good and sufficient fidelity bond in a sum to be determined by the City Council. Said bond shall be payable to the City of Gilmer, and conditioned upon the faithful discharge of the duties of such persons, and upon the faithful accounting for all monies, credits, and things of value coming into the hands of such persons, and such bonds, shall be signed as surety by a company authorized to do business under the laws of the State of Texas. The premium of such bonds shall be paid by the City of Gilmer; and such bonds must be acceptable to the City Council.  
Section 3.21. - Investigative Powers of the Council. 
The Council shall have the power to inquire into or investigate the official conduct of any department, agency, officer, or employee of the City and, for that purpose, shall have the power to administer oaths, subpoena witnesses, compel the production of books, papers, records, or other evidence, and, as provided by ordinance, to punish and fix penalties for contempt for failure or refusal to obey any such subpoena or to produce any such books, papers, records, or other evidence.  
ARTICLE 4. - ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES 
 
Section 4.01. - City Manager - Appointment and Qualification. 
The City Council shall appoint a City Manager for an indefinite term, who shall be the chief administrative and executive officer of the City. The City Manager shall be chosen by the City Council solely on the basis of executive and administrative training, experience, ability and character, and without regard to political consideration. The City Manager need not be a resident at the time of appointment, however, the City Manager must reside within the City during the tenure served. The City Council shall require the City Manager, before entering upon the duties of this office, to execute a good and sufficient surety bond in such amount as the City Council may demand payable to the City of Gilmer and, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of this office, the premium of such bond to be paid by the City. 
(Ref. of 8-12-2000, prop. 5) 
Section 4.01.1. - City Manager - Powers and Duties. 
The City Manager shall be the chief executive officer and head of the administrative branch of City government. The City Manager shall be responsible to the City Council for the proper administration of all the affairs of the City. The powers herein conferred upon the City Manager shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(a)	Appoint and employ all heads of departments and other employees not otherwise provided for in this Charter or by ordinance. Appointments made by the City Manager shall be on the basis of executive and administrative experience, ability, training, fitness, and efficiency of such appointees in the work which they are to administer. All heads of departments shall be immediately responsible to the City Manager, and may be removed any time the City Manager may deem it necessary in the best interest of the City. The City Manager shall have the right to discharge any of the subordinate employees of departments under said direction in accordance with the provisions of this Charter and ordinances enacted pursuant thereto; 
(b)	Exercise control and direction over all departments established by this Charter, or that may hereafter be created by the City Council by Ordinance, except as otherwise herein provided; 
(c)	See that all State laws and Ordinances of the City of Gilmer are effectively enforced as well as recommend, in writing to the City Council for adoption, such other ordinances and measures as may be deemed necessary or expedient; 
(d)	Prepare a proposed budget annually and submit to the City Council on or before July 31st of each year and be responsible for its administration after adoption; 
(e)	Prepare and submit to the Council as of the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the City for the preceding year; 
(f)	Keep the Council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the City and make such recommendations as may seem to be desirable; 
(g)	Prepare personnel policy recommendations to the City Council and furnish it with necessary information in arriving at proper decisions; 
(h)	Attend all meetings of the City Council, with the right to take part in the discussion, but having no vote; and 
(i)	Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or required by the Council not inconsistent with this Charter.  
Section 4.01.2. - City Manager - Term and Removal. 
The City Council shall appoint the City Manager for an indefinite term and may remove him/her by a three-fifth (3/5) vote of the entire Council. At least thirty (30) days before such removal shall become effective, the City Council, shall by a three-fifth (3/5) vote of the entire Council, adopt a preliminary resolution stating the reasons for removal. The Manager may reply in writing and may request a public hearing which shall be held not earlier than twenty (20) days nor later than thirty (30) days after the filing of such request. After such public hearing, if one be requested and after full consideration, the City Council, by the entire council, may adopt a final resolution of removal. By the preliminary resolution, the City Council may suspend the Manager from duty. The City Council may remove the Manager with no public hearing, upon the affirmative vote of the majority of the entire Council, if the Manager has only served the city for six (6) months or less. The action of the Council in suspending or removing the City Manager shall be final, it being the intention of the Charter to vest all authority and fix all responsibility for such suspension or removal in the City Council.  
Section 4.01.3. - City Manager - Investigative Powers. 
The City Manager, or any persons or committee authorized by the City Manager, shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any department or office of the City and to make investigations as to City affairs and, for that purpose, may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and compel the production of books, papers, and other evidence material to said inquiry. The City Council shall provide by ordinance penalties for contempt in refusing to obey any such subpoenas or failure to produce books, papers, and other evidence, and shall have the power to punish any such contempt in the manner provided by ordinance.  
Section 4.01.4. - City Manager - Compensation. 
The City Manager shall receive compensation as may be fixed by the City Council according to the person's experience, education, and training. The compensation should be agreed upon before appointment with the understanding that the City Council may change it at its discretion.  
Section 4.01.5. - Absence of City Manager. 
The City Manager, by letter filed with the City Secretary, may designate a qualified administrative officer of the City to perform the Manager's duties during temporary absence or disability. In the event of failure of the City Manager to make such designation, the Council may, by resolution, appoint an officer of the City to perform the duties of the City Manager until he/she shall return or until such disability shall cease.  
Section 4.02. - City Secretary. 
The City Manager shall appoint and remove the City Secretary and any Assistant City Secretary as the City Council shall deem advisable. The City Secretary shall be entitled to a seat at the Council table at all regular and special Council meetings. The Assistant City Secretary shall serve such obligations in the absence of the City Secretary. 
(Ref. of 8-12-2000, prop. 6) 
Section 4.02.1. - City Secretary - Duties and Responsibilities. 
The duties of the City Secretary, or an Assistant City Secretary, shall be as required by law and as established by the Job Description as adopted with the City's Pay Classification Plan and shall include the following: 
(a)	Record the minutes of all official meetings of the Council provided, however, only the captions of duly enacted ordinances and resolutions shall be recorded in the minutes; and 
(b)	Be the custodian of all municipal records and provide for the safety and security thereof and maintain the City seal and affix it to all instruments requiring the seal.  
Section 4.02.2. - City Secretary - Compensation. 
The City Secretary shall be compensated as other City employees based on the City's Pay Classification Plan.  
Section 4.03. - Department of Finance. 
There shall be established and maintained a Department of Finance to ensure that effective and efficient administration of all financial affairs of the City is achieved.  
Section 4.03.1. - Director of Finance - Appointment and Qualifications. 
There shall be a Director of Finance appointed by the City Manager for an indefinite term. The Director of Finance shall serve in no other position within the City Government, except when so designated by City Council. The City Manager shall have the authority to remove the Director of Finance without the prior approval of [a] three-fifth[s] (3/5) vote of the entire Council, if following a detailed internal or external investigation identifying that the Director of Finance has committed a criminal act or acts against the City of Gilmer in the performance of their duties and/or responsibilities. With the departure of the Director of Finance whether voluntary or involuntary, the City Manager at the direction of the City Council shall cause an independent audit to be undertaken of the City's financial books and accounts. The Director of Finance shall have knowledge of municipal accounting and taxation and have had experience in budgeting and financial control. The Director shall be fully responsible to the City Manager for the administration of their department, and for the carrying out and enforcement of the financial resolutions and ordinances of the City Council. The Director shall, with the approval of the City Manager, appoint and remove the employees of said department and shall perform such duties as identified within this Charter or as may be developed by the City Manager not in conflict with City Council or required by the City Council. 
(Ref. of 8-12-2000, prop. 7) 
Section 4.03.2. - Director of Finance - Powers and Duties. 
The Director of Finance shall have charge of the administration of the financial affairs of the City and to that end shall have the authority and shall be required to: 
(a)	Compile the current expense estimates;
(b)	Compile the capital estimates for the budget;
(c)	Supervise and be responsible for the disbursement of all monies and have control over all expenditures to insure that budget appropriations are not exceeded; 
(d)	Maintain a general accounting system for the City government and each of its offices, departments, and agencies; keep books for and exercise financial budgetary control over each office, department, and agency; keep separate accounts for items of appropriation contained in the City budget, each of which accounts shall show the amount of the appropriation, the amount paid therefrom, the unpaid obligations against it and the unencumbered balance; require report of receipts and disbursements from each receiving and spending agency of the City to be made daily or at such intervals as he/she may deem expedient; 
(e)	Submit to the City Council a monthly statement of all receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the City; 
(f)	Prepare, as of the end of each fiscal year, a complete financial statement and report;
(g)	Collect all taxes, fees, and service charges, including special assessments, license fees, and all other revenues of the City, except those collectable by the County, and receive all money receivable by the City from other levels of government, or from any court, or from any office, department, or agency of the City; 
(h)	Have custody of all public funds belonging to or under control of the City, or any office, department, or agency of the City government, and deposit all funds coming into hands in such depositories as may be designated by resolution of the Council, or, if no such resolution be adopted, by the City Manager, subject to the requirements of law as to surety and the payment of interest on deposits, but all such interest shall be the property of the City and shall be accounted for and credited to the proper account; 
(i)	Supervise and be responsible for the purchase, storage, and distribution of all supplies, materials, equipment, and any other articles used by any office, department, or agency of the City government; 
(j)	Approve all proposed expenditures; unless he/she shall certify that there is an unencumbered balance of appropriation and available funds, no appropriation shall be encumbered and no expenditure made; 
(k)	Prescribe the forms of receipts, requisitions, vouchers, bills, or claims to be used by all the offices, departments, and agencies of the City government; 
(l)	Examine and approve all contracts, orders, and other documents by which the City government incurs financial obligations having previously ascertained that monies have been appropriated and allotted and will be available when the obligations shall become due and payable; 
(m)	Audit and approve before payment all bills, invoices, payrolls, and other evidences of claims, demands, or charges against the City government and with the advice of the City Attorney determine the regularity, legality, and correctness of such claims, demands, or charges; and 
(n)	Inspect and audit any accounts or records of financial transactions which may be maintained in any office, department, or agency of the City government apart from or subsidiary to the accounts kept in his office. 
(Ref. of 8-12-2000, prop. 8) 
Section 4.03.3. - Director of Finance - Compensation. 
The Director of Finance shall be compensated as other City employees based on the City's Pay Classification Plan.  
Section 4.04. - Department of Police. 
There shall be established and maintained a Department of Police, to preserve order within the City, and to secure the residents of said City from violence, and property therein, from injury or loss.  
Section 4.04.1. - Chief of Police. 
The Chief of Police shall be the chief administrative officer of the Department of Police. The Chief shall, with the approval of the City Manager, appoint and remove the employees of said department and shall perform such duties as may be required of him by the City Manager. The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the City Manager for an indefinite term. The Chief of Police shall be fully responsible to the City Manager for the administration of his department, and for the carrying out and enforcement of the resolutions and ordinances of the City Council. The Chief may be removed from office by said City Manager.  
Section 4.04.2. - Special Police. 
No person, except as authorized by general law, by this Charter, or by the ordinances not in conflict herewith, shall act as special police or special detective.  
Section 4.04.3. - Chief of Police - Compensation. 
The Chief of Police shall be compensated as other City employees based on the City's Pay Classification Plan.  
Section 4.05. - Fire Department. 
There shall be established and maintained a Fire Department for the City of Gilmer, to be maintained by the Gilmer Volunteer Fire Department for the protection of the City.  
Section 4.05.1. - Fire Chief. 
The Fire Chief shall be elected by a majority vote of the active members of the Gilmer Volunteer Fire Department present at the first meeting of each year and then approved or denied by the City Council. The Fire Chief shall be the Chief Administrative officer of the Municipal Fire Department, fully responsible to the City Manager for the administration of the fire department, and for the carrying out and enforcement of the resolution and ordinances of the City Council. The Chief shall, with the approval of the City Manager, appoint and remove the employees of said department, and shall perform such duties as may be required of him by the City Manager. 
(Ref. of 8-12-2000, prop. 9) 
Section 4.05.2. - Fire Marshal. 
The Fire Marshal shall be appointed by the City Council and have a term of one (1) year, beginning February 1 of each year. The Fire Marshal shall be fully responsible to the Fire Chief and City Council for the investigation of the origin of fires and the carrying out and enforcement of the resolutions and ordinances of the City Council pertaining to the general prevention of fire and the education of fire prevention of the residents of the City. The Fire Marshal may be removed from office by the City Council, and the duties of the Fire Chief and Fire Marshal may be performed by the same individual but only on a temporary basis.  
Section 4.05.3. - Assistant Fire Marshal. 
The Assistant Fire Marshal shall be appointed by the City Council and have a term of one (1) year beginning February 1 of each year. The Assistant Fire Marshal shall assist the Fire Marshal in the investigation of the origin of fires and the carrying out and enforcement of the resolutions and ordinances of the City Council pertaining to the general prevention of fire and the education of fire prevention of the residents of the City. The Assistant Fire Marshal may be removed from office by the City Council.  
Section 4.06. - Administrative Departments. 
There shall be such administrative departments as established by this Charter and may be established by ordinance and, except as otherwise provided in this Charter, these administrative departments shall be under the direction of the City Manager. The Council shall have the power by ordinance, to establish administrative departments or offices not herein provided by this Charter. The Council may discontinue, redesignate, or combine any of the departments and/or administrative offices. The head of each department shall be a director or superintendent who shall be appointed by the City Manager and such director or superintendent shall have supervision and control over his/her department. Excluding the fire department and police department, two (2) or more departments may be headed by the same individual and the City Manager may head one (1) or more departments.  
ARTICLE 5. - LEGAL AND JUDICIAL SERVICES 
 
Section 5.01. - City Attorney. 
The Mayor, with the concurrence of the City Council, shall appoint a competent, duly qualified, and licensed attorney practicing law in the State of Texas to be an attorney for the City of Gilmer, hereinafter referred to as the "City Attorney." He shall serve at the discretion of the City Council and shall receive for his services such compensation as may be fixed by the Council. The City Attorney shall perform and discharge all duties and exercise all powers which shall be conferred upon him by any ordinance or resolution of the City Council and, in addition, he shall exercise the following powers: 
(a)	Be the legal advisor of and attorney and counsel for the City and for all of the offices and departments and all of the administrative officers thereof, in respect to their official duties, of the City of Gilmer; 
(b)	Represent the City of Gilmer in all litigation and legal proceedings; provided, that the City Council may retain special counsel at any time they deem same appropriate and necessary; 
(c)	Review, concur or dissent, or prepare, as requested or required, all documents, contracts, bonds, legal instruments, and other writings in which the City is concerned or may have an interest; 
(d)	Be Prosecuting Attorney of the Municipal Court and prosecute all cases brought before such court on behalf of the City; 
(e)	The City Council and all administrative officers of the City may require the opinion of the City Attorney upon any question of law involving their respective powers and duties, and he shall furnish the same in writing; 
(f)	Apply in the name of the City to a court of competent jurisdiction for an order of injunction restraining the misapplication of funds of the City or the abuse of its corporate powers, or the execution or performance of any contract, made on behalf of the City in contravention of law, or which was procured by fraud or corruption; 
(g)	When an obligation or contract made on behalf of the City granting a right or easement, or creating a public duty, is evaded or violated, the City Attorney shall require the specific performance of the duty by any administrative officer by application for a writ of mandamus to a court of competent jurisdiction; and 
(h)	Perform other duties prescribed by this Charter, by ordinance or as directed by the City Council.  
Section 5.02. - Municipal Court. 
There shall be established and maintained a court designated as the Municipal Court for the trial of misdemeanor offenses, with all such powers and duties as are now, or may hereafter be prescribed by laws of the State of Texas relative to municipal courts.  
Section 5.02.1. - Judge of the Municipal Court. 
The Municipal Court shall be presided over by a Magistrate who shall be known as the City Judge. The Judge shall be appointed by the Mayor with the concurrence of the Council, and shall serve at the discretion of the City Council. The Judge shall receive such compensation as may be set by the Council. In the event the City Judge is unable to act for any reason or in the event of a vacancy, the Mayor shall act in the place of the City Judge until such vacancy shall be filled; provided, however, the Mayor may not fill the City Judge's vacancy for more than forty-five (45) days from the date of the original vacancy. During the time the Mayor is serving as City Judge, he shall recommend a replacement to fill the vacancy. If within the first thirty (30) days of the time period required to fill the City Judge's vacancy, such action is not initiated by the Mayor, the City Council at a called regular or special meeting may with a three-fifth (3/5) vote appoint and fill the City Judge's vacancy.  
Section 5.02.2. - Clerk of the Municipal Court. 
There shall be a Clerk of the Municipal Court who shall be appointed by, and who shall serve at the pleasure of the City Manager. The Clerk and any deputies shall have the power to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of the court thereto, and otherwise perform any and all acts necessary in issuing process of such Court, and conducting the business thereof. The Council shall require the Municipal Court Clerk, before entering upon the duties of the office, to execute a good and sufficient surety company bond, in such amount as the Council may demand, payable to the City and conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of the office, the premium of such bond to be paid by the City. The City Secretary shall be ex-officio clerk of said Court, and in the absence of the Municipal Court Clerk, the City Secretary or an appointed deputy shall serve as the Municipal Court Clerk until a new clerk is appointed by the City Manager.  
Section 5.02.3. - Procedure in the Municipal Court. 
All complaints, prosecutions, the service process, commitment of those convicted of offenses, the collection and payment of fines, the attendance and service of witnesses and juries, punishment for contempt, bail and the taking of bonds shall be governed by the laws and codes of the State of Texas applicable to Municipal Courts.  
ARTICLE 6. - MUNICIPAL FINANCE 
 
Section 6.01. - Fiscal Year. 
The fiscal year of the City of Gilmer shall begin on October 1st of each calendar year and will end on September 30th of the following calendar year. Such fiscal year shall also constitute the budget and accounting year.  
Section 6.02. - Preparation and Submission of Budget. 
The Director of Finance shall, between sixty (60) and ninety (90) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, submit to the Council a proposed budget, which budget shall provide a complete financial plan for the fiscal year and shall contain, but not be limited to, the following: 
(a)	A budget message, explanatory of the budget, which message shall contain an outline of the proposed financial policies of the City for the fiscal year, shall set forth the reasons for changes from the previous year in expenditures and revenue items, and shall explain any major changes in financial policy; 
(b)	A consolidated statement of anticipated receipts and proposed expenditures of all funds; 
(c)	An analysis of property valuations;
(d)	An analysis of the tax rate;
(e)	Tax levies and tax collections by year for at least five (5) years;
(f)	General fund resources in detail;
(g)	Special fund resources in detail;
(h)	Summary of proposed expenditures by function, department, and activity;
(i)	Detailed estimates of expenditures shown separately for each activity to support [the] summary in [subsection] (h) above; 
(j)	A revenue and expense statement for all types of bonds;
(k)	A description of all bond issues outstanding, showing rate of interest, date of issue, maturity date, amount authorized, amount issued and amount outstanding; 
(l)	A schedule of requirements for the principal and interest of each issue of bonds;
(m)	The appropriation ordinance; and
(n)	The tax levying ordinance.
(Ref. of 8-12-2000, prop. 10) 
Section 6.03. - Anticipated Revenues and Expenditures Compared With Other Years. 
In preparing the budget, the Director of Finance shall list in parallel columns, opposite the various items of revenues and expenditures, the actual amount of each item for the last completed fiscal year, the estimated amount for the current fiscal year and the proposed amount for the ensuing fiscal year. 
(Ref. of 8-12-2000, prop. 11) 
Section 6.04. - Budget a Public Record. 
The budget and all supporting schedules shall be filed with the person performing the duties as City Secretary when submitted to the City Council and shall be a public record. The City Secretary shall make available a copy to any resident of the City upon request. 
(Ref. of 8-12-2000, prop. 12) 
Section 6.05. - Notice of Public Hearing on Budget. 
At the meeting of the City Council at which the budget is submitted, the City Council shall fix the time and place of public hearing on the budget and shall cause to be published in the official newspaper of the City of Gilmer, a notice of the hearing setting forth the time, place, and date, as required by law.  
Section 6.06. - Public Hearing on Budget. 
At the time and place set forth in the notice required by Section 6.05, or at any time and place to which such public hearing shall from time to time be adjourned, the City Council shall hold a public hearing on the budget submitted and all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard for or against any item or the amount of any item therein contained.  
Section 6.07. - Proceeding on Adoption of Budget. 
After public hearing the Council shall analyze the budget, making any additions or deletions which it feels appropriate, and then shall adopt the budget by a favorable vote of three (3) of the Members of the City Council.  
Section 6.08. - Failure to Adopt Budget. 
If the City Council fails to adopt the budget by the fifteenth (15th) day of September, the amounts appropriated for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis with all items in it pro-rated accordingly until such time as the Council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The levy of property tax will be set to equal the total current fiscal year tax receipts, unless the ensuing fiscal year budget is approved by September 30th of the current fiscal year.  
Section 6.09. - Effective Date of Budget; Certification of Copies; Copies Made Available. 
Upon final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the fiscal year. A copy of the budget, as finally adopted, shall be filed with the person performing the duties of the City Secretary, the County Clerk of Upshur County, and the State Comptroller of Public Accounts at Austin. The final budget shall be reproduced and copies shall be made available for the use of all offices, departments, and agencies and for the use of interested persons, civic organizations and the Gilmer Library.  
Section 6.10. - Budget Establishes Appropriations. 
From the effective date of the budget, the several amounts stated therein as proposed expenditures shall be and become appropriated to the several objects and purposes therein named.  
Section 6.11. - Budget Establishes Amount to be Raised by Property Tax. 
From the effective date of the budget, the amount stated therein as the amount to be raised by property tax shall constitute a determination of the amount of the levy necessary for the purposes of the City in the corresponding tax year; provided, however, that, in no event, shall such levy exceed the legal limit provided by the laws and Constitution of the State of Texas relating to a Type "A" General-Law City.  
Section 6.12. - Reserve. 
Provision shall be made in the annual budget and in the appropriation ordinance for a reserve in an amount not less than one (1%) percent but not more than eight (8%) percent of the total budget, to be used in case of unforeseen items of expenditure. Such reserve shall be under the control of the City Manager and distributed by him/her after approval of the City Council. 
(Ref. of 8-12-2000, prop. 13) 
Section 6.13. - Amendments after Adoption of Budget. 
(a)	Supplemental Appropriations: If, during the fiscal year, the Director of Finance certifies that there are available for appropriation revenues in excess of those estimated in the budget, the Council, by resolution, may make supplemental appropriations for the year up to the amount of such excess. 
(b)	Emergency Appropriation: To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or the public peace, the Council may make emergency appropriations. Such appropriations may be made by emergency resolution. To the extent that there are no available unappropriated revenues to meet such appropriations, the Council may by such emergency resolution authorize the issuance of emergency notes. 
(c)	Reduction of Appropriations: If at any time during the fiscal year it appears probable to the Director of Finance that the revenues available will be insufficient to meet the amount budgeted, the Director of Finance shall report to the Council without delay, indicating the estimated amount of the shortfall, any remedial action taken and make recommendations as to any other steps to be taken. The Council shall then take such further action as it deems necessary to prevent or minimize any deficit and for that purpose it may by resolution reduce one or more appropriations. 
(d)	Transfer of Appropriations: At any time during the fiscal year, the Director of Finance with the approval of the City Manager may transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance among programs within a department, office, or agency. Upon written request by the City Manager or Director of Finance, the Council may, by resolution, transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance from one department, office, or agency to another. 
(e)	Limitations; Effective Date: No appropriation for debt service may be reduced or transferred and no appropriation may be reduced below any amount required by law to be appropriated or by more than the amount of the unencumbered balance thereof. The supplemental and emergency appropriations and reduction or transfer of appropriations authorized by this section may be made effective immediately upon adoption. 
(Ref. of 8-12-2000, props. 14—16) 
Section 6.14. - Capital Program Budget. 
The Director of Finance shall prepare and submit to the City Council a five (5) year Capital Program Budget between sixty (60) and ninety (90) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year. Such Capital Program Budget shall include: 
(a)	Clear general summary of its contents;
(b)	List of all capital improvements which are proposed to be undertaken during the five (5) fiscal years next ensuing, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity of such improvements; and 
(c)	Cost estimates, method of financing, and recommended time schedules for each such improvement. 
(Ref. of 8-12-2000, prop. 17) 
Section 6.15. - Council Action on Capital Program Budget. 
The Council shall give notice of a public hearing on the proposed Capital Program Budget and shall hold said hearing in the same manner as provided in this Article for the annual budget. The hearing for the proposed Capital Program Budget and the notice of same may be in conjunction with the annual budget. The Council shall, by resolution, adopt the Capital Program Budget with or without amendment after the public hearing and on or before the 27th day of the last month of the current fiscal year.  
Section 6.16. - Defect Shall Not Invalidate The Tax Levy. 
Errors or defects in the form or preparation of the budget or the failure to perform any procedural requirements shall not nullify the tax levy or the tax rate.  
Section 6.17. - Audit and Examination of City Books and Accounts. 
The City Council shall cause an independent annual audit to be made of the books and accounts of each and every department of the City and may provide for more frequent audits as it deems necessary. Such audit shall be made by a Certified Public Accountant or firm of accountants, who shall be selected by the City Council and who shall have no interest, direct, or indirect in the financial affairs of the City government or in any of its officers. The Council may designate such accountant or firm annually or for a period not exceeding three (3) years, provided that the designation for any particular year shall be made no later than thirty (30) days after the beginning of such fiscal year. Nothing herein shall prevent the City Council from redesignating the same accountant or firm which has previously been designated to prepare an audit. If the State of Texas makes such an audit, the Council may accept it as satisfying the requirement of this section. Such accountant, so selected, shall not maintain or keep any of the City's accounts or records. Such audit shall include a recapitulation of all internal audits made during the course of each fiscal year, and all audit reports shall be filed with the City Council and shall be available for public inspection and shall be made a part of the archives of the City.  
Section 6.18. - Purchases. 
All purchases made and contracts executed by the City of Gilmer shall be made in accordance with the requirements of the Constitution and Statutes of the State of Texas.  
Section 6.19. - Power to Tax. 
The City Council shall have the power under the provisions of the State law to levy, assess, and collect an annual tax upon real and personal property within the City to the maximum provided by the Constitution and general laws of the State of Texas.  
Section 6.20. - Property Subject to Tax. 
All real and personal property within the City of Gilmer on the first day of January, not expressly exempted by law, shall be subject to annual taxation.  
Section 6.21. - Board of Directors of Appraisal District. 
Participation in the selection of members to serve on the Board of Directors of the Appraisal District of Upshur County shall be in accordance with the Texas Property Tax Code and other applicable laws, unless altered by the Constitution and Statutes of the State of Texas.  
Section 6.22. - Appraisal of Property. 
All taxable property located or situated within the corporate limits of the City shall be appraised in accordance with the Texas Property Tax Code or as may be revised by the Constitution or Statutes of the State of Texas.  
Section 6.23. - Certification and Adoption. 
The Board of Directors of the Appraisal District of Upshur County shall be required to keep an accurate record of all its proceedings which shall be available for public inspection. Immediately upon completion of its work, the Board shall certify its approval of the assessment rolls which shall be returned to the City Council, which shall in turn approve said rolls as returned to it and shall thereupon certify and adopt the same as the assessment rolls to be used for the collection of taxes for the current year. The City shall thereafter cause tax statements to be mailed to each person, firm, or corporation named upon the tax rolls. Compliance with this section shall be in accordance with the Texas Property Tax Code or as may be revised by the Constitution or Statutes of the State of Texas.  
Section 6.24. - Taxes, When Due, and Payable. 
All taxes due the City shall be payable at the office of the City or through an agent of the City of Gilmer so designated by ordinance of City Council and may be paid at any time after the tax rolls for the year have been completed and approved, which shall not be later than October 1st. Taxes shall be paid before February 1st of each year succeeding the year for which the taxes are levied, and all such taxes not paid prior to such date shall be deemed delinquent and shall be subject to such penalty and interest as the City Council may provide by ordinance. Failure to levy and assess taxes through omission in preparation of the approved tax roll shall not relieve the person, firm, or corporation so omitted from the obligation to pay such current or past due taxes shown to be payable by recheck of the rolls and receipts for the years in question, unless otherwise provided by law.  
Section 6.25. - Tax Liens. 
A lien is hereby created on all property, personal and real, in favor of the City of Gilmer, for all taxes, ad valorem, or otherwise. Said lien shall exist from January 1st in each year until the taxes are paid. Such lien shall be prior to all other claims. No gift, sale, assignment, or transfer of any kind, or judicial writ of any kind, can ever defeat such lien, but the City can pursue such property and, whenever discovered, may seize and sell enough thereof to satisfy such taxes. All persons or corporations owning or holding personal property or real estate in the City of Gilmer on the first (1st) day of January of each year shall be liable for all municipal taxes levied thereon for such year.  
Section 6.26. - Issuance of Bonds. 
In keeping with the Constitution of the State of Texas and not contrary thereto, the City of Gilmer shall have the right, authority and power to borrow money on the credit of the City for any public purpose not now or hereafter prohibited by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, and shall have the right to issue all tax bonds, revenue bonds, funding and refunding bonds, time warrants, and other evidences of indebtedness as now authorized, or as may hereafter be authorized, to be issued by cities and towns, by the laws of the State of Texas.  
ARTICLE 7. - ELECTIONS 
 
Section 7.01. - General Elections. 
The regular City Election shall be held annually on the first Saturday in May, at which time officers will be elected to fill those offices that become vacant that year. The City Council shall fix the hours and place for holding such elections. Notice of the election shall be published in the official newspaper of the City of Gilmer, such publication to be not less than forty-five (45) days before the election. The Mayor and at large Councilperson shall be elected by obtaining a majority of the votes cast. Candidates for single member districts shall file for one district and shall be elected by a majority of votes cast within that district. During the odd numbered years, the Mayor will be elected at large along with Districts 2 and 3. During the even numbered years, one candidate will be elected at large along with Districts 1 and 4.  
Section 7.02. - Regulation of Elections. 
All general and special elections shall be held in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas regulating the holding of municipal elections and in accordance with this Charter and ordinances or resolutions adopted by the Council for the conduct of elections. The Council shall appoint the election judges and other election officials and shall provide for the compensation of all election officials in the City elections and for all other expenses in holding said elections. Voting boxes shall be established on basis of one (1) voting box for each three thousand (3,000) qualified voters or fraction thereof. The Council shall designate said voting according to population concentrations.  
Section 7.03. - Special Elections. 
The City Council, by ordinance or resolution, may call such special elections as are authorized by the State of Texas law or this Charter, fix the time and place of holding same and provide all means for holding such special elections, provided that every special election shall be called and held, as nearly as practical, according to the provisions governing regular elections.  
Section 7.04. - Filing for Office. 
Any qualified person who desires to become a candidate for election to the office of Mayor or City Councilmember shall file with the City Secretary, not less than forty-five (45) days prior to the election, an application as shown in Appendix A.  
Section 7.05. - Official Ballot. 
The names of all candidates for office, except such as may withdraw, die, or become ineligible, shall be printed on the official ballots without party designations, in the order determined in a drawing of lots, conducted by the City Secretary. Absentee voting shall be governed by the General Election Laws of the State of Texas.  
Section 7.06. - Election by Majority. 
At any regular or municipal election, the candidate in each place or office who shall have received the majority of votes cast for that place in such election shall be declared elected. Should any candidate fail to receive the majority of votes for the office or place for which he is a candidate, the Council shall immediately order a runoff election to be held on a date in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas and as set by ordinance of the City. At this special election, the names only of the two (2) candidates receiving the highest number of votes at the regular election, for the office or place for which they are candidates, shall be printed on the ballot and submitted to qualified voters for election, and the candidate receiving the majority of votes in such special election for the place or office for which he was a candidate, shall be declared duly elected.  
Section 7.07. - Conducting and Canvassing Elections. 
The returns of every municipal election shall be delivered forthwith by the election judges to the proper authority in compliance with the laws of the State of Texas. The City Council shall canvass the returns, investigate the qualifications of the candidates and declare the official results of the election in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas. Returns of every municipal election shall be recorded in the minutes of the Council. The qualified person receiving the majority of votes cast for any office shall thereupon be declared elected by said Council. The decision of the Council, as to qualifications of candidates, shall be conclusive and final for all purposes.  
Section 7.08. - Oath of Office. 
Every elected official of the City shall, before entering upon the duties of office, take and subscribe to the Oath of Office as stated below: "I, ____________, do solemnly swear (or affirm), that I will faithfully execute the duties of the office of ____________, of the City of Gilmer, Texas, and will to the best of my ability preserve, protect, and defend the Constitution and laws of the United States and of this State and the Charter and Ordinances of this City; and I furthermore solemnly swear (or affirm), that I have not directly or indirectly paid, offered, or promised to pay, contributed, nor promised any employment as a reward for the giving or withholding a vote at the election at which I was elected, or if the office is one of appointment, to secure my appointment, So help me God."  
ARTICLE 8. - LEGISLATION BY THE PEOPLE; INITIATIVE 
 
Section 8.01. - General Powers. 
The qualified voters of the City of Gilmer, in addition to the method of legislation hereinbefore provided, shall have the power to direct legislation by initiative. In exercising such power, legislation may not be proposed for: 
(1)	Ordinances appropriating money or levying taxes;
(2)	Ordinances repealing ordinances appropriating money or levying taxes;
(3)	Ordinances granting franchises;
(4)	Ordinances fixing salaries; and
(5)	Ordinances inconsistent with this Charter or law. 
Section 8.02. - Commencement of Proceeding: Petitioners' Committee: Affidavit. 
Any five (5) registered voters may commence initiative proceedings by filing with the city secretary an affidavit stating they will constitute the petitioners' committee and be responsible for circulating the petition and filing it in proper form, stating their names and addresses and specifying the address to which all notices to the committee are to be sent, and setting out in full the proposed initiative ordinance. 
Promptly after the affidavit of the petitioners' committee is filed, the clerk shall issue the appropriate petition blanks to the petitioners' committee.  
Section 8.03. - Petitions. 
(a)	Number of Signatures. Initiative petitions must be signed by registered voters of the City equal in number to at least ten percent (10%) of the total number of registered voters registered to vote at the last regular election. 
(b)	Form and Content. All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and style and be assembled as one instrument for filing. Each signature shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil and shall be followed by the printed name, address and voter registration certificate number of the person signing, and shall include the day, month, and year his or her signature was affixed to the petition. Petitions shall contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation the full text of the ordinance proposed. 
(c)	Affidavit of Circulator. Each paper of a petition shall have attached to it when filed an affidavit executed by the person circulating it stating that he or she personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon, that all the signatures were affixed in his or her presence, that he or she believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be and that each signer had an opportunity before signing to read the full text of the ordinance proposed. 
STATE OF TEXAS	)(
COUNTY OF UPSHUR	)(
 
I, ____________, being first duly sworn, on oath depose and say that I am one of the signers of the above petition; and that each signature appearing thereto was made in my presence on the day and date it purports to have been made, and I solemnly swear or affirm that the same is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. 
____________ 
Subscribed and sworn to before me this ;#rule; day of ;daterule;, ____________. 
_____
Notary Public, Upshur County, Texas  
Section 8.04. - Procedure after Filing. 
(a)	Certificate of Clerk; Amendment. Within twenty (20) days after the petition is filed, the City Secretary shall complete a certificate as to its sufficiency, specifying, if it is insufficient, the particulars wherein it is defective and shall promptly send a copy of the certificate to the petitioners' committee by registered mail. A petition certified insufficient for lack of the required number of valid signatures may be amended once if the petitioners' committee files a notice of intention to amend it with the clerk within two (2) days after receiving the copy of his or her certificate and files a supplementary petition upon additional papers within ten (10) days after receiving the copy of such certificate. Such supplementary petition shall comply with the requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of Section 8.03 and, within five days after it is filed, the clerk shall complete a certificate as to the sufficiency of the petition as amended and promptly send a copy of such certificate to the petitioners committee by registered mail as in the case of an original petition. If a petition or amended petition is certified sufficient, or if a petition or amended petition is certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not elect to amend or request Council review under subsection (b) of this section within the time required, the clerk shall promptly present his or her certificate to the Council and the certificate shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. 
(b)	Council Review. If a petition has been certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not file notice of intention to amend it or if the amended petition has been certified insufficient, the committee may, within two (2) days after receiving the copy of such certificate, file a request that it be reviewed by the Council. The Council shall review the certificate at its next meeting following the filing of such request and approve or disapprove it, and the Council's determination shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. 
(c)	Court Review; New Petition. A final determination as to the sufficiency of a petition shall be subject to court review. A final determination of insufficiency, even if sustained upon court review, shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose.  
Section 8.05. - Council Either to Pass Ordinance or Call Election. 
If the petition accompanying the proposed ordinance be signed by electors equal in number to ten percent (10%) of the registered voters of the City who were qualified to vote on the date of the last regular municipal election as determined from the list of registered voters maintained by the appropriate office of Upshur County, and contains a request that the ordinance be submitted forthwith to a vote of the people at the next general election, the governing body of the City shall either: 
(1)	Pass said ordinance without alteration within forty-five (45) days after the attachment of the City Secretary's certificate of sufficiency to the accompanying petition; or 
(2)	Submit the ordinance, without alteration, to a vote of the people in the next general election.  
Section 8.06. - Form of Ballot. 
The ballots used when voting upon said ordinance shall contain the words "For the Ordinance" and "Against the Ordinance" (stating the nature of the proposed ordinance). If a majority of the registered electors voting on said proposed ordinance shall vote in favor thereof, such ordinance shall thereupon become a valid and binding ordinance of the City.  
Section 8.07. - Voluntary Submission or Legislation by the Council. 
The City Council may, upon its own motion, and by a majority vote of its Members, submit to popular vote at any election, for adoption or rejection, any proposed ordinance in the same manner and with the same force and effect as provided in this Article for "submission on petition."  
Section 8.08. - Publication of Proposed Ordinances. 
The City Secretary shall publish at least once in the official newspaper of the City the proposed ordinance seven (7) days before the date of the notices and do such other things relative to such election as required in general municipal elections or by the ordinance calling the election.  
Section 8.09. - Adoption of Ordinances. 
If a majority of the registered voters voting on any proposed ordinance measure shall vote in favor thereof, it shall thereupon, or at any time fixed therein, become effective as a law or as a mandatory order of the City Council.  
Section 8.10. - Inconsistent Ordinances. 
If the provisions of two (2) or more proposed ordinances approved at the same election are inconsistent, the ordinance or resolution receiving the highest number votes shall prevail.  
Section 8.11. - Ordinances Passed by Petition, Popular Vote; Repeal or Amendment. 
Any ordinances which may have been passed by the City Council upon petition or adopted by popular vote under the provisions of this Article shall be repealed or amended only by the City Council, in response to a referendum petition, or by submission, as provided in Section 8.14 of this Charter.  
Section 8.12. - Further Regulations by City Council. 
The City Council may pass ordinances providing other and further regulations for carrying out the provisions of this Article, which are consistent with this Charter.  
Section 8.13. - Franchise Ordinances. 
Nothing contained in the [this] Article shall be construed to be in conflict with any of the provisions of Article 12 of this Charter, pertaining to ordinances granting franchises, when valuable right shall be actually accrued thereunder.  
Section 8.14. - Election Required for Municipal Utility or Public Improvement Districts. 
Should any person, persons or corporation request that the City Council approve the implementation of a Municipal Utility District or a Public Improvement District, the following shall be done before the Municipal Utility District or Public Improvements District may be authorized to operate within the corporate limits of the City of Gilmer: 
(a)	The request shall be made to the City Council at a regular meeting. The City Council, following discussion and debate of the issue, may approve the implementation of Municipal Utility District or a Public Improvement District by vote of the members; 
(b)	Following vote of the Council to approve such Municipal Utility or Public Improvements District, the Council shall, at the next general election, allow the qualified voters of the City to consider the question of allowing the District to be placed in the City of Gilmer; 
(c)	The election shall be held on the next available election date, allowed by the laws of the State of Texas, which provides sufficient time to prepare for such election in compliance with the laws of the State of Texas; and 
(d)	The ballot used when voting upon said question shall contain the words "For the ____________ District," and "Against the ____________ District" (stating the nature of the district). If a majority of the qualified electors voting on said proposed district shall vote in favor thereof, such district shall thereupon become permitted within the City of Gilmer.  
ARTICLE 9. - LEGISLATION BY THE PEOPLE; REFERENDUM 
 
Section 9.01. - General Powers. 
The qualified voters of the City of Gilmer, in addition to the method of legislation hereinbefore provided, shall have the power to direct legislation by referendum. In exercising such power, legislation may not be repealed for: 
(1)	Ordinances appropriating money or levying taxes;
(2)	Ordinances repealing ordinances appropriating money or levying taxes;
(3)	Ordinances granting franchises;
(4)	Ordinances fixing salaries; and
(5)	Ordinances inconsistent with this Charter or law. 
Section 9.02. - Commencement of Proceeding: Petitioners' Committee: Affidavit. 
Any five (5) registered voters may commence referendum proceedings by filing with the City Secretary an affidavit stating they will constitute the petitioners' committee and be responsible for circulating the petition and filing it in proper form, stating their names and addresses and specifying the address to which all notices to the committee are to be sent, and citing the ordinance sought to be reconsidered. 
Promptly after the affidavit of the petitioners' committee is filed, the City Secretary shall issue the appropriate petition blanks to the petitioners' committee.  
Section 9.03. - Petitions. 
(a)	Number of Signatures. Referendum petitions must be signed by registered voters of the city equal in number to at least ten percent (10%) of the total number of registered voters registered to vote at the last regular election. 
(b)	Form and Content. All papers of a petition shall be uniform in size and style [and shall] be assembled as one instrument for filing. Each signature shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil and shall be followed by the printed name, the address, and the voter registration certificate number of the person signing, and the day, month, and year his or her signature was affixed to the petition. Petitions shall contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation the full text of the ordinance or [sic] sought to be reconsidered. 
(c)	Affidavit of Circulator. Each paper of a petition shall have attached to it when filed an affidavit executed by the person circulating it stating that he or she personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon, that all the signatures were affixed in his or her presence, that he or she believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be and that each signer had an opportunity before signing to read the full text of the ordinance sought to be reconsidered. 
STATE OF TEXAS	)(
COUNTY OF UPSHUR	)(
 
I, ____________, being first duly sworn, on oath depose and say that I am one of the signers of the above petition; and that each signature appearing thereto was made in my presence on the day and date it purports to have been made, and I solemnly swear or affirm that the same is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. 
____________ 
Subscribed and sworn to before me this ;#rule; day of ;daterule;, ____________. 
_____
Notary Public, Upshur County, Texas  
Section 9.04. - Procedure after Filing. 
(a)	Certificate of Clerk; Amendment. Within 20 days after the petition is filed, the City Secretary shall complete a certificate as to its sufficiency, specifying, if it is insufficient, the particulars wherein it is defective and shall promptly send a copy of the certificate to the petitioners' committee by registered mail. A petition certified insufficient for lack of the required number of valid signatures may be amended once if the petitioners' committee files a notice of intention to amend it with the clerk within two (2) days after receiving the copy of his or her certificate and files a supplementary petition upon additional papers within ten (10) days after receiving the copy of such certificate. Such supplementary petition shall comply with the requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of Section 9.03, and within 5 days after it is filed the clerk shall complete a certificate as to the sufficiency of the petition as amended and promptly send a copy of such certificate to the petitioners committee by registered mail as in the case of an original petition. If a petition or amended petition is certified sufficient, or if a petition or amended petition is certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not elect to amend or request Council review under subsection (b) of this section within the time required, the clerk shall promptly present his or her certificate to the Council and the certificate shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. 
(b)	Council Review. If a petition has been certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not file notice of intention [to] amend it or if amended petition has been certified insufficient, the committee may, within two days after receiving the copy of such certificate, file a request that it be reviewed by the Council. The Council shall review the certificate at its next meeting following the filing of such request and approve or disapprove it, and the Council's determination shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the petition. 
(c)	Court Review; New Petition. A final determination as to the sufficiency of a petition shall be subject to court review. A final determination of insufficiency, even if sustained upon court review, shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose.  
Section 9.05. - Council Either to Rescind Ordinance or Call Election. 
If the petition accompanying the ordinance proposed for repeal be signed by electors equal in number to ten percent (10%) of the registered voters of the City who were qualified to vote on the date of the last regular municipal election as determined from the list of registered voters maintained by the appropriate office of Upshur County, and contains a request that the proposed repeal of the ordinance be submitted forthwith to a vote of the people at the next general election, the governing body of the City shall either: 
(1)	Repeal said ordinance within forty-five (45) days after the attachment of the City Secretary's certificate of sufficiency to the accompanying petition; or 
(2)	The proposed repeal of the ordinance shall be submitted to a vote of the people in the next general election.  
Section 9.06. - Form of Ballot; Provision for Repeal. 
The ballots used when voting upon the repeal of said ordinance shall contain the words "For the Repeal of Said Ordinance" and "Against the Repeal of Said Ordinance" (stating the nature of the referred ordinance). If a majority of the registered electors voting on said referred ordinance shall vote in favor of repeal, such ordinance shall thereupon cease to be a valid and binding ordinance of the City.  
Section 9.07. - Voluntary Submission or Legislation by the Council. 
The City Council may, upon its own motion, and by a majority vote of its members, submit for repeal any existing ordinance in the same manner and with the same force and effect as provided in this Article for "submission on petition."  
Section 9.08. - Publication of Referred Ordinances. 
The City Secretary shall publish at least once in the official newspaper of the City the referred ordinance within seven (7) days before the date of the notices and do such other things relative to such election as required in general municipal elections or by the ordinance calling the election.  
Section 9.09. - Adoption of Ordinances. 
If a majority of the registered voters voting on repeal of said ordinance shall vote to rescind, it shall thereupon, or at any time fixed therein, cease to be effective as a law or as a mandatory order of the City Council.  
Section 9.10. - Inconsistent Ordinances. 
If the provisions of two (2) or more proposed ordinances approved at the same election are inconsistent, the ordinance or resolution receiving the highest number votes shall prevail.  
Section 9.11. - Ordinances Passed by Petition, Popular Vote; Repeal or Amendment. 
Any ordinances or resolutions which may have been passed by the City Council upon petition or adopted by popular vote under the provisions of this Article shall be repealed or amended only by the City Council, in response to a referendum petition, or by submission, as provided in this Charter. 
(Ref. of 8-12-2000, prop. 19) 
Section 9.12. - Further Regulations by City Council. 
The City Council may pass ordinances providing other and further regulations for carrying out the provisions of this Article, consistent with this Charter.  
Section 9.13. - Petition for Referendum Not Allowed. 
No petition for referendum shall be submitted for: 
(a)	Ordinances required by the general laws of the State of Texas or by the provisions of this Charter; 
(b)	Ordinances passed for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, or safe [safety] under emergency conditions as specified in this Charter; or 
(c)	Ordinances prohibited from initiative process by Section 9.01 of this Charter.  
ARTICLE 10. - RECALL 
 
Section 10.01. - Scope of Recall. 
Any elected City official, whether elected to office by the qualified voters of the City or appointed by the Council to fill a vacancy, shall be subject to recall and removal from office by the qualified voters of the City on grounds of incompetency, misconduct, malfeasance in office or willful violation of any provision of the Charter.  
Section 10.02. - Commencement of Proceeding: Petitioners' Committee: Affidavit. 
Any five (5) registered voters may commence recall proceedings by filing with the City Secretary an affidavit stating they will constitute the petitioners' committee and be responsible for circulating the recall petition and filing it in proper form, stating their names and addresses and specifying the address to which all notices to the committee are to be sent, and setting out in full the proposed recall. 
Promptly after the affidavit of the petitioners' committee is filed the City Secretary shall issue the appropriate petition blanks to the petitioners' committee.  
Section 10.03. - Petitions. 
(a)	Number of Signatures. Recall petitions must be signed by registered voters of the city equal in number to at least ten percent (10%) of the total number of registered voters registered to vote at the last regular election. 
(b)	Form and Content. All papers of the recall petition shall be uniform in size and style [and shall] be assembled as one instrument for filing. Each signature shall be executed in ink or indelible pencil and shall be followed by the printed name, the address, and the voter registration certificate number of the person signing, and the day, month, and year his or her signature was affixed to the petition. The recall petition mentioned above must be addressed to the Council of the City of Gilmer, must distinctly and specifically point out the ground or grounds upon which such petition for removal is predicated, and, if there be [is] more than one (1) ground, such as for incompetency, misconduct or malfeasance in office, shall specifically state each ground with such certainty as to give the officer sought to be removed notice of the matters and things with which he/she is charged. Petitions shall contain or have attached thereto throughout their circulation the full text of the recall petition. 
(c)	Affidavit of Circulator. Each paper of a petition shall have attached to it when filed an affidavit executed by the person circulating it stating that he or she personally circulated the paper, the number of signatures thereon, that all the signatures were affixed in his or her presence, that he or she believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be and that each signer had an opportunity before signing to read the full text of the recall petition. 
STATE OF TEXAS	)(
COUNTY OF UPSHUR	)(
 
I, ____________, being first duly sworn, on oath depose and say that I am one of the signers of the above petition; and that each signature appearing thereto was made in my presence on the day and date it purports to have been made, and I solemnly swear or affirm that the same is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. 
____________ 
Subscribed and sworn to before me this ;#rule; day of ;daterule;, ____________. 
_____
Notary Public, Upshur County, Texas  
Section 10.04. - Procedure after Filing. 
(a)	Certificate of City Secretary; Amendment. Within twenty (20) days after the recall petition is filed, the City Secretary shall complete a certificate as to its sufficiency, specifying, if it is insufficient, the particulars wherein it is defective and shall promptly send a copy of the certificate to the petitioners' committee by registered mail. A recall petition certified insufficient for lack of the required number of valid signatures may be amended once if the petitioners' committee files a notice of intention to amend it with the clerk within two days after receiving the copy of his or her certificate and files a supplementary petition upon additional papers within ten (10) days after receiving the copy of such certificate. Such supplementary recall petition shall comply with the requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of Section 10.03, and within five (5) days after it is filed the clerk shall complete a certificate as to the sufficiency of the recall petition as amended and promptly send a copy of such certificate to the petitioners committee by registered mail as in the case of an original recall petition. If a recall petition or amended recall petition is certified sufficient, or if a recall petition or amended recall petition is certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not elect to amend or request Council review under subsection (b) of this section within the time required, the clerk shall promptly present his or her certificate to the Council and the certificate shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the recall petition. 
(b)	Council Review. If a recall petition has been certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not file notice of intention to amend it or if the amended recall petition has been certified insufficient, the committee may, within two days after receiving the copy of such certificate, file a request that it be reviewed by the Council. The Council shall review the certificate at its next meeting following the filing of such request and approve or disapprove it, and the Council's determination shall then be a final determination as to the sufficiency of the recall petition. 
(c)	Court Review; New Petition. A final determination as to the sufficiency of a recall petition shall be subject to court review. A final determination of insufficiency, even if sustained upon court review, shall not prejudice the filing of a new recall petition for the same purpose.  
Section 10.05. - Petition Found Sufficient. 
If the petition be [is] found sufficient, the City Secretary shall immediately notify, in writing, the officer so sought to be removed by mailing such notice to his mailing address and submitting the same to the Council without delay. In the event the Councilmember fails to resign, the Council shall order and fix a date for holding the said election. If an election is to be held within the City for any other purpose within sixty (60) days from the date of said notification, then the said recall election shall be held on the same day. If the Councilmember in question resigns, no election shall be necessary and the vacancy shall be filled by the Council as in other cases of vacancies.  
Section 10.06. - Public Notice. 
The Council shall make or cause to be made publication or notice and provide for holding such election and the same shall be conducted and the result thereof declared in all respects as other City elections.  
Section 10.07. - Ballots in recall election. 
Ballots used at recall elections shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)	With respect to each person whose removal is sought, the question shall be submitted "Shall (name of person) be removed from the office of Councilman (Mayor) by recall?" 
(2)	Immediately below each such question, there shall be printed the two (2) following propositions, one above the other, in the order indicated: 
"For the recall of (name person)" 
"Against the recall of (name person)".  
Section 10.08. - Recall Petition Prohibited. 
No recall petition shall be filed against any officer of the City of Gilmer within three (3) months after his/her election nor within three (3) months after an election for such officer's recall.  
Section 10.09. - Refusal of Recall Petition. 
In case all of the requirements of this Charter shall have been met and the City Council shall fail or refuse to receive the recall petition, or order such recall election, or discharge any other duties imposed upon said City Council by the provisions of this Charter with reference to such recall, then a court of competent jurisdiction shall discharge any of such duties herein provided to be discharged by the person performing the duties of the City Secretary and the City Council.  
ARTICLE 11. - MUNICIPAL PLANNING, ZONING, AND DEVELOPMENT 
 
Section 11.01. - Platting of Property. 
(a)	Hereafter, every owner of any tract of land situated within the corporate limits of the City of Gilmer, who may divide the same in two or more parts for the purpose of laying out any subdivision or any addition to the City, shall comply with the provisions of the Subdivision Regulations or ordinances of the City, and such other Statutes of the State of Texas, as now or hereafter amended. 
(b)	The provisions of Section 11.01(a) above shall apply similarly to the owner of any tract of land situated within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Gilmer, if not in an incorporated city or town. 
(Ref. of 8-12-2000, prop. 20) 
Section 11.02. - Development of Property. 
The City Council shall cooperate in every manner possible with persons interested in the development of property within or beyond the city limits. No expenditure of public funds, however, shall be authorized for the development of privately owned subdivisions situated within or beyond the corporate limits of the City.  
Section 11.03. - The Planning and Zoning Commission. 
There shall be established a Planning and Zoning Commission which shall consist of seven (7) citizens from the City of Gilmer. The members of said Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor with confirmation by City Council for a term of three (3) years. The initial confirmed appointments of the Planning and Zoning Commission members by the Council shall designate which two (2) members shall serve one (1) year, which two (2) members shall serve two (2) years, and which three (3) members shall serve three (3) years. On each succeeding year thereafter, the Mayor shall select replacements for the Planning and Zoning Commission members whose terms have expired. Vacancies and unexpired terms shall be appointed by the Mayor for the remainder of the term. The Commission shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from among its members. The Commission shall meet not less than once each quarter. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum, and the affirmative vote of four (4) members shall be necessary for the passage of any recommendation to the City Council. Any member may be removed by the appointing authority upon filing of written charges and after public hearing, which may be provided upon request of the members against whom the charges are brought. However, should a member of the Commission fail to attend fifty percent (50%) of the scheduled meetings of the Commission within a twelve (12) month period, such member shall be subject to removal from the Commission without a public hearing by the Mayor without notice or approval of the City Council. 
The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings which shall be of public record. The City Manager and City Engineer, or their designates, shall serve as ex-officio members of the Commission with no voting rights, but may participate in the discussions of the Commission. The City Secretary or his/her designate shall serve as the Commission's secretariat, with no voting rights. The Commission shall serve without compensation. Commission members and officers holding such office on the effective date of the Charter shall continue in office until the expiration of their term of membership or office and shall thereafter be appointed as provided in this Section.  
Section 11.04. - Powers and Duties of Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(a)	The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
(1)	Review and make recommendations to the City Council regarding the adoption and implementation of a comprehensive plan, any element or portion thereof, and any amendments thereto; 
(2)	Review and make recommendation to the City Council on all proposals to adopt or amend land development regulations for the purpose of establishing consistency with the comprehensive plan; 
(3)	Monitor and oversee the effectiveness of the comprehensive plan and zoning ordinance, review and make recommendations to the Council on any amendments to the plan and zoning ordinance, and forward to the Council comprehensive updates to the plan and zoning ordinance at least once every five (5) years; 
(4)	Review and make recommendations to the City Council regarding zoning or requests for zoning changes in a manner to insure [ensure] the consistency of any such zoning or changes in zoning with the adopted comprehensive plan; 
(5)	Exercise control over platting and subdividing land within the corporate limits and the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city in a manner to insure [ensure] the consistency of any such plats with the adopted comprehensive plan; and 
(6)	Review and make recommendation to the City Council on the city's annual capital budget and any capital improvement bond program. 
(b)	The departments of the city government shall cooperate with the planning and zoning commission in furnishing it such information as is necessary in relation to its work. 
(c)	The commission shall be responsible to and act as an advisory body to the City Council and shall perform such additional duties and exercise such additional powers as may be prescribed by ordinance of the Council.  
Section 11.05. - Comprehensive Plan. 
(a)	Purpose and intent. It is the purpose and intent of this Section that the City Council establish comprehensive planning as a continuous and ongoing governmental function in order to promote and strengthen the existing role, processes, and powers of the City of Gilmer to prepare, adopt, and implement a comprehensive plan to guide, regulate, and manage the future development within the corporate limits and the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City to assure the most appropriate and beneficial use of land, water, and other natural resources, consistent with the public interest. 
(b)	The Comprehensive Plan. The comprehensive plan for the physical development of the City of Gilmer shall be adopted by the City Council and it shall contain recommendations for orderly growth, development, and beautification of the City. The City Council shall have the authority to amend the comprehensive plan in whole or in part after one (1) public hearing on the proposed action. 
(c)	Legal Effect of the Comprehensive Plan. Upon the adoption of a comprehensive plan by the City Council, no subdivision, street, park, or any public way, ground or space, public building or structure, or public utility, whether publicly or privately owned, which is in conflict with the comprehensive plan shall be constructed or authorized by the City until and unless the location and extent thereof shall have been submitted to and approved by the City Council. The widening, narrowing, relocating, vacating, or change in the use of any street, alley, or public way, or ground or the sale of any public building or real property, shall be submitted for approval by the City Council.  
Section 11.06. - Boards and Commissions. 
The City Council shall have authority to establish by ordinance such boards and commissions as it may deem necessary for the conduct of City business and management of municipal affairs including appointments of all officers to such boards and commissions except as otherwise provided in the Charter. The authority, functions and responsibilities of such boards and commissions shall be such as is spelled out in the ordinance establishing them. All existing boards and commissions heretofore established shall be continued in accordance with the ordinance or other acts under which they have been created, or until the City Council shall, by ordinance, abolish, modify or alter the ordinances or acts under which they exist. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Charter, the elected City Council shall have paramount authority over all matters affecting the budgets, appropriation of funds, expenditures, purchases and sale of properties and procedures for accounting therefore, consistent with the express provisions of this Charter and applicable provisions of the State constitution and laws of this State.  
Section 11.07. - Building Permits. 
The City of Gilmer shall have the power to prohibit the removal of, the movement into or through, the erection of, or the construction of any building or structure of any kind within the City of Gilmer without a permit first having been issued by the City for the construction or erection of such building or structure, and may authorize a fee to be charged for such permit, and in pursuance of said authority may authorize the inspection by the City of all buildings or structures during the progress of their construction and may require that all buildings shall be constructed in conformity with the building code which exists in said City or shall hereafter be passed.  
Section 11.08. - Condemnation of Dangerous Structures. 
Whenever, in the opinion of the governing body of the City of Gilmer or appropriate city official, any building, fence, shed, awning, cave, excavation, structure, object, or thing of any kind or part thereof may fall or collapse and injure persons or property, the City may order the owner or agent of the same or occupant of the premises to take such corrective measures as the governing body may direct, and may punish by fine all persons failing to do so. Upon notice and compliance with requirements of due process of law, the governing body shall have the additional power to remove the same on account of the owner of the property and assess the expenses thereof, including condemnation proceedings, as a special tax against the land or improvements, and the same may be collected as other special taxes provided for in this Charter, or by suit in any court of competent jurisdiction.  
Section 11.09. - Pool, Ponds, and Lakes. 
The City of Gilmer shall have the power to control or prohibit construction of pools, ponds, or lakes, receiving water from recognizable stream, creek, branch or natural drainage. The City may control location, construction, height of structure, depth and size of body of water to be impounded. No pool, pond or lake, receiving water from a recognizable stream, creek, branch or natural drainage, shall be constructed without first obtaining a permit issued by the City.  
ARTICLE 12. - FRANCHISES AND PUBLIC UTILITIES 
 
Section 12.01. - Powers of the City. 
In addition to the City's power, right and authority, to buy, construct, lease, maintain, operate and regulate public utilities, and to manufacture, distribute, and sell the output of such utilities' operations, the City shall have all further rights, authorities, and powers as may now, or hereafter, be granted under the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas.  
Section 12.02. - Inalienability of Control of Public Property. 
The right of control and use of the public streets, highways, including state facilities, sidewalks, alleys, parks, public squares and public places of the City, is hereby declared to be inalienable by the City, except by ordinances not in conflict with the provisions of the Charter. No act or omission by the Council or an officer or agent of the City shall be construed to grant, renew, extend, or amend, expressly or by estoppel or implication, any right, franchise, or easement affecting such public streets, highways including state facilities, sidewalks, alleys, parks, public squares, public places, and other real property, except as provided in this Charter.  
Section 12.03. - Power to Grant Franchise. 
The Council shall have the power by ordinance to grant, renew, and extend all franchises of all public utilities of every character operating within the City and, with the consent of the franchise holder, to amend the same. Provided, however, that no franchise shall be granted for an indeterminate term, and that no franchise shall be granted for a term of more than twenty years.  
Section 12.04. - Ordinance Granting Franchise. 
Every ordinance granting, renewing, extending, or amending a public utility franchise shall be presented in writing at two regular meetings of the Council and shall not be finally acted upon until thirty days after the first presentation thereof. Within five (5) days following each of the two presentations for the ordinance, a descriptive caption of the ordinance stating in summary the purpose of the ordinance shall be published one time in the official newspaper of the City, and the expense of such publication shall be borne by the prospective franchise holder.  
Section 12.05. - Transfer of Franchise. 
No public utility franchise shall be transferred by the holder thereof except with the approval of the Council expressed by the ordinance.  
Section 12.06. - Franchise Value Not Allowed. 
In fixing reasonable rates and charges for public utility service within the City and in determining the just compensation to be paid by the City for public utility property which the City may acquire by condemnation or otherwise, nothing shall be included as the value of any franchise by the City under this Charter.  
Section 12.07. - Regulation of Franchise. 
Every grant, renewal, extension, or amendment of a public utility franchise, whether so provided in the ordinance or not, shall be subject to the right of the Council: 
(a)	To forfeit any such franchise by ordinance at any time for failure of the holder thereof to comply with the terms of the franchise. Such power shall be exercised only after written notice to the franchise holder stating wherein the franchise holder has failed to comply with the terms of the franchise and setting a reasonable time for the correction of such failure, and shall be exercised only after hearing and after such reasonable time has expired; 
(b)	To impose reasonable regulations to insure [ensure] safe, efficient, and continuous service to the public; 
(c)	To require such expansion, extension, enlargement, and improvement of plants and facilities as are necessary to provide adequate service to the public; 
(d)	To require every franchise holder to furnish to the City, without cost to the City, full information regarding the location, character, size, length, and terminals of all facilities of such franchise holder in, over, and under the streets, alleys, and other public properties of the City, and to regulate and control the location, relocation, and removal of such facilities; 
(e)	To collect from every public utility operating in the City such proportion of the expense of excavating, grading, paving, repaving, constructing, reconstructing, draining, repairing, maintaining, lighting, sweeping, and sprinkling the streets, alleys, ridges, culverts, viaducts, and other places of the City as represent the increased cost of such operation resulting from the occupancy of such public places by such public utility, and such proportion of the cost of such operations as results from the damage to or the disturbance of such public places caused by such public utility; or to compel such public utility to perform at its own expense, such operations as above listed which are made necessary by the occupancy of such public places by such utility or by damage to or disturbance of such public places caused by such public utility; 
(f)	To require every franchise holder to allow other public utilities to use its poles and other facilities, including bridges and viaducts, whenever in the judgment of the Council such use shall be in the public interest, provided that, in such an event, a reasonable rental shall be paid such owner of the facilities for such use. Provided further, that inability of such public utilities to agree upon rental facilities shall not be an excuse for failure to comply with such requirement by the Council; 
(g)	(1)	To require the keeping of accounts in such form as will accurately reflect the value of the property of each franchise holder which is used and useful in rendering its service to the public and the expenses, receipts, and profits of all kind of such franchise holder; 
(2)	To examine and audit at any time during business hours the accounts and other records of any franchise holder; and 
(3)	To require reports on the operation of the utility, which shall be in such form and contain such information as the Council shall prescribe. 
(h)	To require that the public utility give notice to any subscriber to its service prior to the permanent or temporary discontinuance or disruption of such service by the public utility, except in cases of emergency, and to require that no officer, agent, servant, or employee of the public utility nor any vehicles or equipment under their control shall make use of, go upon or across any private property in the City without first obtaining the permission of the owner or occupant of such property, except in cases of emergency, and to provide a penalty for the violation of such requirements; or 
(i)	To impose such other reasonable regulations, restrictions, requirements, and conditions as may be deemed necessary or desirable to promote the health, safety, welfare, or accommodations of the public.  
Section 12.08. - Franchise Records. 
Within six (6) months after the effective date of this Charter, every public utility operating in the City and every owner of public utility franchise within the City, shall file with the City Secretary certified copies of all franchises owned or claimed or under which such utility is operating in the City of Gilmer. The City shall compile and maintain a public record of public utility franchises.  
Section 12.09. - Regulation of Rates. 
The Council shall have full power after notice and hearing to regulate by ordinance the rates, charges, and fares of every public utility franchise holder operating in the City, provided that no such ordinance shall be passed as an emergency measure. Every franchise holder who shall request an increase in rates, charges, or fares shall have, at the hearing of the Council called to consider such request, the burden of establishing by clear, competent, and convincing evidence the value of its investments properly allowable to service in the City, and the amount and character of its expenses and revenues connected with the rendering of such service. If, upon such hearing, the Council is not satisfied with the sufficiency of the evidence so furnished, it shall be entitled to call upon such public utility for the furnishing of additional evidence at a subsequent date to which said hearing may be adjourned. No public utility franchise holder shall institute any legal action to contest any rate, charge, or fare fixed by the Council until such franchise holder has filed a motion for rehearing with the Council for a specific date setting out each ground of its complaint the rate, charge, or fare fixed by the Council, and until the Council shall have acted upon such motion. Such motion shall be deemed overruled unless acted upon by the Council within a reasonable time, not to exceed ninety (90) days from the filing of such motion for rehearing; provided, that the Council may, by resolution, extend such time limit for acting on said motion for rehearing from ninety (90) days to one hundred eighty (180) days.  
Section 12.10. - Accounts of Municipally Owned Utilities. 
Accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated by the City, in such manner as to show the true and complete results of such ownership and operation, including all assets and all liabilities, appropriately subdivided by classes, depreciation reserve, other reserves and surplus; also revenues, operating expenses including depreciation interest payments, rental and other disposition of annual income. The accounts shall show actual capital cost to the City of each public utility owned, also the cost of all extensions, additions, and improvements and the source of funds expended for such capital purposes. They shall show, as nearly as possible, the cost of any service to or rendered by any such utility to any City department. The City Council shall cause an annual report to be made by a Certified Public Accountant and shall publish such report, showing the financial results of such City ownership and operation, giving the information specified in this section and such other data as the City Council shall deem expedient.  
Section 12.11. - Temporary Permits. 
Permits unconditionally revocable at the will of the governing body for minor or temporary privileges in the streets, public ways, and public places of the City may be granted and revoked by the governing body from time to time, and such permits shall not be deemed franchises as the term is used in this Charter.  
Section 12.12. - Grant Not to be Exclusive. 
Any grant, contract, or franchise, to construct, maintain, or operate a public utility, for or in Gilmer, Texas, and any renewal or extension of such grant, contract, or franchise shall not be exclusive.  
Section 12.13. - Consent of Property Owners. 
The consent of abutting and adjacent property owners shall not be required for the construction, extension, maintenance, or operation of any public utility; but, nothing in this Charter, or in any franchise granted thereunder, shall ever be construed to deprive any such property owner of any right of action for damage or injury to this property as now or hereafter provided by law.  
Section 12.14. - Extensions. 
All extensions of public utilities within the city limits shall become a part of the aggregate property of the public utility, shall be operated as such, and shall be subject to all the obligations and reserved rights contained in this Charter and in any franchise grant made to such public utility. The right to use and maintain any extensions shall terminate with the termination of the original franchise grant, and shall be terminable as provided in Section 12.04 of this Charter. In case of an extension of a public utility operated under a franchise hereafter granted, such right shall be terminable at the same time and under the same conditions as the original grant.  
Section 12.15. - Other Conditions. 
All franchises heretofore granted are recognized as contracts between the City of Gilmer and the grantee, and the contractual rights, as contained in any such franchise, shall not be impaired by the provisions of this Charter, except that the power of the City of Gilmer to exercise the right of eminent domain in the acquisition of utility property is in all things reserved, and except the general power of the City, to regulate the rates and services of a grantee, which shall include the right to require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and the maintenance of the franchise hereafter granted, shall be held subject to all the terms and conditions contained in the various sections of this article, whether or not such terms are specifically mentioned in the franchise. Nothing in this Charter shall operate to limit in any way, as specifically stated, the discretion of the City Council, or voters of the City, in imposing terms and conditions as may be reasonable in connection with any franchise granted.  
ARTICLE 13. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Section 13.01. - Publicity of Records. 
All records and accounts of every office, department or agency of the City shall be open to inspection by any citizen or by any representative of the press at all reasonable times under such reasonable regulations as may be established by the City Council or the Mayor, except those records and documents closed pursuant to law. 
State Law reference— Public records, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 552.001 et seq.  
Section 13.02. - Conflict of Interests. 
(a)	General Provisions.
The use of public office for private gain is prohibited. A Councilmember, officer or employee of the City of Gilmer shall be prohibited from the following acts including, but not limited to: 
(1)	Acting in an official capacity on matters in which the official has a private financial interest that is clearly separate from that of the general public; 
(2)	The acceptance of gifts and other things of value;
(3)	Acting in a private capacity on matters dealt with as a public official;
(4)	The use of confidential information; and
(5)	Appearances by city officials before other city agencies on behalf of private interests.
(b)	Councilmembers.
No member of the City Council shall hold any other office with the City of Gilmer, nor be employed by the City of Gilmer, unless herein otherwise provided. 
A Councilmember having any type of personal interest, directly, indirectly or otherwise, including, but not limited to, any work, business or contract, wherein the consideration paid or contracted for will be paid, in whole or in part by: [1] the City Treasury; [2] an assessment levied by an ordinance; or [3] resolution of the City Council, shall be prohibited from taking any action as a member of the City Council and shall not participate in any discussion that is had by and between the remaining Councilmembers. Further, any such Councilmember having any type of financial interest in any matter shall abstain from voting on such matters or being present while such other members of the City Council consider or vote on the same. 
A Councilmember is further prohibited from serving or acting as surety of any person, company or other legal entity who is obligated by contract or otherwise, to perform any type of work or transact any type of business with the City of Gilmer. 
(c)	Officers and Employees.
No officer or employee of the City of Gilmer shall have a financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract with the City, or be financially interested, directly or indirectly, in the sale to the City of any land, material, supplies or services, except on behalf of the City as an officer or employee. Any willful violation of this section shall constitute malfeasance in office, and any officer or employee guilty thereof shall forfeit his office or position. 
(d)	Financial Interest by Stock Ownership.
A Councilmember, officer or employee of the City of Gilmer shall be deemed to have a financial interest in a corporation if they, their spouse or child, owns one percent (1%) or more of the stock in a corporation. 
(e)	Prohibition Against Receiving Things of Value.
A Councilmember, officer or employee of the City of Gilmer shall be prohibited from accepting, whether directly, indirectly or otherwise, any gift, favor or privilege, from any public utility corporation, or other corporation, person or persons, enjoying a grant, contract, franchise, privilege or easement from or with said City, during any term of office, or during such employment, except as may be authorized by law. Any such Councilmember, officer or employee of the City of Gilmer who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and may be punished pursuant to the prescribed ordinance or statute for such offense, and shall forthwith, be removed from office.  
Section 13.03. - Prohibitions. 
(a)	Activities prohibited:
(1)	In appointment to and removal from any City office employment, persons shall not be favored or discriminated against because of race, gender, age, religious preference or political affiliation; 
(2)	No person who seeks appointment or promotion with respect to any City position or appointive City administrative office shall directly or indirectly give, render or pay any money, service, or other valuable thing to any person for, or in connection with, the test, appointment, proposed appointment, promotion or proposed promotion; 
(3)	No City officer or employee, elected or appointed, shall orally, by letter, or otherwise, solicit or assist in soliciting an assessment, subscription, or contribution for any political purpose whatever from any subordinate City official or employee holding any compensated City position. 
(4)	No person who holds a compensated City position shall solicit or receive any contribution to the campaign funds of any candidate for municipal office or take any part in the management, affairs, or political campaign of any municipal candidate. 
(b)	Penalties.
Any person who alone, or with others, violates any of the provisions of paragraphs one (1) through four (4) of the preceding subsection, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as determined by ordinance adopted by the City Council. Any person convicted under this section shall be ineligible for a period of five (5) years thereafter to hold any City office or position and, if an officer or employee of the City, shall immediately forfeit the office or position.  
Section 13.04. - Provisions Relating to Assignment, Execution, and Garnishments. 
The property, real and personal, belonging to the City shall not be liable to be sold or appropriated under any writ of execution or cost bill. The funds belonging to the City, in the hands of any person, firm or corporation, shall not be liable to garnishment on account of any debt it may owe or funds or property it may have on hand or owing to any person. Neither the City nor any of its officers or agents shall be required to answer any such writ of garnishment on any account whatever. The City shall not be obligated to recognize any assignment of wages or funds by its employees, agents, or contractors, except as required by law.  
Section 13.05. - Bond of Contractors. 
The governing body of the City of Gilmer shall require sufficient payment and/or performance bonds in an amount equal to the contract price of all contractors, with a good corporate surety thereon.  
Section 13.06. - City Not Required to Give Security or Execute Bond. 
It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceeding in which the City of Gilmer is a party, for any bond, undertaking, or security to be demanded or executed by or on behalf of the City in any of the State courts, but in all such actions, suits, appeals proceedings, same shall be conducted in the same manner as if such bond, undertaking security had been given as required by law.  
Section 13.07. - Special Provisions Covering Damage Suits, Etc. 
(a)	The City of Gilmer, Texas, shall never be liable for any personal injury, whether or not resulting in death, unless the person injured, or someone on his behalf, or, in the event the injury results in death, the person or persons who may have a cause of action under the law by reason of such death or injury, shall file a notice in writing with the City Manager or City Secretary within thirty (30) days after the occurrence of such injury, stating specifically in such notice, when, where, and how the exact injury occurred and the full extent thereof, together with the amount of damage claimed or asserted. The City of Gilmer shall never be liable for any claim for damage or injury to personal property unless the person whose personal property has been injured or damaged, or someone in his/her behalf, shall file a claim in writing with the City Manager or the City Secretary within thirty (30) days after said damage or injury has occurred, stating specifically when, where, and how the injury or damage occurred and the full extent thereof, and the amount of damage sustained. 
(b)	The City of Gilmer shall never be liable for any claim for damage or injury to real property caused by the negligent act or omission of its officers, servants, agents or employees, unless the person whose real property has been injured or damaged, or someone in his behalf, shall file a claim in writing with the City Manager or City Secretary within thirty (30) days after said damage or injury has occurred, stating specifically when, where, and how the injury or damage occurred, and the amount of damage claim. The City of Gilmer shall never be liable on account of any damage or injury to person or to personal property arising from, or occasioned by, any defect in any public street, highway, alley, grounds, or public work of the City of Gilmer, unless the specific defect causing the damage or injury shall have been actually known to the City Manager at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the occurrence of the injury or damage, or unless the attention of the City Manager or City Secretary shall have been called thereto by a notice thereof in writing at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the occurrence of the injury or damage, and proper diligence has not been exercised to rectify the defect. The notice herein required to be given to the City Manager or the City Secretary of the specific defect causing the damage or injury shall apply where the defect arose from any omission of the City itself, through its agents, servants, or employees, acts or third parties. 
(c)	No provision of this Section shall ever be so construed as to expand the ordinary liability of the City. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to mean that the City of Gilmer waives any rights, privileges, defenses under the common law, the Constitution, and general laws of the State of Texas. 
State Law reference— Tort claims, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code § 101.701 et seq.  
Section 13.08. - Judicial Notice. 
This Charter shall be deemed a public act, and shall have the force and effect of a general law, may be read in evidence without pleading or proof, and judicial notice shall be taken thereof in all courts and places, without further proof.  
Section 13.09. - Construction of Charter. 
This Charter shall not be construed as a mere grant of enumerated powers, but shall be construed as a general grant of power, and as a limitation of power on the government of the City of Gilmer, in the same manner as the Constitution of Texas is construed as limitation of the powers of the Legislature. Except where expressly prohibited by this Charter, each and every power under the Constitution of Texas, which it would be competent for the people of the City of Gilmer to grant expressly to the City, shall be construed to be granted to the City by this Charter. In the wording of the Charter, the use of the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the singular. Words used in the masculine gender shall include the feminine also unless by reasonable construction, it appears that such was not the intention of this Charter.  
Section 13.10. - Powers to Remit Penalties. 
The governing body shall have the right to remit, in whole or in part, any fine or penalty belonging to the City, which may be imposed under any ordinance or resolution passed pursuant to this Charter.  
Section 13.11. - Property Not Exempt from Special Assessments. 
No property of any kind including churches, schools, or otherwise by whomsoever owned or held or by whatsoever institution, agency, political subdivision or organization, owned or held, whether in trust or by nonprofit organization, or by "foundation" or otherwise, (except property of the City of Gilmer, Texas), shall be exempt in any way from any of the special taxes, charges, levies, and assessments, authorized or permitted by this Charter, for local improvement, unless the exemption is required by State Law for the public welfare.  
Section 13.12. - No Lien on Public Property; Contractors, Etc. 
No lien of any kind or character can be created, and none shall ever exist or be established on or against the public buildings, property, public halls, parks, or public works of the City of Gilmer, Texas; and, all subcontractors, materialmen, mechanics, artisans, and laborers upon any public works or projects of the City of Gilmer are hereby required to notify the City in writing of all claims against it that they may have, on account of such work, and, when such notice has been timely, duly, and properly given, the City shall retain an amount from any funds due the Contractor, sufficient to satisfy all claims; provided that such notice may be given at any time after such indebtedness becomes due, and before final settlement; and provided, further, that no contractor or subcontractor shall issue any "time check" on, or on account of, any public works of said City.  
Section 13.13. - Severability Clause. 
If any section or part of this Charter shall be held invalid by a Court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the remainder of this Charter, nor the context in which such section or part of section so held invalid may appear, except to the extent the [that] any entire section, or part of [the] section, may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section or of [the] section to which such holding shall directly apply.  
Section 13.14. - Damages. 
No member of the City Council shall be individually liable or accountable in damage as a result of any actions taken by the member in performance of official duties.  
Section 13.15. - Effect of this Charter on Existing Law. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations now in force under the City Government of Gilmer and not in conflict with the provisions of this Charter, shall remain in full force and effect under this Charter until altered, amended or repealed by the Council, after this Charter takes effect; and, all rights of the City of Gilmer under existing franchises and contracts are preserved in full force and effect for and to the City of Gilmer.  
Section 13.16. - Interim Municipal Government. 
From and after the date of the adoption of this Charter, the persons then filling elective offices which are retained under this Charter, shall continue to fill those offices for the terms to which there [they] were elected. The City Council shall be elected as provided in this Charter. Persons, who on the date this Charter is adopted are filling [an] appointive position with the City of Gilmer which are retained under this Charter, may continue to fill these positions for the term for which they were appointed, (subject to Section 13.02 above).  
Section 13.17. - Retirement System and Social Security; Group Insurance. 
The City Council shall have the power to provide for coverage of its appointed officers and employees under the Worker's Compensation, Retirement and Social Security systems provided or permitted by laws of the State of Texas, for such officers and employees of the City; and for "group insurance coverage" of such officers and employees; the City Council having the power to provide for the payment of all or any part of the cost thereof.  
Section 13.18. - Special Powers Under Applicable State Codes and Regulations. 
The City of Gilmer and the City Council shall have all rights, powers and authority which is given and granted, pursuant to applicable laws of the State of Texas, unless altered by Federal law or the Constitution.  
Section 13.19. - City Depository. 
The provisions of the general laws of the State of Texas, governing the selection designation of a City depository are hereby adopted as the law governing the selection and designation of a depository of and for the City of Gilmer.  
Section 13.20. - Disaster Clause. 
In case of disaster when a legal quorum of elected Councilmembers cannot otherwise be assembled due to multiple deaths or injuries, the surviving member or members of the elected Council, or highest surviving City official, if no elected official remains, must within twenty-four (24) hours of such disaster, request the highest surviving officers of the local Chamber of Commerce, the Board of Trustees of the local school district, and the County Judge of Upshur County to appoint a commission to act during the emergency and call a City election within thirty (30) days of such disaster for election of a required quorum, if for good reasons it is known a quorum of the present Council will never again meet.  
Section 13.21. - Charter Review Commission; Amendments. 
At its first regular meeting in January, 2000, and every fifth year thereafter the Council shall appoint a Charter Review Commission of fifteen (15) citizens of the City. It shall be the duty of the Commission to: 
(a)	Inquire into operation of the City Government under the Charter provisions and determine whether any such provisions require revision and to this end, public hearings may be held and the Commission shall have the power to compel the attendance of any officer or employee of the City to require the submission of any of the City records which it may consider necessary to the conduct of such hearing; 
(b)	Make any recommendations it considers desirable to insure [ensure] compliance with the provisions of this Charter; 
(c)	Propose amendments to this Charter; and
(d)	Report its findings in writing to the Council.
The Council shall receive any report submitted by the Charter Review Commission and shall consider any recommendations made, and, if any amendment or amendments be presented as a part of such report may order such to be submitted to the electors of the City. The term of office of the Charter Review Commission shall be six (6) months. All records of the Commission shall be filed with the City Manager and shall be a public record.  
ARTICLE 14. - ETHICS COMMISSION 
 
[Sec. 14.01. - Appointment.] 
The City Council shall appoint an Ethics Commission of five people to develop a list of Ethics for the Council. This would then go before Council for [a] three-fifths (3/5) vote of the entire council to be approved within six (6) months from the date of the election to approve the Charter Revisions. In addition, the City Manager and the City Attorney shall sit on the Ethics Board as ex-officio members with no voting rights. The Ethics List shall be reviewed every five (5) years when the Home Rule Charter is reviewed. 
(Ref. of 8-12-2000, prop. 21)
APPENDIX A 
CITY OF GILMER 
APPLICATION FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE 
"I, ____________, do hereby declare that I am a candidate for the office of ____________, and request that my name be printed upon the official ballot for that particular office in the next City Election." 
I hereby certify and attest that I meet all the following candidate qualifications for the office of ____________ and agree to voluntarily comply with the forfeiture of office criteria, if and when such would apply to me: 
(a)	Be a citizen of the United States of America;
(b)	Be a registered qualified voter of the State of Texas and at least 21 years of age;
(c)	Have resided for at least one (1) year immediately preceding the election date at which they are candidates within the corporate limits of the City of Gilmer; if seeking election for a single member district they must reside in that district for at least one (1) year immediately preceding the election date; 
(d)	Not be employed by the City at the time they declare to be a candidate as a Councilmember or Mayor; 
(e)	If elected shall hold no other public office except that of Notary Public or a member of the National Guard or naval or military reserve; and 
(f)	Not be disqualified by reason of any provision of any other sections of this Charter.
A Councilmember or Mayor shall forfeit his/her office if they: 
(a)	Lack at any time during his/her term of office any qualifications for the office prescribed by this Charter or by law; 
(b)	Willfully violates any express prohibition of this Charter;
(c)	Is convicted of a felony offense or a crime involving moral turpitude;
(d)	Is placed under the terms and conditions of the Adult Probation Department and/or community supervision department of the State of Texas pursuant to a final Court order of a court with competent jurisdiction for any felony offense or a crime involving moral turpitude; or 
(e)	Fails to attend three (3) consecutive regular meetings of the Council without first being excused by the Council. 
____________ 
Signature of Candidate 
____________ 
Candidate's Present Address 
____________ 
Candidate's Present Address 
____________ 
Received by: 
____________ 
Date and Hour of Filing: 
STATE OF TEXAS	)(
COUNTY OF UPSHUR	)(
 
BEFORE ME, the undersigned authority, on this day personally appeared ____________, known to me to be the person whose name is subscribed in the foregoing Application, and who acknowledged to me that the same was executed for the purpose and considerations therein expressed, and declared under oath that the same is true and correct. 
GIVEN UNDER MY HAND AND SEAL OF OFFICE, THIS THE ;#rule; DAY OF ;daterule;, ____________. 
_____
Notary Public, State of Texas 
LOYALTY OATH 
I, ____________, of the City of Gilmer, County of Upshur, State of Texas, being a candidate for the office of Councilmember (or Mayor), do solemnly swear or affirm that I believe in and approve of our present representative form of government, and if elected, I will support and defend our representative form of government and shall resist any effort or movement from any part thereof, and I will support and defend the Constitution and the Laws of the United States and of the State of Texas. 
_____
Notary Public, State of Texas 
This Charter is dedicated to the citizens of the "City of Gilmer, Texas", and to ensure such powers, rights, and duties as herein provided and to encourage the citizens' participation in the democratic government for proper and efficient progress of our city. 
To this end we ordain this home rule charter as prescribed by law and with the guidance of God. 
____________ 
Richard A. Fromm
Chairman 
_____
Robbie Bruns
Vice-Chairman	_____
Kevin M. Rushing
Secretary-Treasurer
_____
David A. Bishop	_____
Gordon L. Bowers
_____
Frank Breazeale	_____
Kenneth Conaway
_____
Sara Dumas	_____
Thelma T. Duncan
_____
Edwin P. Herrmann	_____
Frankie Lindley
_____
Buford Petty	_____
Steve Stewart
_____
Bill Taylor	_____
Ruth Whiteside
  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Gilmer, Texas." 
Charter reference— Code of ordinances, § 3.19 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt a civil and criminal code of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
Charter. The term "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of Gilmer printed in part I of this volume. 
City. The term "city" shall mean the City of Gilmer, in the County of Upshur and State of Texas. 
Code. The term "Code" shall mean the "Code of Ordinances, City of Gilmer, Texas." 
Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Code, the day of the act, event or default after which the designated period of time begins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included unless it is a Sunday or legal holiday, in which event the period shall run until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.014. 
Council and city council. Whenever the terms "council" and "city council" are used, they shall be construed to mean the city council of the City of Gilmer, Texas. 
County. The term "county" shall mean Upshur County, Texas. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a section of this Code requires or authorizes an officer or employee of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty, unless the terms of the section specifically provide otherwise. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
State Law reference— Gender, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 311.012, 312.003. 
In the city. The term "in the city" shall mean and include all territory over which the city now has or shall hereafter acquire jurisdiction for the exercise of its police, regulatory and other powers. 
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
State Law reference— Joint authority, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.004. 
Month. The term "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
State Law reference— Definition of month, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(7). 
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
State Law reference— Number, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.003(b). 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
State Law reference— Oath, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(8). 
Officers, departments, boards, committees, commissions and employees. Officers, departments, boards, commissions and employees referred to in this Code shall mean officers, departments, boards, committees, commissions and employees of the city unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this Code, they shall mean Central Standard Time or Central Daylight Saving Time, as may be officially in current use in the state. 
State Law reference— Standard time defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.016. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals. 
State Law reference— Person defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.005(2). 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property, except real property as defined in this section. 
Preceding and following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
State Law reference— Preceding, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(11). 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
State Law reference— Property, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(13). 
Public place. A public place shall mean any public street, alley, square, highway, grounds, house or premises. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Roadway. The term "roadway" shall mean that portion of a highway other than the berm or shoulder that is improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. If a highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" as used in this definition shall refer to any such roadway separately. 
State Law reference— Similar definitions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 541.301(11). 
Shall and may. "Shall" is mandatory, and "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of the street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of the roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" shall include a mark when a person cannot write. 
State Law reference— Signature, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(14). 
State. The term "state" shall be construed to mean the State of Texas. 
Street and highway. The terms "street" and "highway" shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every publicly maintained way when any part is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
State Law reference— Similar definition, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 541.301(5). 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
State Law reference— Tense, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.003(a). 
Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. The abbreviation "Vernon's Ann. Civ. St." shall mean the latest edition or supplement to Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes. 
V.T.C.A. The abbreviation "V.T.C.A." shall mean and refer to the latest edition or supplement of Vernon's Texas Code Annotated. 
State Law reference— Statutory references, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.008. 
Written and in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
State Law reference— Written, in writing defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(17). 
Year. The term "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Year defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.011(18).  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
State Law reference— Headings of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.024.  
Sec. 1-4. - References to chapters or sections. 
All references to chapters or sections are to the chapters and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
State Law reference— Construction of statutory references, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.027.  
Sec. 1-5. - History notes. 
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section.  
Sec. 1-6. - References and editor's notes. 
References and editor's notes following certain sections are inserted as an aid and guide to the reader and are not controlling or meant to have any legal effect.  
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this and the following chapters and sections, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances or resolutions existing at the time of the adoption of this Code, shall be considered as a continuation and not as new enactments. 
State Law reference— Repeal of statute, V.T.C.A., Government Code §§ 311.030, 312.007.  
Sec. 1-8. - Prior offenses, penalties and rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)	Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty of forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)	Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the city repealed in this chapter, and all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing and not a new enactment of the same ordinance. This chapter shall not be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue or as affecting the liability of any person or as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or section of an ordinance in force at the time of the adoption of this Code.  
Sec. 1-9. - Effect of repeals. 
(a)	The repeal of an ordinance or portion of this Code shall not revive any ordinance or portion of this Code in force before or at the time the ordinance or portion of this Code repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance or a portion of this Code shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed under the ordinance or portion of this Code repealed. 
(b)	This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new sections upon the same subject or in any other ordinance. 
State Law reference— Effect of repeal of statute, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 312.007.  
Sec. 1-10. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)	Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)	Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)	Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract, right, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the city. 
(3)	Any administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code. 
(4)	Any right or franchise granted by any ordinance.
(5)	Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing, vacating, etc., any street or public way. 
(6)	The ordinance adopting the budget or any appropriation ordinance.
(7)	Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes.
(8)	Any ordinance prescribing through streets, parking and traffic regulations, speed limits, one-way traffic, limitations on load of vehicles or loading zones. 
(9)	Any zoning or rezoning ordinance or amendment to the zoning map.
(10)	Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street.
(11)	Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements.
(12)	Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision.
(13)	Any ordinance annexing territory or excluding territory or any ordinance extending the boundaries of the city. 
(14)	Any ordinance establishing positions, classifying positions, establishing pension or employee benefits, setting salaries of city officers and employees or any personnel regulations. 
(15)	Any temporary or special ordinance.
(16)	Any ordinance calling an election.
(17)	Any ordinance authorizing street maintenance agreements.
(18)	Any ordinance levying a fee, rate, deposit or charge.
(19)	Any ordinance regarding development, zoning or land use.
(20)	Any ordinance regarding cable television franchises and regulations.
(b)	All such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. All ordinances are on file in the city secretary's office.  
Sec. 1-11. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)	Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the addition or amendment a part of this Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(b)	All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion of a chapter, section or subsection, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted in a repeal shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the city council. 
(c)	Amendments to any section of this Code shall be made by amending such section by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ;#rule; of the Code of Ordinances, City of Gilmer, Texas, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new section shall then be set out in full and shall be underscored, and any provisions which are to be deleted shall be enclosed in brackets. 
(d)	If a new section not existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Gilmer, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ;#rule;, which section reads as follows:…." The new section shall then be set out in full and shall be underscored. 
(e)	Every subsection, section, division, article or chapter desired to be repealed must be set out in full and specifically repealed by subsection, section, division, article or chapter, as the case may be. 
(f)	It is provided, however, that any subsequent ordinance which fails to amend this Code in the manner provided for in this section, shall not be deemed invalid as a result of such failure to follow the procedure outlined in this section.  
Sec. 1-12. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)	By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made by the supplement in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete; and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)	In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by their omission from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)	Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2)	Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)	Change the term "this ordinance" or terms of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ;#rule; through ;#rule;"; the inserted section numbers will indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code; and 
(5)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.  
Sec. 1-13. - Severability of parts of Code. 
(a)	It is declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable; and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since they would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(b)	If any provision of this Code or its application to any person, fact, situation or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this Code and the application of such provision to other persons, facts, situations or circumstances shall not be affected. 
State Law reference— Severability of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 311.032.  
Sec. 1-14. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)	Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city, or in any rule, regulation or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the city under authority duly vested in him or it, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance, rule, regulation or order that governs or regulates fire, safety, zoning or public health or sanitation, including dumping of refuse, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000.00. The violation of any other provision of this Code or any other ordinance, rule, regulation or order shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 unless specifically stated otherwise in the Code. If the maximum penalty provided by this Code for any offense is greater than the maximum penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state, the maximum penalty for such violation provided by the state statute shall be the maximum penalty under this Code. 
(b)	Except where otherwise provided, each day any violation of this Code or of any such ordinance, rule, regulation or order shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
State Law reference— Penalty for ordinance violations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 54.001; authority of city to prescribe penalties for violation of Code, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 53.001; jurisdiction of municipal courts, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.003.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— City council, art. 3.
Cross reference— Any administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code saved from repeal § 1-10(a)(3); any ordinance establishing positions, classifying positions, establishing pension or employee benefits, setting salaries of city officers and employees or any personnel regulations saved from repeal, § 1-10(a)(14); administration of aviation regulations, § 10-31 et seq.; administration of cemetery regulations, § 22-31 et seq.; civil emergencies, ch. 26; administration of emergency management regulations, § 26-51 et seq.; floodplain administrator, § 42-33; human relations, ch. 46; administration of human relation regulations, § 46-61 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 50; municipal court, ch. 58; administration of building security fund regulations, § 58-55; administration of parks and recreation regulations, § 62-31 et seq.; sales, ch. 66; administration of sign regulations, § 70-31 et seq.; taxation, ch. 82; utilities, ch. 90; administration and enforcement of sewer regulations, § 90-131 et seq.; administration and enforcement of zoning regulations, app. A, § 18-1 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 2-1—2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BOARDS, COMMITTEES, COMMISSIONS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Boards and commissions, § 11.06 
Cross reference— Airport board, § 10-51 et seq.; board of electrical examiners, § 18-141 et seq.; cemetery board, § 22-51 et seq.; park advisory board, § 62-51 et seq.; zoning board of adjustment, app. A, § 18-3  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-31—2-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - COMMITTEE FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES 
 
Sec. 2-51. - Findings. 
(a)	The city council acknowledges the special needs of people with disabilities to enable such people to live productive lives and contribute to the general well-being of the city. 
(b)	The creation of a mayor's committee for people with disabilities would provide a citywide focal point for the accumulation of information; the distribution of information; the coordination of activities; and the implementation of training, education and awareness programs necessary to improve the social, economic and employment conditions of people with disabilities. 
(c)	The adoption of the Americans With Disabilities Act at the federal level imposes new requirements and obligations on public facilities, private facilities, employers and other individuals designed to improve the general living conditions of disabled members of the community, and compliance with the act would be enhanced by the availability of local specialized committee possessing the necessary expertise and data required to adequately inform affected individuals as to the requirements of the Americans With Disabilities Act. 
(Ord. No. 1996-0019, § 1, 9-12-1996) 
Sec. 2-52. - Created. 
There is created the mayor's committee for people with disabilities. 
(Ord. No. 1996-0019, § 2, 9-12-1996) 
Sec. 2-53. - Government. 
The committee for people with disabilities shall be governed by a governing board of seven individuals appointed by the city council. In choosing members to serve on the governing board, emphasis shall be placed on selecting individuals who are aware of the problems of the disabled. The governing board shall act as the chief policy-setting body of the committee. 
(Ord. No. 1996-0019, § 4, 9-12-1996) 
Sec. 2-54. - Membership. 
Membership of the committee for people with disabilities shall consist of community leaders selected from a broad-based spectrum of interested individuals and representatives of agencies and organizations in the city who have demonstrated an interest in all phases of service to people who are physically, mentally or emotionally disabled. Agencies and organizations encouraged to be involved include governmental, business, labor, veterans, medical, health, welfare, education, informational, fraternal, civic and religious groups, as well as individuals within the city who are interested in the problems of people with disabilities. 
(Ord. No. 1996-0019, § 3, 9-12-1996) 
Sec. 2-55. - Terms. 
Of the members of the governing board of the committee for people with disabilities first appointed, four members shall be appointed for a term of one year and three members for terms of two years. All members of the governing board thereafter shall be appointed for two-year staggered terms. The terms of the governing board members shall expire on the same day of appointment; however, if an appointment is not timely made, a member shall continue to serve until reappointed or a successor has been appointed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1996-0019, § 5, 9-12-1996) 
Sec. 2-56. - Purpose and objectives. 
The purpose and objectives of the committee for people with disabilities shall include the following: 
(1)	To promote an increased awareness and better understanding of people with disabilities and of their capabilities in contributing to the working and social needs of the city; 
(2)	To inform people with disabilities in the city of the educational, training, rehabilitation and placement services available to them and to encourage their use of these services; 
(3)	To promote increased employment of people with disabilities and the retention, training and advancement of those now employed; and 
(4)	To initiate, develop and sponsor programs designed to improve the lives of people with disabilities and to strengthen their contributions to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1996-0019, § 6, 9-12-1996) 
Sec. 2-57. - Functions. 
The functions of the committee for persons with disabilities shall be to: 
(1)	Maintain a yearround public awareness program through the news media and other resources on the social, economic and employment opportunities faced by people with disabilities; 
(2)	Act as a clearinghouse for receipt and distribution of all incoming publicity materials distributed from state and national organizations dealing with problems of people with disabilities; 
(3)	Serve as an informational exchange on activities planned and carried out by local organizations with respect to rehabilitation, and especially employment of people with disabilities; 
(4)	Cooperate with the governor's committee on people with disabilities and with the state association of mayor's committees for people with disabilities in conducting specific activities recommended at the state and national levels to promote recognition of the rights and opportunities of people with disabilities, including employment opportunities; 
(5)	Cooperate with placement, rehabilitation and other community agencies and organizations in obtaining employer acceptance of job-ready people with disabilities, as well as assisting employers in acquiring an understanding of and the need for compliance with affirmative action and antidiscrimination regulations, and all applicable requirements of the Americans With Disabilities Act (the ADA); 
(6)	Promote the establishment of training and other facilities necessary to help people with disabilities find suitable employment and achieve useful, productive and healthful lives; 
(7)	Assist not only employers, but all other individuals or entities covered by the Americans With Disabilities Act in achieving the lawfully mandated requirements of such legislation; 
(8)	Carry out special activities, including but not limited to National Employment of People With Disabilities Awareness Month; and 
(9)	Conduct appropriate studies to enhance understanding of the rehabilitation and employment needs of people with disabilities and to determine the adequacy of resources to meet those needs. 
(Ord. No. 1996-0019, § 7, 9-12-1996) 
Sec. 2-58. - Quorum; removal; filling of terms. 
Five members of the governing board of the committee for people with disabilities shall constitute a quorum. To take official action, affirmative votes of the majority present shall be required. Three consecutive absences of any member from regular meetings of the governing board shall, at the discretion of the city council, render any such members subject to immediate removal from the board. Vacancies shall be filled for the length of an unexpired term in the same manner in which original appointments are required to be made. 
(Ord. No. 1996-0019, § 8, 9-12-1996) 
Sec. 2-59. - Officers. 
The governing board of the committee for people with disabilities shall elect from among its membership a chair to preside over its meetings and perform such other duties as the membership shall vote to assign. The governing board shall likewise select a vice-chair to serve in the stead of the chair when the chair is not present. The governing board of the committee shall meet at such frequency as the members of the board shall determine. 
(Ord. No. 1996-0019, § 9, 9-12-1996) 
Sec. 2-60. - Subcommittees authorized. 
The committee for people with disabilities through the actions of the governing board may create subcommittees of such number, duties and terms as it deems proper. 
(Ord. No. 1996-0019, § 10, 9-12-1996) 
Sec. 2-61. - Adoption of rules, regulations. 
The governing board of the committee for persons with disabilities shall adopt, with the approval of the city council, such rules and regulations for the governing of the committee as may be deemed appropriate and not inconsistent with the laws of the United States or the state, or the ordinances and Charter of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1996-0019, § 11, 9-12-1996) 
Secs. 2-62—2-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - HOSPITAL AUTHORITY 
 
Sec. 2-81. - Findings. 
It is officially found and determined that it is to the best interest of the city and its inhabitants to create a hospital authority, without taxing power. 
(Ord. No. 1980-0012, § 1, 10-9-1980) 
Sec. 2-82. - Created. 
By virtue of the power conferred upon the city by the hospital authority act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 262.001 et seq., a hospital authority is created as a body politic and corporate. 
(Ord. No. 1980-0012, § 2, 10-9-1980) 
Sec. 2-83. - Title. 
The hospital authority created in this division shall be called and known as the Gilmer Hospital Authority. 
(Ord. No. 1980-0012, § 3, 10-9-1980) 
Sec. 2-84. - Powers. 
The hospital authority shall have the power of perpetual succession, have a seal, may sue and be sued, and may make, amend and repeal its bylaws. 
(Ord. No. 1980-0012, § 4, 10-9-1980) 
Sec. 2-85. - Boundaries. 
The boundaries of the hospital authority shall include only that territory included within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1980-0012, § 5, 10-9-1980) 
Sec. 2-86. - Board of directors. 
The hospital authority shall be governed by a board of directors consisting of seven members. The members of the board shall occupy positions which shall be position number one, position number two, position number three, position number four, position number five, position number six, and position number seven. The members shall be appointed for staggered terms and until a successor is appointed and has duly qualified. Each member of the board of directors shall be appointed by the city council for a term of two years, or, in the case of a vacancy, until the expiration of the applicable unexpired term. Each of the directors, upon appointment, shall qualify by executing the oath of office required of appointed officials of the state. Nothing in this section shall prohibit, if the hospital authority issues its revenue bonds, the resolution authorizing the issuance of such revenue bonds or the trust indenture securing such revenue bonds from prescribing the method of selecting and the term of office of a majority of the members of the board; and the terms of the members of the board appointed prior to the issuance of the first issue of revenue bonds shall be subject to any such resolution or trust indenture with respect to a majority of the members of the board of directors. 
(Ord. No. 1980-0012, § 6, 10-9-1980) 
Secs. 2-87—2-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - GILMER LAKE DEPARTMENT 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 2000-011, adopted December 14, 2000, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as division 4, § 2-91 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 2-91. - Duties and responsibilities. 
The duties and responsibilities of the lake manager/chief ranger shall be but not limited to the following: 
(1)	The lake manager/chief ranger shall be the administrative officer of the Gilmer Lake department. The lake manager/chief ranger shall with the approval of the city manager, appoint and remove the employees of said department and shall perform such duties that may be required of him by the city manager. 
(2)	Compile records of lake conditions and mitigation property.
(3)	Develop a maintenance program for the lake and mitigation property.
(4)	Provide annual reports as needed for the USACE, TNRCC, Texas Parks and Wildlife, Texas Fisheries and Texas Historical Commission. 
(5)	Prepare and oversee budget for Gilmer Lake department.
(6)	Supervise and be responsible for purchase, storage, and distribution of all supplies, materials, equipment, and any other articles used by the Gilmer Lake department. 
(7)	The lake manager/chief ranger will be responsible for patrolling the lake and mitigation property to enforce the state and federal laws, regulations and permits. 
(8)	The lake manager/chief ranger shall be fully responsible to the city manager for the administration of his department as well as carrying out and the enforcement of their resolutions and ordinances of the city council. The lake manager/chief ranger may be removed from office by said city manager. 
(9)	Oversee the development and proper usage of boat ramp, swimming and recreation areas and educational facilities and activities. 
(10)	The lake manager/chief ranger and all rangers working in this department shall be licensed peace officer of the state. The lake manager/chief ranger and all rangers working in this department shall be TCLEOSE certified. 
(11)	The lake manager/chief ranger shall be compensated as other city employees based on the city's pay classification plan. 
(Ord. No. 2000-011, 12-14-2000) 
Secs. 2-92—2-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FINANCE 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal finance, art. 6; city depository, § 13.19 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract, right, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-10(a)(2); any ordinance levying a fee, rate, deposit or charge saved from repeal, § 1-10(a)(18); taxation, ch. 82  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-121—2-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MISCELLANEOUS FEES 
 
Sec. 2-141. - On file with city secretary. 
All fees, charges, deposits and rates are not printed in the Code but are on file in the city secretary's office.  
Secs. 2-142—2-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC RECORDS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference— Public records, § 13.01 
State Law reference— Local government public records management, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 201.001 et seq.; public records, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 552.001 et seq. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-171—2-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 2-191. - Purpose. 
In order to comply with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.025, regarding designation of a records management officer, the stated purpose of which is efficient and cost-effective government, efficient management of local government records, preservation of local government records of permanent value, convenient access to advice and assistance based on well-established and professionally-recognized records management techniques and practices, establishment of uniform standards and procedures for the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, or other disposition of local government records, the city council enacts this division. 
(Ord. No. 1990-007, 5-22-1990) 
Sec. 2-192. - Officer. 
(a)	The holder of the office of city secretary, a nonelective office, is designated, pursuant to V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.025 as records management officer. 
(b)	The name or the name and office or position of the records management officer shall be filed by the records management officer with the state director and librarian within 30 days after the date of the designation. 
(c)	The designation of a new individual or a new office or position shall be entered on the minutes and reported by the records management officer to the state director and librarian in the same manner as the original designation. 
(d)	Since the order designates an office or position rather than an individual, a new holder of that office or position must file the holder's name with the state director and librarian within 30 days after the date of assuming the office or position. 
(Ord. No. 1990-007, 5-22-1990) 
Sec. 2-193. - Duties of officer. 
The records management officer shall: 
(1)	Assist in establishing and developing policies and procedures for a records management program for the city; 
(2)	Administer the records management program and provide assistance to custodians for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping; 
(3)	In cooperation with the custodians of the records:
a.	Prepare and file with the state director and librarian the records control schedules and amended schedules required by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.041 and the list of obsolete records as provided by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.044; and 
b.	Prepare or direct the preparation of requests for authorization to destroy records not on an approved control schedule as provided by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 203.045, of requests to destroy the originals of permanent records that have been microfilmed as provided by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 204.008, and of electronic storage authorization requests as provided by V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 205.007; 
(4)	In cooperation with custodians, identify and take adequate steps to preserve local government records that are of permanent value; 
(5)	In cooperation with custodians, identify and take adequate steps to protect essential local government records; 
(6)	In cooperation with custodians, ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction or other disposition of records is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the city's records management program and the requirements of this division and rules adopted under it; 
(7)	Disseminate to the city and custodians information concerning state laws, administrative rules and the policies of the government relating to local government records; and 
(8)	In cooperation with custodians, establish procedures to ensure that the handling of records in any context of the records management program by the records management officer or those under the officer's authority is carried out with due regard for: 
a.	The duties and responsibilities of custodians that may be imposed by law; and
b.	The confidentiality of information in records to which access is restricted by law.
(Ord. No. 1990-007, 5-22-1990)  
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals upon runways, § 10-105; environment, ch. 34; AR agricultural residential district, app. A, § 19-1 et seq.
State Law reference— Health and safety of animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 821.001 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal control means the animal control division of the city. 
Animal control officer means any person designated by the supervisor of animal control to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
Commercial stable means a facility where a fee is charged to house, pasture or rent horses or other livestock. 
Harboring means the act of keeping or caring for an animal, including but not limited to the providing of food, shelter or medical attention for the animal. 
Livestock means any cows, horses, mules, jacks, jennets, goats, sheep, swine or any other livestock. 
Owner means any person having a right to property in an animal, who has an animal in his care or custody, or who knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about any premises occupied or owned by him. 
Poultry means all domesticated fowl and all game birds which are kept in captivity. 
Running at large means not completely confined by a building, wall or fence of sufficient strength or construction to restrain the animal except when such animal is either on a leash or held in the hands of the owner or keeper, or under supervision of the owner within the limits of the owner's private property. 
Supervisor of animal control means the person designated by the city manager to supervise all aspects of animal control. 
Vicious animal means any individual animal of any species that has on a previous occasion or occasions without provocation attacked or bitten any person or other animal, or chases a person walking or riding a bicycle so as to cause harm to the person, or if the dog overturns a garbage container or other container, or any individual animal which the supervisor of animal control has reason to believe has a dangerous disposition likely to be harmful to humans or other animals. 
Wild animal means any poisonous or dangerous reptile, or any other animal which can normally be found in the wild state not normally capable of being domesticated, including but not limited to skunks, foxes, leopards, panthers, tigers, lions and lynx, unless certified for medical, biological, herpetological or other scientific research or study. 
Zoonosis control officer means the person designated by the state department of public health. 
(Ord. No. 1989-008, § 4.1, 9-12-1989; Ord. No. 1996-0021, § 4.1, 12-12-1996)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2  
Sec. 6-2. - Running at large. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any animal possessed, kept or harbored to run at large.
(b)	The supervisor of animal control is authorized to impound such animals running at large. 
(Ord. No. 1989-008, § 4.3, 9-12-1989) 
Sec. 6-3. - Animal nuisance. 
The following shall be considered a public nuisance and shall be unlawful: 
(1)	The keeping of any animal which, by causing frequent or long-continued barking or noise, shall disturb any person of ordinary sensibilities in the vicinity. 
(2)	The keeping of any animal in such a manner as to endanger the public health, to annoy neighbors by the accumulation of animal wastes which cause foul and offensive odors or are considered to be a hazard to any other animal or human being, or by continued presence on the premises of another. 
(3)	All animal pens, stables or enclosures in which any animal may be kept or confined which from use have become offensive to a person of ordinary sensibilities. 
(Ord. No. 1989-008, § 4.8, 9-12-1989) 
Sec. 6-4. - Prohibited animals. 
(a)	Any person desiring to keep any wild animal inside the city shall secure a permit from city hall. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to release or allow to run at large any wild or vicious animals inside the city. 
(Ord. No. 1989-008, § 4.9, 9-12-1989) 
Sec. 6-5. - Vicious animals. 
(a)	Any vicious animal found running at large may be destroyed by any peace officer or animal control officer in the interest of public safety. 
(b)	The supervisor of animal control may order any owner or person having care, control or custody of any vicious animal to take such animal permanently from the city. This animal must be removed immediately following receipt of such an order, even if an appeal is initiated. This order may be appealed in writing within ten days to a committee made up of the chief of police or his representative, the city manager or his representative, and the city attorney or his representative. Such committee may uphold, reverse or modify the supervisor of animal control's order and may stipulate restrictions on the animal as a condition to allowing the animal to remain in the city. If the committee upholds the supervisor of animal control's order, the owner may appeal the decision of the committee to the city council. The city council shall have final authority on all matters. If the city council upholds the committee's order, the owner or person having care, control or custody shall not bring the animal back inside the city limits. 
(c)	If the owner or person having care, custody or control of a vicious animal fails to remove such animal as provided for in subsection (a) or (b) of this section, such animal may be impounded and/or destroyed. 
(d)	The owner or person having care, custody or control of a vicious animal must report the disposition and relocation of such animal to the supervisor of animal control in writing, within ten days after the expiration date for removal of such animal from the city. Each day thereafter such information is not provided shall constitute a separate offense. 
(e)	The supervisor of animal control shall be authorized to obtain a search and seizure warrant if there is reason to believe that an animal ordered removed from the city for being vicious has not been so removed. 
(Ord. No. 1989-008, § 4.10, 9-12-1989)
State Law reference— Dangerous dogs, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 822.041 et seq.  
Sec. 6-6. - Sanitary conditions. 
The owner or person in possession of animals shall keep yards, pens and enclosures in which such animals are confined in such a manner so as not to give off odors offensive to persons of ordinary sensibilities residing in the vicinity; or to breed or attract flies, mosquitoes or other noxious insects; or in any manner to endanger the public health or safety or create a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 1989-008, § 4.11, 9-12-1989) 
Sec. 6-7. - Pet care. 
It is prohibited and shall be unlawful for any person to willfully abandon any animal, or to withhold food or water from any animal such that its health is endangered, or to treat the animal in such a way that it suffers unduly. 
(Ord. No. 1989-008, § 4.12, 9-12-1989)
State Law reference— Cruelty to animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 821.021 et seq.  
Sec. 6-8. - Enforcement. 
(a)	Enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the supervisor of animal control or any animal control officer. 
(b)	Any animal control officer shall have the authority to issue citations for any violation of this chapter. If the person being cited is not present, the animal control officer may send the citation to the alleged offender by registered or certified mail. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any animal control officer in the performance of his duties. 
(Ord. No. 1989-008, § 4.2, 9-12-1989) 
Sec. 6-9. - Penalty. 
A person who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is committed, continued or is permitted; and each offense is punishable as follows: 
(1)	First offense, a written warning.
(2)	Second offense, a fine not exceeding $25.00.
(3)	Additional offenses occurring within 12 months, a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 1989-008, § 4.13, 9-12-1989) 
Secs. 6-10—6-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DOGS AND CATS 
 
Sec. 6-41. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cat means a domestic feline of either sex, including one neutered or sterilized. 
Dog means a domestic canine of either sex, including one neutered or sterilized. 
(Ord. No. 1989-008, § 4.1, 9-12-1989)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2  
Sec. 6-42. - Vaccination. 
All dogs and cats over four months of age must be vaccinated annually for rabies with an antirabies vaccine. A metal certificate of vaccination with the year of vaccination and a certificate number must be securely attached to a collar or harness that must be worn by the dog or cat at all times. In addition to the metal certificate, a paper certificate must be issued, stating the name of the owner, the address of the owner, a description of the dog or cat, the date of the vaccination, the number of the metal certificate, and the kind of vaccine used. This tag is valid for the life of the animal and is not transferable. 
(Ord. No. 1989-008, § 4.4, 9-12-1989)
State Law reference— Rabies vaccination required, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.021.  
Secs. 6-43—6-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - IMPOUNDMENT 
 
Sec. 6-71. - Authorized. 
(a)	The following animals may be impounded:
(1)	Cats and dogs not exhibiting evidence of being vaccinated or as described in section 6-42 
(2)	Any animal infected or kept under conditions which could endanger the public or animal health. 
(3)	Any animal that created a nuisance, as defined in section 6-102 
(4)	Any animal running at large, as stipulated in section 6-2.
(5)	Any animal treated in a manner determined by the supervisor of animal control to be cruel or inhumane. 
(6)	Any animal that has bitten a human being or needs to be placed under observation for rabies determination, as determined by an animal control officer. 
(7)	Any animal violating any provision of this chapter.
(b)	If any of the animals named in this chapter are found upon the premises of any person, the owner or occupant of the premises shall have the right to confine such animal in a humane manner until he can notify an animal control officer to come and impound such animal. When so notified, it shall be the duty of an animal control officer to have such animal impounded as provided in this article. 
(c)	Reasonable effort shall be made by an animal control officer to contact the owner of any animal impounded; however, final responsibility for location of an impounded animal is that of the owner. 
(d)	The owner can resume possession of any impounded animal upon payment of impoundment fees, handling fees, and any veterinarian bills incurred by animal control for the welfare of the animal, and upon compliance with vaccination provisions of this chapter, except where prohibited in subsections (e) and (f) of this section. 
(e)	Disposition of animals impounded on the grounds of cruel or inhumane treatment shall be determined by the court of jurisdiction. 
(f)	If any animal is being held under quarantine or observation for rabies, the owner shall not be entitled to possession until the animal has been released from quarantine. 
(g)	The city manager shall select and establish a place for impounding all animals impounded under any provision of this chapter. 
(h)	Any animal, except vicious or wild animals, not reclaimed by the owner may be humanely euthanized after being impounded 72 hours. 
(i)	Any nursing baby animal impounded without the mother, or where the mother cannot or refuses to provide nutritious milk, may be immediately euthanized to prevent further suffering. 
(j)	Any impounded vicious or wild animal, unless there is reason to believe that it has an owner, may be immediately disposed of as may be deemed appropriate by the supervisor of animal control. 
(Ord. No. 1989-008, § 4.5, 9-12-1989) 
Sec. 6-72. - Fees. 
Impoundment fees shall be on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Ord. No. 1989-008, § 4.6, 9-12-1989) 
Sec. 6-73. - Adoption. 
(a)	An individual may adopt an animal from the city animal shelter under the following conditions: 
(1)	The animal has been classified as adoptable by the supervisor of animal control;
(2)	The prospective adopter has proper facilities to care for the animal;
(3)	The prospective adopter obtains all necessary vaccinations; and
(4)	The fee for adoption shall be on file in the city secretary's office. The purchaser of any dog or cat must have it vaccinated, and neutered if a male, or spayed if a female, within 30 days after purchase, or animal control shall have the right of immediate return of the animal to the animal shelter. The supervisor of animal control shall allow additional time in the case of dogs or cats less than six months of age. 
(b)	The supervisor of animal control may refuse to allow a person to adopt a cat or dog of whom he has reason to believe: 
(1)	Would not have proper facilities to contain or care for the animal, as required by this chapter; 
(2)	Wants the dog or cat for the purpose of resale or for purposes other than pet ownership; or 
(3)	That the cat or dog would be a hazard to humans or other animals.
(Ord. No. 1981-0030, § I(4.6), 11-12-1981) 
Secs. 6-74—6-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FARM ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 6-101. - Swine and potbellied pigs. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Potbellied pig means that breed of miniature pig meeting the standards established by the North American Potbelly Pig Association (NAPPA). 
Swine means any domesticated or undomesticated hog. 
(b)	Keeping regulated. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any hog or other members of the swine family, with exception of potbellied pigs, within the city. No person shall keep more than one potbellied pig at their residence. 
(c)	Distance restrictions. It shall be illegal for anyone to keep or stake up to one potbellied pigs at a distance closer than 500 feet from a habitation located on another person's property when the animal's primary habitat is located outdoors. 
(Ord. No. 1995-0006, § 1, 4-27-1995) 
Sec. 6-102. - Keeping of livestock restricted. 
It shall be declared a nuisance for any person within the city limits to keep or pen any cattle, horses, mules, jacks, jennets, goats, sheep or any other livestock in any enclosure less than two acres in area and within 100 feet of any school, park, building or structure used for sleeping, dining, living and/or business, except such a building or structure belonging to the owner of such livestock; however, keeping of horses and cattle in such an enclosure is further restricted to no more than one such animal per one-half acre of land contained within the enclosure. 
(Ord. No. 1996-0021, § 4.8, 12-12-1996) 
Sec. 6-103. - Rabbits and poultry. 
(a)	The running at large of domesticated rabbits or poultry, including chickens, geese, ducks, turkeys or guinea fowls and odors and noise from rabbits or poultry, within the city limits are declared to be a public nuisance. It shall be the duty of any person owning or having within his management or control any rabbits, chickens, turkeys, geese or other poultry to keep them in an enclosure upon their own premises at all times. Enclosure shall mean a house or building; or in case of a fence or structure or pen, it must have secure sides, top and a secure bottom. The structure or pen shall provide protection from the weather. 
(b)	No rabbits or chickens, turkeys, geese or other poultry shall be kept in any enclosure within the city any part of which enclosure is within 100 feet of any occupied building or dwelling within the city other than the building or dwelling occupied by the owner of the animals. 
(c)	This section is not to be construed to prevent owners from keeping pet animals inside their residence. 
(d)	It shall be the duty of every person raising or harboring any rabbit or poultry to keep the required enclosure in a sanitary condition, so that it shall not at any time become foul or offensive to adjacent neighbors or to the public. 
(e)	Failure to comply with this section shall be deemed a nuisance.
(Ord. No. 1996-0021, § 4.8, 12-12-1996) 
Secs. 6-104—6-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RABIES CONTROL 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34 
State Law reference— Rabies control, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.001 et seq. 
Sec. 6-131. - Animal quarantine. 
(a)	The supervisor of animal control shall have the authority to order the quarantine of animals responsible for bite incidents or suspected of having any zoonotic disease considered to be a hazard to the human population or to other animals. 
(b)	Every animal that bites a human, or attacks another animal in an unnatural manner, or has rabies or any other zoonotic disease, or is under suspicion of having rabies or any other zoonotic disease shall be immediately confined by the owner, who shall promptly notify animal control, or an animal control officer, of the place where such animal is confined and the reason for confinement. The owner shall not permit such animal to come in contact with any other person or animal. The owner shall surrender possession of such animal to animal control on demand for supervised quarantine. A release from quarantine may be issued if no signs of rabies or other diseases have been observed during the quarantine period. 
(c)	All animal bite reports shall be investigated by animal control. Without permission of the supervisor of animal control, it shall be unlawful for any person to kill or remove from the city limits any animal that has bitten a person or other animal, or that has been placed under quarantine except when it is necessary to kill such animal to protect the life of any person or animal. 
(d)	The supervisor of animal control shall direct the disposition of any animal suspected of being rabid or having any other zoonotic disease considered to be a hazard to any animal or human being. 
(e)	The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies or suspected of having been rabid shall, upon demand, be surrendered to animal control. 
(f)	Every animal that has been bitten by another animal shall be immediately confined by the owner, who shall promptly notify animal control of the place where such animal is confined and the reason for confinement. The owner shall not permit such animal to come in contact with any person or animal. Any animal known exposed to rabies shall be handled in one of the following manners: 
(1)	Humane destruction, with notification to or under the supervision of animal control; or 
(2)	Quarantine in a veterinary hospital for at least ten days immediately following the date of exposure. 
(g)	No person shall fail to surrender an animal for supervised quarantine or humane destruction, as required in this article for rabies control when demand is made by the supervisor of animal control. 
(Ord. No. 1989-008, § 4.7, 9-12-1989)
State Law reference— Quarantine, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 826.041 et seq.  
Chapter 10 - AVIATION 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial use means a use of any airplane for which a charge is made, either directly or indirectly. 
Private hangar means a hangar owned by any person other than the city. For the purposes of this chapter, if such private hangar is owned other than by one person, the owners shall designate in writing one person as the agent to deal with the city. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0014, § 3A-28, 7-8-1982)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2  
Secs. 10-2—10-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 10-31—10-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - AIRPORT BOARD 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, committees, commissions, § 2-31 et seq. 
Sec. 10-51. - Created. 
There is created in and for the city an administrative department to be designated as the airport board. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0014, § 3A-10, 7-8-1982) 
Sec. 10-52. - Membership. 
The airport board shall be composed of five members. Two members shall be nonpilots, and three members shall be pilots. One of the five members shall be a member of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0014, § 3A-11, 7-8-1982; Ord. No. 1994-0010, § 1, 8-23-1994) 
Sec. 10-53. - Appointment of members. 
The members of the airport board shall be appointed by a majority vote of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0014, § 3A-12, 7-8-1982) 
Sec. 10-54. - Members to be citizens. 
Each member of the airport board shall be a resident citizen of the city unless such citizenship shall be waived by a majority vote of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0014, § 3A-13, 7-8-1982) 
Sec. 10-55. - Terms of members. 
The term of office of the members of the airport board shall commence on February 1, except for the filling of vacancies. The members shall be appointed for a term of two years, with the exception of two members whose terms shall expire on January 31, 1983, and three members whose terms shall expire on January 31, 1984. Thereafter, all members shall be appointed for terms of two years. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0014, § 3A-14, 7-8-1982) 
Sec. 10-56. - Compensation of members. 
The members of the airport board shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0014, § 3A-15, 7-8-1982) 
Sec. 10-57. - Removal of members from office. 
Any member of the airport board shall be subject to removal from office by the city council for any cause deemed sufficient by the council in the interest of public service. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0014, § 3A-16, 7-8-1982) 
Sec. 10-58. - Filling of vacancies. 
All vacancies occurring in the membership of the airport board shall be filled by appointment by a majority vote of the city council and for the unexpired term of the vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0014, § 3A-17, 7-8-1982) 
Sec. 10-59. - Organization. 
The members of the airport board shall organize and select officers of such board from its membership. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0014, § 3A-18, 7-8-1982) 
Sec. 10-60. - Meetings. 
The members of the airport board shall hold such meetings as the board may determine, or shall meet at the request of the city council or the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0014, § 3A-19, 7-8-1982) 
Sec. 10-61. - Rules of procedure, record of proceedings. 
The airport board shall adopt its own rules of procedure and keep a record of its proceedings. A copy of such record shall be filed with the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0014, § 3A-20, 7-8-1982) 
Sec. 10-62. - Quorum. 
A simple majority of the members of the airport board shall constitute a quorum of the board for the transaction of all business. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0014, § 3A-21, 7-8-1982) 
Sec. 10-63. - Powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the airport board shall be as follows: 
(1)	Oversee annual yet continuous operations and maintenance functions, to include:
a.	Recommendation and approval of airport specific regulations;
b.	Supervise and establish priorities for maintenance and upgrading projects;
c.	Conduct periodic safety inspections of the airport; and
d.	Receive credentials, establish qualifications, evaluate and recommend hiring of airport caretaker or manager; 
(2)	To approve all applications for the construction of hangars on airport property, and file copy with the city secretary; 
(3)	To make recommendations to the city council relative to rates to be charged for the various uses of the airport; 
(4)	Prepare, review and update long-range plan for airport development, to include:
a.	Capital improvement program, including federal-state-local funding anticipated;
b.	Operations and maintenance plans;
c.	Recommendations to local planning and zoning authority for protection of the airport through zoning for obstructions and compatible land use; 
d.	Promote orderly but compatible development of adjacent land to its maximum revenue-generating capacity; 
(5)	To consider such other items as may be referred to it by the council pertaining to the airport; and 
(6)	Serve as communications conduit for airport-related matters, to include:
a.	Provide accurate information on facilities to federal, state and city agencies;
b.	Provide liaison between the airport users and government officials;
c.	Resolve conflicts which may periodically develop between the airport and its neighbors.
(Ord. No. 1982-0014, § 3A-22, 7-8-1982) 
Sec. 10-64. - Recommendations subject to city council. 
All rules or regulations of the airport board shall be subject to modification or veto by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0014, § 3A-23, 7-8-1982) 
Secs. 10-65—10-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 10-101. - Name of airport. 
The airport owned by the city shall be called "Fox Stephens Field-Gilmer Municipal Airport." 
(Ord. No. 1982-0014, § 3A-1, 7-8-1982) 
Sec. 10-102. - Operation of vehicles on runways restricted. 
No person shall drive or operate an automotive motor vehicle upon the runways of the municipal airport owned by the city except emergency vehicles or repair vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0014, § 3A-2, 7-8-1982)
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 86  
Sec. 10-103. - Possession, consumption of alcoholic beverages on city property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have, store, possess or consume any intoxicating beverages or liquors upon properties owned by the city and used for municipal airport purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0014, § 3A-3, 7-8-1982)
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, § 18-31 et seq.  
Sec. 10-104. - Hunting, use of dangerous weapons on airport property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, except authorized city employees, to hunt, carry firearms, or hunting equipment or discharge any firearm within or upon any portion of the municipal airport property. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0014, § 3A-4, 7-8-1982)
Cross reference— Weapons, § 54-31 et seq.  
Sec. 10-105. - Animals upon runways. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, except authorized city employees, to ride or cause to be ridden or driven any animals upon the runways of the municipal airport property. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0014, § 3A-5, 7-8-1982)
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 6  
Secs. 10-106—10-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - HANGARS 
 
Sec. 10-141. - Planes based at airport generally. 
The airport board may make reasonable charges or use fees on all planes based at or using the municipal hangar or airport. A schedule of these charges shall be filed with the city manager from time to time as they are made or changed. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0014, § 3A-29, 7-8-1982) 
Sec. 10-142. - Authority of chair of airport board. 
The chair may, from time to time, sign ground leases with persons desiring to construct hangars on the grounds of the municipal airport, which leases shall contain, among other provisions, the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0014, § 3A-30, 7-8-1982) 
Sec. 10-143. - Term. 
The term of any lease for hangar space at the municipal airport shall be for a period not in excess of ten years from October 1, with an option to renew the lease by the owner of the building on a year-to-year term. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0014, § 3A-31, 7-8-1982) 
Sec. 10-144. - Annual rent. 
The lease for airport hangar space shall provide an annual rental payable to the city on or before January 10 of each calendar year in an amount which is on file in the city secretary's office. If the lease is signed at a time other than January 1, the rental for the remainder of that year shall be prorated. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0014, § 3A-32, 7-8-1982) 
Sec. 10-145. - Use of hangar building. 
The airport hangar space lease shall provide that the buildings shall be used for the storage of airplanes and such other uses as may be beneficial to the best aviation interest of the city, but all leases shall specifically specify the use to which any hangar will be placed; and no owner of a hangar shall place the hangar to any use not stated in the lease or amendments to the lease. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0014, § 3A-33, 7-8-1982) 
Sec. 10-146. - Plans and specifications to be approved. 
Any person desiring to construct a hangar on airport land shall furnish a complete set of plans and specifications to the airport board and shall not commence any construction or moving material to the site until such time as the plans and specifications shall be approved by the airport board and a building permit has been secured and the fee paid to the city. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0014, § 3A-34, 7-8-1982) 
Sec. 10-147. - Execution. 
Any lease for hangar space at the municipal airport shall not be signed until the building has been constructed; and when it is completed, if it has been built in accordance with the plans and specifications, the lease shall be executed. If such hangar is not built in accordance with plans and specifications, the city inspector and the airport board shall require such to be done; and if the owner refuses to complete the construction in accordance with plans and specifications, the owner shall immediately remove the hangar; otherwise it may be demolished and removed by the city at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0014, § 3A-35, 7-8-1982) 
Sec. 10-148. - Removal, demolition. 
All leases shall contain a provision to the effect that if the land on which the hangar is located is required by the city to be used in any airport improvement, the owner will, within 30 days after notice from the city, remove the hangar at the owner's expense; and should he fail to do so, the city may demolish and remove the hangar at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0014, § 3A-36, 7-8-1982) 
Sec. 10-149. - Transfer of title. 
Any owner selling or transferring title to a hangar will give notice of such sale or transfer to the city manager, and the transferee shall sign a statement that the transferee assumes the obligations of the lease. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0014, § 3A-37, 7-8-1982) 
Sec. 10-150. - Maintenance; abatement of nuisance. 
(a)	The owner of a hangar is bound and obligated to keep the hangar in good repair at all times; keep the hangar in a sightly condition; not permit the accumulation of any cans, rubbish or other debris in or around the hangar; keep the hangar securely closed except when going in or out of the hangar; pay the rent when due; obey all rules, regulations and ordinances promulgated by the city or the airport board relating to the use of the airport; and not permit or do anything that will create a nuisance or a disturbance at the airport. 
(b)	A continued violation of this division for a period of 15 days after notice from the city manager shall void the contract and the owner shall immediately sell or transfer or remove the hangar. Upon his failure to do so, the city may demolish and remove the hangar at the expense of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0014, § 3A-38, 7-8-1982) 
Sec. 10-151. - Lease not to be issued to persons in debt to city. 
No lease for hangar space shall be granted any person who may be indebted to the city, its lessee or agent, on any airport charges. If after a lease is granted the holder becomes delinquent for as much as 60 days in airport charges to the city, its lessee or agent, the lease shall be canceled. The city shall have a lien on the hangar for all delinquent airport charges. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0014, § 3A-39, 7-8-1982) 
Secs. 10-152—10-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - GILMER MUNICIPAL AIRPORT—FOX STEPHENS FIELD HAZARD ZONING REGULATIONS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 2005-011, §§ 1—15, 17, 18, adopted November 17, 2005, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as article IV, §§ 10-201—10-217, is at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 10-201. - Short title. 
These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the "Gilmer Municipal Airport-Fox Stephens Field Hazard Zoning Regulations." 
(Ord. No. 2005-011, § 1, 11-17-2005) 
Sec. 10-202. - Definitions. 
As used in these regulations, unless the context otherwise requires: 
Administrative agency means the appropriate person or office of a political subdivision which is responsible for the administration and enforcement of the regulations prescribed herein. The administrative agency is set forth in section 10-203. 
Airport means the Gilmer Municipal Airport-Fox Stephens Field, Gilmer, Texas; including the ultimate development of that facility. 
Airport elevation means The established elevation of the highest point on the runway, either existing or planned, at the airport measured in feet above mean sea level (MSL). The airport elevation of the Gilmer Municipal Airport-Fox Stephens Field is 415 feet above mean sea level (MSL). 
Airport hazard means any structure, tree, or use of land which obstructs the airspace required for the flight of aircraft or obstructs or interferes with the control, tracking, and/or data acquisition in the landing, takeoff, or flight at an airport or any installation or facility relating to flight, tracking, and/or data acquisition of the flight craft; is hazardous to, interferes with, or obstructs such landing, takeoff, or flight of aircraft; or is hazardous to or interferes with tracking and/or data acquisition pertaining to flight and flight vehicles. 
Approach surface means a surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and upward from each end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in section 10-205. In plan, the perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone. 
Approach, conical, horizontal, and transitional zones. These zones are set forth in section 10-204. 
Board of adjustment means a board so designated by these regulations as provided in V.T.C.A, Local Government Code § 241.032. Provisions for the board of adjustment are set forth in section 10-209. 
Conical surface means a surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 feet horizontally for each one foot vertically for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 
Hazard to air navigation means an obstruction or use of land determined to have a substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of navigable airspace. 
Height means, for the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in these regulations and shown on the hazard zoning map, the datum shall be height above mean sea level (MSL) elevation as measured in feet. 
Horizontal surface means a horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation which in plan coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone. 
Nonconforming use, structure, or tree means any structure, tree, or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of these regulations and which is existing as of the effective date of these regulations. 
Nonprecision instrument runway means a runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities or other equipment that provides only horizontal guidance or area type navigation equipment. This also includes a runway for which a nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned. Runway 18-36 is considered a nonprecision instrument runway. 
Obstruction means any structure, tree, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in section 10-205 or is an airport hazard. 
Other than utility runway means a runway designed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of more than 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and jet powered aircraft. Runway 18-36 at the Fox Stephens Field/Gilmer Municipal Airport is considered an other than utility runway. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association, or body politic and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, administrator, executor, guardian, or other representative. 
Primary surface means a 500-foot wide surface longitudinally centered on the runway extending the full length of the ultimate runway configuration plus 200 feet beyond each ultimate end of the runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the nearest point on the existing or ultimate runway centerline. 
Runway means a defined area on the airport prepared for the landing and taking off of aircraft along its length. The zoned length of Runway 18-36 at the Fox Stephens Field/Gilmer Municipal Airport is 5,500 feet. 
Structure means an object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man including, but not limited to, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, poles, earth formations, overhead power lines, and traverse ways. Traverse ways are considered to be the heights set forth in 14 C.F.R. Part 77.23. 
Transitional surfaces means surfaces extending perpendicular to the runway centerline and the extended runway centerline outward from the edges of the primary surface and the approach surfaces at a slope of seven (7) feet horizontally for each one foot vertically to where they intersect the horizontal surface. 
Tree means any type of flora and an object of natural growth. 
(Ord. No. 2005-011, § 2, 11-17-2005) 
Sec. 10-203. - Administrative agency. 
It shall be the duty of the office of city manager/community development coordinator, to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein and is hereby designated as the administrative agency. 
(Ord. No. 2005-011, § 3, 11-17-2005) 
Sec. 10-204. - Zones. 
In order to carry out the provisions of these regulations, there are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, conical surface, horizontal surface, and transitional surfaces as they apply to the airport. Such surfaces are shown on the City of Gilmer/Gilmer Municipal Airport Hazard Zoning Map consisting of one sheet, prepared by TxDOT Aviation and dated 8-5-05, which is hereby attached to these regulations and made a part hereof. An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows: 
(1)	Approach zones. Approach zones are hereby established beneath the approach surfaces at each end of Runway 18-36 at the airport for an other than utility runway with non-precision instrument landings. The approach surface shall have an inner edge width of 500 feet, which coincides with the width of the primary surface, at a distance of 200 feet beyond each runway end, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of 3,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet beyond the end of the primary surface. The centerline of the approach surface is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(2)	Conical zone. A conical zone is hereby established beneath the conical surface at the airport which extends outward from the periphery of the horizontal surface for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 
(3)	Horizontal zone. A horizontal zone is hereby established beneath the horizontal surface at the airport which is a plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which is constructed by swinging arcs of 10,000 feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs. 
(4)	Transitional zones. Transitional zones are hereby established beneath the transitional surfaces at the airport. Transitional surfaces, symmetrically located on either side of the runway, have variable widths as shown on the Gilmer Municipal Airport-Fox Stephens Field Hazard Zoning Map. Transitional surfaces extend outward perpendicular to the runway centerline and the extended runway centerline from the periphery of the primary surface and the approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal surface. 
(Ord. No. 2005-011, § 4, 11-17-2005) 
Sec. 10-205. - Height limitations. 
Except as otherwise provided in section 10-208, no structure shall be erected, altered, or replaced and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone created by these regulations to a height in excess of the applicable height limitations herein established for such zone except as provided in subsection (5). Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows: 
(1)	Approach zones. Slope one foot in height for each 34 feet in horizontal distance beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a point 10,000 feet beyond the end of the primary surface. 
(2)	Conical zone. Slopes one foot in height for each 20 feet in horizontal distance beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at 150 feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation, or to a height of 765.0 feet above mean sea level. 
(3)	Horizontal zone. Established at 150 feet above the airport elevation, or at a height of 565.0 feet above mean sea level. 
(4)	Transitional zones. Slope one foot in height for each seven feet in horizontal distance beginning at the sides of and at the same elevations as the primary surface and the approach surfaces. 
(5)	Excepted height limitation. Nothing contained in these regulations shall be construed as prohibiting the growth, construction, or maintenance of any structure or tree to a height of up to 50 feet above the surface of the land at its location. 
(Ord. No. 2005-011, § 5, 11-17-2005) 
Sec. 10-206. - Land use restrictions. 
Except as provided in section 10-207, no use may be made of land or water within any zone established by these regulations in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communications between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create potential bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, taking off, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. 
(Ord. No. 2005-011, § 6, 11-17-2005) 
Sec. 10-207. - Nonconforming uses, structures, and trees. 
(a)	Nonconforming uses. Nothing contained in these regulations shall be construed as requiring changes in or interference with the continuance of any nonconforming use of land. 
(b)	Nonconforming structures. Nothing contained in these regulations shall be construed as to require the removal, lowering, or other change to any existing nonconforming structure including all phases or elements of a multiphase structure the construction of which was begun prior to the effective date of these regulations and is diligently prosecuted. 
(c)	Nonconforming trees. Nothing in these regulations shall be construed as to require the removal, lowering, or other change to any nonconforming tree. However, any nonconforming tree which grows to a greater height than it was as of the effective date of these regulations is subject to the provisions of these regulations as described in section 10-205 
(Ord. No. 2005-011, § 7, 11-17-2005) 
Sec. 10-208. - Permits and variances. 
(a)	Permits. Any person who desires to replace, rebuild, substantially change, or repair a nonconforming structure or replace or replant a nonconforming tree must apply for and receive a permit, and the permit shall be granted. However, no permit shall be granted which would allow the establishment of an airport hazard or allow a nonconforming structure or tree to exceed its original height or become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was at the time of the adoption of these regulations. Applications for permit shall be applied to and issued by the administrative agency. 
(b)	Variances. Any person who desires to erect, substantially change, or increase the height of any structure or establish or allow the growth of any tree which would exceed the height limitations set forth in section 10-205 or change the use of property in such a way as to create a hazardous condition as described in section 10-206 must apply to the board of adjustment and receive a variance. The application for variance must be accompanied by a determination from the Federal Aviation Administration under 14 C.F.R. Part 77 as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations will result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and the granting of relief would result in substantial justice, not be contrary to the public interest, and be in accordance with the spirit of these regulations. 
(c)	Requirements and reasonable conditions. 
(1)	Any permit granted may, at the discretion of the administrative agency, impose a requirement to allow the installation and maintenance, at the expense of the administrative agency, of any markers or lights as may be necessary to indicate to flyers the presence of an airport hazard. 
(2)	Any variance granted may, at the discretion of the board of adjustment, impose any reasonable conditions as may be necessary to accomplish the purpose of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2005-011, § 8, 11-17-2005) 
Sec. 10-209. - Board of adjustment. 
(a)	The board of adjustment of the city is hereby designated as the board of adjustment for the purposes of these regulations and shall have and exercise the following powers: 
(1)	To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the administrative agency in the administration or enforcement of these regulations; 
(2)	To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of these regulations when the board is required to do so; and 
(3)	To hear and decide specific variances.
(b)	The board of adjustment shall be comprised of five members and shall adopt rules for its governance and procedure in harmony with the provisions of these regulations. Meetings of the board of adjustment shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such times as the board of adjustment may determine. The chairman, or in his/her absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the board of adjustment shall be public. The board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question or if any member is absent or fails to vote, indicating such fact and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office of the board of adjustment or in the office of community development coordinator [of the] city. All such records shall be public records. 
(c)	The board of adjustment shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law stating the facts upon which it relied when making its legal conclusions in reversing, affirming, or modifying any order, requirement, decision, or determination which comes before it under the provisions of these regulations. 
(d)	The concurring vote of four members of the board of adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the administrative agency, to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under these regulations, or to effect any variance to these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2005-011, § 9, 11-17-2005) 
Sec. 10-210. - Appeals. 
(a)	Any person aggrieved or any taxpayer affected by a decision of the administrative agency made in the administration of these regulations may appeal to the board of adjustment if that person or taxpayer is of the opinion that a decision of the administrative agency is an improper application of these regulations. This same right of appeal is extended to the governing bodies of the city and Upshur County, Texas, and to the City of Gilmer-Upshur County Joint Airport Zoning Board. 
(b)	All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the board of adjustment by filing a notice of appeal with the board of adjustment and the administrative agency specifying the grounds for the appeal. The administrative agency shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken. 
(c)	An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed unless the administrative agency certifies in writing to the board of adjustment that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in the opinion of the administrative agency, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the board of adjustment on notice to the administrative agency and on due cause shown. 
(d)	The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent, and/or by attorney. 
(e)	The board of adjustment may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the administrative agency's order, requirement, decision, or determination from which an appeal is taken and make the correct order, requirement, decision, or determination, and for this purpose the board of adjustment has the same authority as the administrative agency. 
(Ord. No. 2005-011, § 10, 11-17-2005) 
Sec. 10-211. - Judicial review. 
Any person aggrieved or any taxpayer affected by a decision of the board of adjustment may present to a court of record a petition stating that the decision of the board of adjustment is illegal and specifying the grounds of the illegality as provided by and in accordance with the provisions of Texas Local Government Code, § 241.041. This same right of appeal is extended to the governing bodies of the city, and Upshur County, Texas, and to the City of Gilmer-Upshur County Joint Airport Zoning Board. 
(Ord. No. 2005-011, § 11, 11-17-2005) 
Sec. 10-212. - Enforcement and remedies. 
The governing bodies of the city or Upshur County, Texas, or the City of Gilmer-Upshur County Joint Airport Zoning Board may institute in a court of competent jurisdiction an action to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate any violation of these regulations or of any order or ruling made in connection with their administration or enforcement including, but not limited to, an action for injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 2005-011, § 12, 11-17-2005) 
Sec. 10-213. - Penalties. 
Each violation of these regulations or of any order or ruling promulgated hereunder shall constitute a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $200.00 and each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2005-011, § 13, 11-17-2005) 
Sec. 10-214. - Conflicting regulations. 
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed herein and any other regulation applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or trees, the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2005-011, § 14, 11-17-2005) 
Sec. 10-215. - Severability. 
If any of the provisions of these regulations or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or application of these regulations which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application and to this end, the provisions of these regulations are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 2005-011, § 15, 11-17-2005) 
Sec. 10-216. - Duties of joint airport zoning board. 
Sixty days following the date of adoption of this article, the duties, responsibilities and authority of the City of Gilmer-Upshur County Joint Airport Zoning Board shall be dissolved. 
(Ord. No. 2005-011, § 17, 11-17-2005) 
Sec. 10-217. - Adherence with state laws. 
Any actions brought forth by any person or taxpayer as a result of the administration, enforcement, or the contesting these regulations will be in accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A, Local Government Code, §§ 241.001 et seq. and other applicable state laws. 
(Ord. No. 2005-011, § 18, 11-17-2005)  
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Building permits, § 11.07 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38; flood prevention and protection, ch. 42; signs, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; subdivisions, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 90; zoning, app. A. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 14-1—14-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STANDARDS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 14-31. - Codes adopted. 
The following codes are adopted by reference as though they were copied in this section fully and are in effect in the city: 
2003 International Building Code. 
2000 International Residential Code. 
2000 International Plumbing Code. 
2000 International Mechanical Code. 
2000 International Fuel Gas Code. 
1999 National Electrical Code. 
(Ord. No. 1994-0016, § 1, 9-27-1994; Ord. No. 2001-010, 9-27-2001; Ord. No. 2005-013, § 1, 12-13-2005)  
Sec. 14-32. - Adoption of fees. 
All permit fees referenced in the technical codes adopted in section 14-31 shall be replaced by the fees on file in the city secretary's office.  
Secs. 14-33—14-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ELECTRICAL 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 90  
Sec. 14-51. - Installation standards. 
(a)	All installations shall be in strict conformity with the provisions of this division, the statutes of the state, the rules and regulations issued under authority of the state statutes, and shall be in conformity with approved standards of construction for safety to life and property. In every case where no specific type or class of material or no specific standard of construction is prescribed by the statutes of the state, the regulations issued under the authority of the state statutes or by this division, conformity with the regulations as laid down in the National Electrical Code, as approved by the American Standards Association; and other installation and safety regulations approved by the American Standards Association shall be prima facie evidence of conformity with approved standards of construction for safety to life and property. 
(b)	All electrical equipment installed or used shall be in conformity with the provisions of this division; the statutes of the state and any order, rules and regulations issued by authority of this division and such statutes and with approved electrical standards for safety to persons and property. Unless by this division, by a statute of the state, or by any orders, rules or regulations issued by authority of this division and such statutes, a specific type or class of electrical equipment is disapproved for installation and use, conformity with the standards of Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., as approved by the American Standards Association, shall be prima facie evidence of conformity with approved standards for safety to persons and property; however, the provisions of this division shall not apply to equipment owned and used by an electrical supply or communications agency, in the generation, transmission or distribution of electricity or for the operation of signals or the transmission of intelligence. 
(c)	No electrical apparatus, fitting or material shall be used or placed on sale unless such apparatus, fitting or material is approved by the electrical inspector as complying with the safety requirements of this division; however, all such apparatus, fittings or material which bears the label of Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., shall be deemed prima facie evidence to satisfy the requirements of this division; and the electrical inspector is authorized to approve such apparatus, fittings and material without requiring that further tests be made. 
(d)	Approved wiring methods are as follows:
(1)	Rigid metal conduit.
(2)	Electrical metallic tubing.
(3)	Flexible metal conduit.
(4)	Surface metal raceways.
(5)	Underfloor raceways.
(6)	Cellular metal floor raceways.
(7)	Wireways.
(8)	Busways.
(9)	Service entrance cable.
(10)	Open wiring insulators.
(11)	Nonmetallic sheathed cable.
(12)	Or any other method approved by the National Electrical Code, with the exception of the use of aluminum wire. 
(e)	The term "fire limits," as referred to in the provisions of this division relating to electrical work within the fire limits of the city, shall be taken to mean and include the district contained within the fire limits or districts as they exist at the time of the installation or performance of such electrical work. 
(f)	All wiring other than residential and multifamily shall be in electrical conduit, surface metal raceways, underfloor raceways, cellular metal, floor raceways, wireways, busways. 
(g)	Switchboards, switches, panel boards, control boards and distributing centers of any and all types shall be dead-front safety-type equipment located in machinery rooms which are safeguarded as provided for elevator-control equipment. 
(h)	All panels and switchboards used for the control of lighting and appliance circuits in residential and commercial buildings shall be of the multibreaker type. All switches, disconnects, circuit breakers, load centers, and multibreakers when mounted outside and exposed to the weather shall be raintight, designed for outdoor service. 
(i)	Ground fault circuit interrupters are now required for all unfinished accessory buildings used for storage or work areas when associated with dwellings for any readily accessible general use receptacles. 
(j)	All outdoor receptacles for dwellings are required to be ground fault circuit interrupters protected. 
(k)	Outdoor receptacles cannot be on small appliance circuits.
(l)	Bathroom receptacles are required to be on at least one separate 20-amp branch circuit that serves only bathroom receptacles. 
(m)	Service disconnect and overcurrent protection shall not be located in a bathroom.
(n)	The grounded conductor is no longer permitted under any conditions to serve as the equipment grounding conductor for new installations. 
(o)	Receptacles shall not be located in bathtubs and shower spaces.
(p)	Lighting tracks and ceiling fans above in an area above the tub measured three feet horizontally and eight feet vertically from the top of the bathtub rim is prohibited. 
(q)	All 125-volt receptacles located within five feet of a hydromassage bathtub shall be protected. 
(r)	Metal-clad cable may be used in remodels where electrical conduit is not practical. All flexible conduit shall have a ground wire. 
(s)	All smoke alarms shall be hard wired in commercial and residential buildings, and no batteries will be allowed except for emergency backup. 
(Ord. No. 1997-0004, 4-10-1997) 
Secs. 14-52—14-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PLUMBING 
 
Sec. 14-71. - Duties of the plumbing inspector. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of the plumbing inspector, under the direction of the city manager to: 
(1)	Sign and issue all notices and certificates and to pass on all plans submitted;
(2)	Keep a daily record of his work, including all notices and applications received, violations of this division and all other pertinent matters; 
(3)	Make daily, weekly and quarterly reports and annual reports to the city council;
(4)	Inspect all houses in course of erection, alteration and repair, as often as may be necessary; and 
(5)	See that all work for plumbing, drainage and ventilation is done in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(b)	The plumbing inspector will inspect all sewer connections and external house drains within five hours after notification by the plumber, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excepted, and all waste and vent pipes and other inside plumbing within 24 hours after notification, Saturdays, Sundays and holidays excepted. 
(c)	Should the plumbing inspector fail to comply with the requirements of this section, the plumber doing the work shall file with the health officer a written statement that the inspection was not made within the time mentioned in this section. 
(d)	The fee for inspection of all water, sewer, water heater and gas lines is on file in the city secretary's office. This fee is to be paid upon application for a permit. For all inspection trips to the job over and above one trip, there shall be a charge on file in the city secretary's office for each trip. 
(e)	The plumbing board may permit the installations being made though some may conflict with this division if in its judgment the work, material and methods prescribe equal or better safety from a sanitary standpoint. 
(Ord. No. 1996-0017, § 1, 8-29-1996) 
Sec. 14-72. - General plumbing rules. 
Each person doing business as a plumber or drainlayer or property owner personally doing or performing his own work, must conform to the following rules and regulations: Before beginning any work, all of the applicable requirements mentioned in this article must be complied with and a permit issued for such work must be in the possession of that person making application for such permit; and no person conducting a plumbing business shall allow his name to be used by any person directly or indirectly to obtain a permit to do any work under his bond. The charge for plumbing permits is on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Ord. No. 1996-0017, § 2, 8-29-1996) 
Sec. 14-73. - Interceptors and separators (grease traps). 
(a)	Wastes from kitchen sinks, and/or dishwashers in any hotel, restaurant, clubhouse, boardinghouse, public institution, hospital or other establishments where grease can be introduced into the drainage system in quantities that can effect line stoppage or hinder sewage disposal shall discharge into an approved type grease trap of adequate size before entering the sanitary drain or sewer. The grease trap shall be properly vented; and if it is more than four feet horizontally or 30 inches vertically from the outlet of the fixtures it serves, the fixture shall have a separate trap and vent. The grease-retaining capacity of each grease trap in pounds of grease shall be equal to twice the rate of flow capacity in gallons per minute of wastewater so that the trap shall remove and retain 90 percent of the grease discharged into it up to its required capacity of accumulated grease. For calculating the required sizes of grease traps, the rate of discharge from each fixture connected to the trap shall be based upon the rates shown in the following table: 
Type of Fixture 	Rate of Flow
in gpm 
Single compartment sink with 1½-inch waste .....	15 
Double compartment sink with 1½-inch waste .....	20
Triple compartment sink with 2-inch waste .....	25
Dishwashers:	
	Up to 30 gallon water capacity .....	15 
	Up to 50 gallon water capacity .....	25
	Up to 100 gallon water capacity .....	40
Floor drain, each .....	 5
 
(b)	Interceptors or separators shall be provided where they are necessary for the proper handling of wastes containing ingredients harmful to the building system, the public sewer or sewage treatment plant or processes. 
(c)	Each interceptor (grease trap) shall be so installed as to provide ready accessibility to the cover and means for servicing and maintaining the interceptor in working and operating condition. 
(d)	Interceptors shall be maintained in efficient operating condition by periodic removal of accumulated grease. Establishments must provide the city water superintendent or the city inspector with receipts for waste collections. 
(Ord. No. 1996-0006, art. II, 2-8-1996) 
Secs. 14-74—14-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— Dangerous structures, § 11.08 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34  
Sec. 14-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dangerous building means any building or structure which has any of the following defects or is in any of the following conditions; however, this enumeration shall not be deemed or construed to be conclusive, limiting or restrictive: 
(1)	Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit does not conform to the approved fire code of the city; 
(2)	Whenever any portion has been damaged by fire, wind, flood or by any other cause in such manner that the structural strength or stability is appreciably less than it was before such catastrophe and is less than the minimum requirements of the building code of the city for a new building or similar structure, purpose or location; 
(3)	Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance is likely to fall or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property; 
(4)	Whenever any portion has settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds than is required in the case of new construction by the building code of the city; 
(5)	Whenever any building or structure or any part, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, or because of the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building or portion, or some other reason, is likely to be partially or completely collapsed; 
(6)	Whenever for any reason whatsoever the building or structure or any portion is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used; 
(7)	Whenever any building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind or flood, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become an attractive nuisance to children who might play in the building or structure to their danger, or as to afford a harborage for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons, or as to enable persons to resort to the building or structure for the purpose of committing a nuisance or unlawful or immoral acts; 
(8)	Whenever any building or structure used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, because of dilapidation, decay, damage or faulty construction or arrangement or otherwise, is unsanitary or unfit for human habitation or is in a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease when so determined by the health officer, or likely to work injury to the health, safety or general welfare of those living within; or 
(9)	Whenever any building becomes vacant, dilapidated and open at a door or window, leaving the interior of the building exposed to the elements or accessible to entrance by trespassers. 
(Ord. No. 1979-0013, § 9.70, 11-8-1979)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2  
Sec. 14-102. - Unlawful to keep or maintain. 
It is unlawful for any owner or his agent to keep or maintain any building or part which is a dangerous building. 
(Ord. No. 1979-0013, § 9.71, 11-8-1979) 
Sec. 14-103. - Notice of hearing. 
(a)	When the whole or any part of any building or structure is found to be in a dangerous or unsafe condition, the building inspector shall issue a notice of the dangerous and unsafe condition. 
(b)	Such notice shall be directed to each owner of or party in interest in the building in whose name the property appears on the last local tax assessment records. 
(c)	The notice shall specify the time and place of a hearing on the condition of the building or structure, at which time and place the person to whom the notice is directed shall have the opportunity to show cause why the building or structure should not be ordered to be demolished or otherwise made safe. 
(d)	The building inspector shall file a copy of the notice of the dangerous and unsafe condition with the hearing officer. 
(Ord. No. 1979-0013, § 9.72, 11-8-1979) 
Sec. 14-104. - Service of notice. 
All notices served under this article shall be in writing and shall be served upon the person to whom they are directed personally, or in lieu of personal service may be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to such owner or party in interest at the address shown on the tax records, at least 15 days before the date of the hearing described in the notice. If any person to whom a notice is directed is not personally served, in addition to mailing the notice, a copy shall be posted upon a conspicuous part of the building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 1979-0013, § 9.73, 11-8-1979) 
Sec. 14-105. - Appointment of hearing officer. 
The hearing officer, functioning under this article, shall be appointed by the city manager to serve at the manager's pleasure. 
(Ord. No. 1979-0013, § 9.74, 11-8-1979) 
Sec. 14-106. - Hearing and order of hearing officer. 
(a)	The hearing officer shall take testimony of the building inspector, the owner of the property and any interested party at the hearing under this article. The hearing officer shall render a decision either closing the proceedings or ordering the building to be demolished or otherwise made safe. 
(b)	If it is determined by the hearing officer that the building or structure should be demolished or otherwise made safe, the hearing officer shall so order, fixing a time in the order for the owner, agent or lessee to comply with the order. 
(c)	If the owner, agent or lessee fails to appear or neglects or refuses to comply with the order, the hearing officer shall file a report of such officer's findings and a copy of such officer's order with the city council and request that the necessary action be taken to demolish or otherwise make safe the building or structure. A copy of the findings and order of the hearing officer shall be served on the owner, agent or lessee in the manner prescribed in section 14-104 
(Ord. No. 1979-0013, § 9.75, 11-8-1979) 
Sec. 14-107. - Review hearing by city council. 
The city council shall fix a date for a hearing, reviewing the findings and order of the hearing officer under section 14-106 and shall give notice to the owner, agent or lessee in the manner prescribed in section 14-104 of the time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner, agent or lessee shall be given the opportunity to show cause why the building should not be demolished or otherwise made safe; and the city council shall either approve, disapprove or modify the order for the demolition or making safe of the building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 1979-0013, § 9.76, 11-8-1979) 
Sec. 14-108. - Emergency abatement by city. 
When in the opinion of the building inspector or other duly designated officer there is actual and immediate danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure or any part which would endanger life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is endangered by the occupation of the building or structure, the building inspector is authorized and empowered to order and require the inmates and occupants to vacate the building or structure forthwith. The building inspector or other duly designated officer of the city shall proceed to demolish or make safe the dangerous building, as described in this section, and shall prepare a statement of costs incurred in such work. 
(Ord. No. 1979-0013, § 9.77, 11-8-1979) 
Sec. 14-109. - Penalty for failure or refusal to comply. 
Upon failure of the owner, upon whom notice to demolish or make safe a dangerous building was served pursuant to this article, to demolish or make safe a dangerous building, such owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined as provided in section 1-14. In case the owner or occupant of any lot or premises under the provisions of this article shall be a corporation and shall violate any provision of this article, the president, vice-president, secretary, treasurer of such corporation, or any manager, agent or employee of such corporation shall be also liable for the penalties provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 1981-0002, § 9.78, 1-5-1981) 
Sec. 14-110. - Right of city to perform work. 
If an owner refuses or fails to comply with the provisions of this article, despite penalties, or if the owner cannot be contacted, and if the violation represents an immediate threat to health or safety in the view of the mayor, city manager or city health officer, the city may perform the necessary work to eliminate the threat. 
(Ord. No. 1981-0002, § 9.80, 1-5-1981) 
Sec. 14-111. - Judicial review. 
An owner aggrieved by any final decision or order of the city council under section 14-107 may appeal the decision or order to a court of competent jurisdiction by filing a petition for an order of superintending control within 20 days from the date of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 1979-0013, § 9.79, 11-8-1979) 
Sec. 14-112. - City costs declared lien; collection as taxes. 
(a)	The cost of the demolition or making a building safe under this article shall be a lien against the real property and shall be reported to the city assessor, who shall assess the cost against the property on which the building or structure is located. 
(b)	The owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears upon the last local tax assessment records shall be notified of the amount of such cost by first class mail at the address shown on the records. If such owner or party in interest fails to pay such amount within 30 days after mailing by the assessor of the notice of the amount, the assessor shall add such amount to the next tax roll of the city; and such amount shall be collected in the same manner in all respects as provided by law for the collection of taxes by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1979-0013, § 9.80, 11-8-1979) 
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Emergency services, ch. 30; sales, ch. 66; shopping center and shopping mall signs, § 70-164; taxation, ch. 82; hotel occupancy tax, § 82-61 et seq.; occupation tax, § 82-101 et seq.; roller skates, coasters, skateboards, bicycles and similar vehicles prohibited in central business district, § 86-1; utilities, ch. 90; vehicles for hire, ch. 94; local business district, app. A, § 11-1 et seq.; general business district, app. A, § 12-1 et seq.; light industrial district, app. A, § 13-1 et seq.; general industrial district, app. A, § 14-1 et seq.; home occupations, app. A, § 16-7  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 18-1—18-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Possession, consumption of alcoholic beverages on city property, § 10-103; possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages in public parks prohibited, § 62-1; consumption of alcohol prohibited on streets and sidewalks, § 74-1 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.01 et seq. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 18-31—18-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - NUDITY 
 
Sec. 18-51. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to prohibit certain acts of commercial exploitation of human sexuality in commercial establishments within the city limits where alcoholic beverages are served or offered for sale for consumption on the premises, and to reduce the likelihood of criminal activity, moral degradation and disturbances of the peace and good order of the community, to prohibit lewd and unlawful activity, such as prostitution and the proliferation of controlled substances, all of which may occur when such commercial exploitation is permitted in such places, and to promote the preservation of property values of neighborhoods and adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 1994-0007, § 1, 6-16-1994) 
Sec. 18-52. - Prohibition of nudity in commercial establishments serving or permitting the consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining, owning or operating a commercial establishment located within the boundaries of the city at which alcoholic beverages are served or offered for sale for consumption on the premises, or at which alcoholic beverages are permitted to be consumed to: 
(1)	Suffer or permit any female person, while on the premises of such commercial establishment, to expose that area of the human female breast at or below the top of the areola. 
(2)	Suffer or permit any female person, while on the premises of such commercial establishment, to use any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or simulate such portions of the human female breasts as described in subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(3)	Suffer or permit any person, while on the premises of such commercial establishment, to expose his genitals, pubic areas, buttocks, anus, or anal cleft or cleavage. 
(4)	Suffer or permit any person, while on the premises of such commercial establishment, to use any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or simulate the genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, or anal cleft or cleavage. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any female person, while on the premises of a commercial establishment located within the boundaries of the city at which alcoholic beverages are served or offered for sale for consumption on the premises, or at which alcoholic beverages are permitted to be consumed, to expose that area of the human female breast at or below the top of the areola, or to use any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance or simulate such areas of the female breast as described in this section. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person, while on the premises of a commercial establishment located within the boundaries of the city at which alcoholic beverages are served or offered for sale for consumption on the premises, or at which alcoholic beverages are permitted to be consumed, to expose his genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, or anal cleft or cleavage, or to use any device or covering which is intended to give the appearance of or simulate the genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, or anal cleft or cleavage. 
(Ord. No. 1994-0007, § 1, 6-16-1994) 
Sec. 18-53. - Injunctive relief. 
The city attorney is authorized to seek compliance with this division by seeking injunctive relief in a court of proper jurisdiction to compel the operator, owner, or other violator of this division to comply with the terms and provisions of this division. The ability of the city to seek injunctive relief under this section shall not be subject to, nor shall it be a prerequisite of, that the city has sought compliance with this division of application of penalties and sanctions as otherwise set out in this division. 
(Ord. No. 1994-0007, § 1, 6-16-1994) 
Sec. 18-54. - Penalties. 
Any violation of the provisions of this division shall be punishable by fine as provided in section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 1994-0007, § 1, 6-16-1994) 
Secs. 18-55—18-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - LOCATION 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Zoning, app. A. 
Sec. 18-81. - Sales near school, church or hospital. 
(a)	The sale of alcoholic beverages by a dealer whose place of business is within 300 feet of a church, public school or public hospital or 1,000 feet of a public school, if the city council receives a request from the board of trustees of a school district under V.T.C.A., Education Code § 38.007 is prohibited. 
(b)	The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in direct line across intersections. The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the public schools shall be in a direct line from the property line of the public school to the property line of the place of business, and in a direct line across intersections. 
(c)	Every applicant for an original alcoholic beverage license or permit for a location with a door by which the public may enter the place of business of the applicant that is within 1,000 feet of the nearest property line of a public school, measured along street lines and directly across intersections, must give written notice of the application to officials of the public school before filing the application with the city council. A copy of the notice must be submitted to the city council with the application. This subsection does not apply to a permit or license covering premises where minors are prohibited from entering the premises under V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.53. 
(d)	As to any dealer who held a license or permit on September 1, 1983, in a location where a regulation under this section was in effect on that date, for purposes of subsection (a), but not subsection (c), of this section, the measurement of the distance between the place of business of the dealer and a public school shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in direct line across intersections. 
(e)	The city council may also allow variances to the regulation if the council determines that enforcement of the regulation in a particular instance is not in the best interest of the public, constitutes waste or inefficient use of land or other resources, creates an undue hardship on an applicant for a license or permit, does not serve its intended purpose, is not effective or necessary, or for any other reason the council, after consideration of the health, safety and welfare of the public and the equities of the situation, determines is in the best interest of the community. 
(f)	Subsection (a) does not apply to the holder of a:
(1)	Retail on-premises consumption permit or license if less than 50 percent of the gross receipts for the premises is from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages; 
(2)	Retail off-premises consumption permit or license if less than 50 percent of the gross receipts for the premises, excluding the sale of items subject to the motor fuels tax, is from the sale or service of alcoholic beverages; or 
(3)	Wholesaler's, distributor's, brewer's, distiller's and rectifier's, winery, wine bottler's or manufacturer's permit or license, or any other license or permit held by a wholesaler or manufacturer as those words are ordinarily used and understood in V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 102.001 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 1983-0023, 9-8-1983)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code § 109.33.  
Secs. 18-82—18-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICIANS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 90  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-111. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Words used in the National Electrical Code shall have the meanings assigned to them in that code. Words relating to buildings and building use, when not otherwise separately defined, shall have meanings which conform to the meanings set out in the building ordinances of the city, if set out; otherwise, they shall have their usual meaning. 
Apprentice electrician means a person who is learning the trade of an electrician and who works only under the direct supervision of a journeyman electrician or master electrician and who has registered as an apprentice. 
Approved and approval mean inspected and accepted by the electrical inspector as having met the requirements of this article. 
Authorized person means an individual or authorized representative of a firm or corporation who is licensed to do work as permitted under the specific provisions of this article. 
Board of electrical examiners means the board of electrical examiners. 
Electrical inspector means the chief electrical inspector and his authorized assistants. 
Electrical work means any act in connection with the installing, altering, repairing and/or maintaining of electric wires, conduits, apparatus or other electrical installation designed or capable of carrying electrical energy, which act ordinarily requires the use of tools. 
Experience means active and practical experience during which not less than two-thirds of one's time, exclusive of normal periods of rest and recreation, has been spent in the installation, alteration and repair of electrical equipment and conductors. A bachelor's degree in electrical engineering from a college or university which requires at least four years of study in residence as a prerequisite to such degree shall be considered as the equivalent of three years of experience, and the satisfactory completion of 120 semester hours of work required for such degree shall be considered the equivalent of one year of experience. 
Journeyman electrician means a person licensed as a journeyman electrician in compliance with the requirements of this article, who works for and under the general supervision and direction of a master electrician, doing electrical work contracted for by a master electrician and who does not hold himself out to the public as being qualified to contract for the doing of electrical work. 
Master electrician means any person licensed as a master electrician in compliance with the requirements of this article, who holds himself out to the public as being qualified to do the kind of electrical work or to contract for the doing of the kind of electrical work, by himself or by the employment of journeyman electricians or apprentice electricians, which his license authorizes him to do. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0005, § 5.47, 5-13-1982)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2  
Sec. 18-112. - Object, scope of article. 
(a)	The object of this article is to reduce the personal hazard and the fire hazard from electrical causes. To accomplish this, the requirements set forth in this article are intended to provide a minimum standard for electrical installation in the city. 
(b)	The provisions of this article shall not apply to installation in railway cars or automotive equipment or to installations used by electrical public utility, telephone, telegraph companies and radio transmission stations, in the generation, transmission or in distribution of electricity or for the operation of signals or the transmission of intelligence, in the exercise of their functions as such agencies and located outdoors, or in buildings used exclusively for that purpose; however, this article, except as to permits, shall apply to all such wiring and equipment installed in or on the consumers premises. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0005, § 5.48, 5-13-1982) 
Sec. 18-113. - Enforcement of article provisions. 
This article shall be enforced by the city electrical inspector in accordance with the interpretation contained in the National Electrical Code, a certified copy of which shall be on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0005, § 5.49, 5-13-1982) 
Sec. 18-114. - Liability for damages. 
This article shall not be construed to affect the responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating, controlling or installing any electrical equipment for damages to persons or to property caused by any defect in such equipment; nor shall the city or any officer or employee of the city be held liable by reason of the inspection or reinspection authorized in this article or the certificate or disapproval of any equipment authorized in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0005, § 5.50, 5-13-1982) 
Secs. 18-115—18-140. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF ELECTRICAL EXAMINERS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, committees, commissions, § 2-31 et seq. 
Sec. 18-141. - Creation. 
There is created an examining, licensing, advisory and appeal board which will be known as the board of electrical examiners. The city inspector shall serve as recorder for the board of electrical examiners. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0005, § 5.51(a), 5-13-1982) 
Sec. 18-142. - Composition. 
The board of electrical examiners shall consist of five members, any three of whom shall constitute a quorum. The board shall include three licensed master electricians and two other citizens deemed advisable by the city council. The fire marshal or fire chief of the city and the electrical inspector shall be ex officio members of the board with no right to vote. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0005, § 5.51(b), 5-13-1982) 
Sec. 18-143. - Appointment. 
The board of electrical examiners shall be appointed by the city council and shall hold office for a period of two years from date of appointment or until their successors have been appointed and qualified. On the initial appointment the council may vary the terms. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0005, § 5.51(c), 5-13-1982) 
Sec. 18-144. - Compensation; chair; meetings. 
(a)	All members shall serve on the board of electrical examiners without pay.
(b)	The board shall select its chair from among the members.
(c)	Meetings shall be called by the chair or the city electrical inspector.
(Ord. No. 1982-0005, § 5.51(d)—(f), 5-13-1982) 
Sec. 18-145. - Powers and duties. 
(a)	The board of electrical examiners shall pass on all examinations for licenses covered by this article. 
(b)	The board may modify or waive requirements of this article by a majority of all members in particular cases wherever any rules are shown to involve expense not justified by the protection secured, or for any other reason shown to be impracticable; or whenever it is shown that equivalent or safer construction can be more readily accomplished in other ways; or where an applicant has been licensed by another city. 
(c)	The board shall have such other powers and perform such other duties, including revocation of license and advising with the electrical inspector and the city council, as are necessary for the proper administration of this article or as may be granted or directed by the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0005, § 5.52, 5-13-1982) 
Sec. 18-146. - Appeals from decision of electrical inspector. 
Any person aggrieved by a decision or ruling of the city electrical inspector shall have the right to appeal to the board of electrical examiners for its review. Such appeal shall be perfected by a request in writing to the city electrical inspector for a hearing, in which writing the nature of the appellant's grievance is briefly described and his correct name and address stated. The chair of the board shall fix a date for the hearing at which the board shall hear the testimony of all parties concerned and shall render a decision within three days after the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0005, § 5.53(a), 5-13-1982) 
Sec. 18-147. - Bond requirement. 
No license shall be issued until the applicant has furnished to the city secretary an approved bond in the sum of $1,000.00, payable to the city and guaranteeing the faithful performance of all contracts and compliance with all the terms of this article. Such bond shall be liable for all costs incident to or caused by failure of licensee to perform his duties in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0005, § 5.54, 5-13-1982) 
Secs. 18-148—18-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FOOD AND FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 2001-004, §§ 1—26, adopted April 12, 2001, amended article IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, article IV pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1994-0014, §§ 1, 2(a)—(f), adopted September 13, 1994. 
Sec. 18-181. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means any person seeking a permit to operate a retail food store or food service establishment and every person to whom such a permit has been issued. 
City means the City of Gilmer, Texas. 
Employee means any individual working in a food service establishment or retail food store, whether paid or unpaid, full-time or part-time, on a temporary or permanent basis, or an independent contractor. 
Food means any raw, cooked, or processed edible substance, ice, beverage, or ingredient used or intended for use of for sale in whole or in part for human consumption. 
Food service establishment means any place open to the general public or where, for distinct payment, food and/or drink is prepared or served for human consumption, whether served and consumed on the premises or off the premises. The term includes temporary food service establishments and mobile food units. 
Health department means the health department of the city. 
Health officer means the person designated by the city manager to enforce this article and state law relating to food service establishments and retail food store. 
Mobile food unit means a wheeled or vehicle mounted food service establishment designed to be readily moveable. In addition to the requirements of this article, mobile food units shall comply with additional ordinance requirements of the city. 
Person means any individual, partnership, company, venture, association, trust, estate, foundation, institution, organization, group, governmental subdivision or agency, and any other entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties whether operated for profit or not for profit. 
Person in charge means the individual present in a food service establishment or retail food store who is the apparent manager or supervisor of the food service establishment or retail food store at the time of inspection or delivery of notice. If no individual is the apparent supervisor, then any employee present is the person in charge. 
Retail food store means any establishment where the only food offered for sale to ultimate consumers is that which is intended for off-premises consumption. 
Roadside food vendors means a person who operates a mobile food store from a temporary location adjacent to a public roadway or highway. A roadside food vendor is classified herein as a retail food store. 
Temporary food service establishment means a food service establishment that operates at a fixed location for a period of time of not more that 14 consecutive days in conjunction with an event or celebration. 
(Ord. No. 2001-004, § 1, 4-12-2001) 
Sec. 18-182. - Adoption of state rules. 
The laws of the state and the rules of the state department of health governing food service sanitation and retail food store sanitation, as now existing and as may be amended or changed hereafter, are hereby adopted and made a part of this article as if fully set out herein, and the provisions thereof shall govern all matters covered herein within the city. The shall govern all matters covered herein within the city. The provisions of this article are in addition to state laws and rules governing food service sanitation and retail food store sanitation. 
(Ord. No. 2001-004, § 2, 4-12-2001) 
Sec. 18-183. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food service establishment or retail food store within the city without a valid permit issued to him by the health department of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2001-004, § 3, 4-12-2001) 
Sec. 18-184. - Application for permit. 
Any person desiring to operate a food service establishment or retail food store within the city shall make a written application for such permit on forms to be provided by the city health department. Such application shall, at a minimum, include the following information: 
(1)	The applicant's full name, office address and telephone number, including the address and telephone number of the home office, if any, and whether such applicant is an individual, partnership, corporation or other entity; and, if other that an individual, sufficient information to fully identify the ownership of the applicant. 
(2)	The location and type of food service establishment or retail food store;
(3)	If the application is for a temporary food service establishment, it shall include the inclusive dates of the proposed operation of such establishment; 
(4)	A copy of the applicant's sales tax permit showing its tax location in the city.
(5)	A statement by the applicant that he is not delinquent upon any account owed to the city or otherwise indebted to city, said accounts and indebtedness including, but not limited to, unpaid taxes, garbage collection fees, assessments, fines, and permit and license fees; and 
(6)	The signature of the applicant or applicants.
(Ord. No. 2001-004, § 4, 4-12-2001) 
Sec. 18-185. - Inspection by health department and records access. 
Upon receipt of such application, the health department shall make an inspection of the food service establishment or retail food store to determine compliance with the revisions of this article and state law. The health department may make such inspections thereafter, as it shall deem necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article and state law. The health department shall be permitted to examine the records of the establishment or store to obtain information pertaining to food and supplies. 
(Ord. No. 2001-004, § 5, 4-12-2001) 
Sec. 18-186. - Issuance of permit. 
When inspection by the health department reveals that the applicable requirements of this article and state law have been met, including the payment of a permit fee as required, and finds that the applicant is not delinquent in any amount due to the city, a permit shall be issued to the applicant by the health department. 
(Ord. No. 2001-004, § 6, 4-12-2001) 
Sec. 18-187. - Permit fees. 
The annual permit fee to be paid by each applicant shall be as follows: 
(1)	For each establishment having one and not more than two employees on average, annually .....$ 25.00 
(2)	For each establishment having at least three but not more than five employees on average, annually .....50.00 
(3)	For each establishment having at least six but not more than ten employees on average, annually .....100.00 
(4)	For each establishment having more than ten but not more than 20 employees on average, annually .....125.00 
(5)	For each establishment having more than 20 but not more than 30 employees on average, annually .....150.00 
(6)	For each establishment having more than 30 employees on average, annually .....175.00 
(7)	For each mobile food unit, an annual fee .....100.00 
(8)	For each roadside food vendor, an annual fee .....100.00 
(Ord. No. 2001-004, § 7, 4-12-2001) 
Sec. 18-188. - Record of permit holders and reports. 
Files shall be kept by the health department of the city of all establishments who hold a permit under this article. Said file shall include the permit application, permit copy or receipt, all inspection reports, all other reports, and all other documents related to the operation and requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-004, § 8, 4-12-2001) 
Sec. 18-189. - Term and renewal of permit. 
A permit required by this article shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance thereof, unless the same is sooner revoked or suspended as herein provided, or unless the holder of such permit shall change the location of his place business or sells or otherwise disposes of such business or materially changes the character of such business. Upon the expiration of any such permit and within seven days thereafter, a person conducting or operating such business or vehicle shall apply for and secure renewal thereof in the same manner as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 2001-004, § 9, 4-12-2001) 
Sec. 18-190. - Display of permit. 
Each permit issued under this article shall at all times be kept publicly displayed in a conspicuous place in or about such place of business, premises, or vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 2001-004, § 10, 4-12-2001) 
Sec. 18-191. - Inspection sheets to be kept. 
Inspection sheets prepared by the city health officer on prior inspections must be kept on the premises to be produced upon request of the health officer. 
(Ord. No. 2001-004, § 11, 4-12-2001) 
Sec. 18-192. - Suspension or revocation of permit; hearings. 
(a)	The health officer, or in his absence his designee in consultation with the city manager, may, without prior notice or hearing, suspend any permit to operate a food service establishment or retail food store if the operation of the food service establishment or retail food store constitutes a substantial and imminent hazard to public health. Suspension is effective immediately upon written notification and all food service operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit is suspended in accordance with this subsection, a hearing shall be held before the city council as soon as possible. 
(b)	Whenever a permit is suspended, except in the case of a substantial and imminent hazard to public health as provided for in subsection (a), the applicant or person in charge shall be notified in writing that the permit will be suspended on a specified date and that an opportunity for hearing by the city council will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the health officer by the applicant within five days. All food service operations shall cease upon the date specified the notice pending such hearing. If no request for hearing is filed within five days, the suspension is sustained. The health officer may terminate the suspension at any time if reasons for the suspension no longer exist. 
(c)	The health officer, after providing opportunity for a hearing by the city council, may revoke a permit for serious violation or repeated violation of any of the requirements of this article or for interference with the health department in the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the health officer shall notify the applicant or person in charge, in writing, of the reasons for which the permit is subject to revocation and the permit may be revoked at the end of five days following service of such notice. If the city council determines after such hearing that revocation is warranted or if the applicant does not file a written request for a hearing with the health officer within such five-day period, the revocation is sustained. 
(d)	A notice provided for in this section is properly served when it is delivered in person to the applicant or the person in charge of the permitted business, premises or vehicle or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested to the last known address of the applicant. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the health department. 
(e)	The hearings provided for in subsections (a), (b), and (c) shall be conducted at a time and place designated in the written notice. Based upon recorded evidence of such hearings, the city council shall make final findings and shall sustain, modify, or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearings. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the applicant by the city council. 
(f)	Whenever a revocation of a permit has become final the applicant with a revoked permit may make written application for a new permit. 
(Ord. No. 2001-004, § 12, 4-12-2001) 
Sec. 18-193. - Correction of violations after inspection. 
When a food service establishment or retail food store upon inspection receives a rating score of less than 70, the food service establishment or retail food store shall initiate corrective action on all identified violations within 24 hours and shall complete them within 72 hours unless a written extension is given by the health officer. One or more reinspections will be conducted at reasonable time intervals to verify corrections. In the case of mobile food units and temporary food service establishments all violations shall be corrected within 24 hours. If violations are not corrected within 24 hours, the establishment or unit shall immediately cease food service operations until authorized to resume by the health department. 
Payable penalties. Fines are based on the level of severity according to the food inspection report demerit columns. Fines are payable and due based on level of severity and number of times of non-compliance. 
Demerit group 3 points (Level I) 
A)	$25.00
B)	$50.00
C)	$75.00 ten days after violation (per inspection report)
Demerit group 4 points (Level II) 
A)	$75.00
B)	$100.00
C)	$125.00
Demerit group 5 points (Level III) 
A)	$100.00
B)	$200.00
C)	$300.00
In case that violation have not been corrected within 72 hours: 
(1)	Demerit group I shall be assessed;
(2)	After 96 hours demerit group II shall be assessed;
(3)	After 120 hours demerit group III shall be assessed.
Each violation constitutes an individual fine. Each demerit group constitutes an individual fine. Each demerit line (A, B, C) constitutes an individual fine. 
(Ord. No. 2001-004, § 13, 4-12-2001) 
Sec. 18-194. - Examination and condemnation of food and hold order. 
Food may be examined or sampled by the health department as often as necessary for enforcement of this article. The health department may, upon written notice to the applicant or person in charge, specifying with particular reasons therefore, place a hold order on any food which it believes is adulterated or misbranded in accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code §§ 431.001—438.001 and all rules and regulations promulgated thereunder. The health department shall tag, label, or otherwise identify any food subject to the hold order. No food subject to a hold order shall be used, served, or moved from the establishment. The health department shall permit storage of food under conditions specified in the hold order, unless storage is not possible without risk to public health, in which case immediate destruction shall be ordered and accomplished. The hold order shall state that a request for hearing may be filed within five days and that if no hearing is requested the food shall be destroyed. A hearing shall be held if so requested, and on the basis of the evidence produced at the hearing the hold order may be vacated, or the applicant or person in charge of the food may be directed by written order to denature or destroy such food or to bring it into compliance with the provisions of the state rules on food service sanitation and the state rules on retail food store sanitation. 
(Ord. No. 2001-004, § 14, 4-12-2001) 
Sec. 18-195. - Procedure when infection is suspected. 
When the health department has reasonable cause to suspect the possibility of disease transmission from any food service establishment or retail food store employee, it may secure medical history of the suspected employee or make any other investigation as may be indicated and shall take appropriate action. The health department may take any or all of the following measure: 
(1)	The immediate exclusion of the employee from all food service establishments and retail food stores; 
(2)	The immediate closing of the food service establishment or retail food store concerned until, in the opinion of the health department, no further danger of disease outbreak exists; 
(3)	Restriction of the employee's services to some area of the establishment or store where there would be no danger of transmitting disease; 
(4)	Require adequate medical and laboratory examination of the employee and of other employees.
(Ord. No. 2001-004, § 15, 4-12-2001) 
Sec. 18-196. - Submission of plans. 
Whenever a food service establishment or retail food store is constructed or extensively remodeled and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food service establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling, or conversion shall be submitted to the health department for review and approval before a building permit for such construction, remodeling or conversion may be issued and before construction, remodeling, or conversion is begun. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, arrangement, mechanical plans, construction materials of work areas, plumbing fixtures, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The health department shall provide the plans and specifications if they meet the requirements of state rules on food service sanitation and the state rules on retail food store sanitation. No food service establishment shall be constructed, extensively remodeled, or converted except in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the health department. 
(Ord. No. 2001-004, § 16, 4-12-2001) 
Sec. 18-197. - Notification, reporting and consumer notice requirements. 
(a)	Every food service establishment and retail food store issued a permit under this article shall be obligated to notify the health officer of every instance of a report or complaint of contaminated food or of illness caused by or associated with food prepared by, served by, or sold by the establishment or store or otherwise associated with the establishment's or store's first knowledge of the report of complaint of illness. 
(b)	Following the telephonic or verbal notification, the establishment or store shall submit a written report on a form provided by the health department which must be received by the health department within three days of the establishment's or store's first knowledge of the report or complaint of contaminated food or of illness. In the case of illness, said report shall fully identify the person complaining of the contamination, the date, time and place of discovery of the contamination, the type of food or drink contaminated, the type of contamination, the cause of contamination, and explanation of the establishment's or store's investigation into the allegation, and what remedial steps, if any, have been or will be taken. In case of illness and contamination, the establishment and store shall preserve any evidence for the health officer. 
(c)	Every food service establishment and retail food store holding a permit under this article shall display a consumer notice prepared by the health department summarizing the requirements of this section. Said notice shall be no less than eight inches by ten inches in size and shall at all times be kept publicly displayed in a conspicuous place in or about such place of business, premises or vehicles. 
(d)	Every employee shall be made aware by the applicant of the provisions of this section. The applicant, person in charge, and manager are all responsible for compliance with the notification, reporting and consumer notice display requirement. A failure to timely notify, report, or display the consumer notice under this section shall be considered a serious violation under subsection 18-192(c) herein and shall constitute grounds for suspension or revocation of permit. 
(Ord. No. 2001-004, § 17, 4-12-2001) 
Sec. 18-198. - Criminal penalty. 
Every person who violates a provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine in an amount not to exceed $2,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 2001-004, § 18, 4-12-2001) 
Sec. 18-199. - Civil enforcement. 
In addition to the criminal enforcement and other remedial provisions provided herein, the city attorney or his designee might enforce the provisions of this article through any and all civil remedies available. In such event, person, against whom enforcement is sought and against whom civil remedies are granted, shall be jointly and severally liable for all damages, court costs, attorney's fees, and all costs and expenses reasonably related to the civil enforcement action. 
(Ord. No. 2001-004, § 19, 4-12-2001) 
Sec. 18-200. - Exceptions. 
A permit shall not be required under this article for food served at local events such as festivals, cook-offs and church bazaars, composed in whole or in part by local residents for charitable or civic purposes. Not profit tax number is required 503C. 
(Ord. No. 2001-004, § 20, 4-12-2001) 
Sec. 18-201. - Severability. 
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase or provision of this article shall be finally adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, the same shall not effect the validity of this article as a whole or any part or provisions thereof, other than the part so decided to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 2001-004, § 21, 4-12-2001) 
Sec. 18-202. - Repealer and effective date. 
This article shall take effect after its passage and approval as required by law, and all parts of city ordinances in conflict with this article are repealed on the effective date of this article. Applicants shall have until to make application for and receive permits under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-004, § 22, 4-12-2001) 
Sec. 18-203. - Public information. 
Unless prohibited by law, the regulatory authority shall treat the inspection report as a public document and shall make it available for disclosure upon request. 
(Ord. No. 2001-004, § 23, 4-12-2001) 
Sec. 18-204. - Inspection report form. 
For the purpose of Texas Health and Safety Code, ch. 437, the department adopts the retail food establishment inspection report form. 
(Ord. No. 2001-004, § 24, 4-12-2001) 
Sec. 18-205. - Timeframe for corrections; examination and detention of food. 
(a)	When the total cumulative demerit value of an establishment exceeds 30 demerits, the establishment shall initiate immediate corrective action on all identified critical violations and shall initiate corrective action on all other violations within 48 hours. One or more reinspections shall be conducted at reasonable time intervals to assure correction. 
(b)	In the case of temporary food establishments, all critical violations must be corrected immediately and other violations must be corrected within 24 hours or sooner is required by the regulatory authority. If violations are not corrected, the establishment shall immediately cease food operation until authorized to resume by the regulatory authority. 
(c)	Other violations, time frame for corrections.
(1)	Time frame. Except as specified in subsection (2), the food establishments shall correct all other violations as soon as possible, and in any event, by the time of the next routine inspection, but not later than 90 calendar days after the inspection. 
(2)	Extension of compliance schedule. The regulatory authority may approve a compliance schedule that extends beyond the time limits specified under subsection (1) if the food establishment submits a written schedule of compliance and no health hazard exists or will result from allowing an extended schedule for compliance. 
(d)	Examination and detention of food. The regulatory authority may examine and collect samples of food as often as necessary or the enforcement of these rules. The regulatory authority shall issue a receipt for samples. The department shall, upon written notice to the owner or person in charge specifying the reason therefore, please under detention any food which it has probable cause to believe is adulterated or misbranded in accordance with the provisions of the Texas Food, Drive, and Cosmetic Act, Texas Health and Safety Code, ch. 431. 
(Ord. No. 2001-004, § 25, 4-12-2001) 
Sec. 18-206. - Ceasing operations and reporting. 
(a)	Except as specified in subsection (b), a food establishment shall immediately discontinue operations and notify the regulatory authority if an imminent health hazard may exist because of an emergency such as a fire, flood, extended interruption of electrical or water service, sewer backup, misuse of poisonous or toxic materials, onset of an apparent foodborne illness outbreak, gross incinerate occurrence or condition, or other circumstance that may endanger public health. 
(b)	A permit holder need not discontinue operations in an area of an establishment that is unaffected by the imminent health hazard. 
(c)	Regulatory authority may cease operation if there is an imminent health hazard.
(d)	Resumption of operations. If operations are discontinued as specified under subsection (1) or otherwise according to law, the permit holder shall obtain approval from the regulatory authority before resuming operations. 
(1)	Critical violations, timeframe for corrections; timely correction. 
a.	Except as specified in subsection b., the food establishment shall at the time of inspection implement immediate corrective actions of all food (PHI) temperature violations; personnel/handling/source requirement violations; facility and equipment requirement violations; any HACCP plan provision that is not in compliance with its critical limit; and all other critical violations noted. 
b.	Considering the nature of the potential hazard involved and the complexity of the corrective action needed, the regulatory authority may agree to or specify a longer time from, not to exceed ten calendar days after the inspection, for the food establishment to correct facility and equipment requirement violations. After ten days regulatory may cease operations, if corrections are not made. 
(2)	Verification and documentation of correction. 
a.	After observing at the time of inspection a correction of a violation, regulatory authority shall document the violation and note the corrective action on the inspection report. 
b.	If immediate correction is not achieved, the regulatory authority shall verify each correction. 
(3)	Restriction or exclusion of food employee, establishment closure. Based on the findings of an investigation related to an employee who is suspected of being infected or diseased, the regulatory authority may require any or all of the following: 
a.	Immediately restricting the employee's services to specific areas and tasks in a food establishment that present no risk of transmitting the disease; 
b.	Immediately excluding the employee from all food establishments; or
c.	Immediately closing the food establishment until, in the opinion of the regulatory authority, no further danger of disease outbreak exists. 
(4)	Restriction or exclusion order; warning or hearing not required, information required in order. Based on the findings of the investigation as specified in subsection (1) and to control disease transmission, the regulatory authority may issue an order of restriction or exclusion to a suspended employee or the permit holder without prior warning, notice of a hearing, or a hearing if the order: 
a.	States the reasons for the restriction or exclusion that is ordered;
b.	States the evidence that the employee or permit holder shall provide in order to demonstrate that the reasons for the restriction or exclusion are eliminated; 
c.	States that suspected employee or the permit holder may request an appeal hearing by submitting a timely request as provided under law; and 
d.	Provides the name and address of the regulatory authority representative to whom a request for an appeal hearing may be made. 
(5)	Release of employee from restriction or exclusion. The regulatory authority shall release an employee from restriction or exclusion according to V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 438, § 438.033 and the following conditions: 
a.	An employee who was infected with Salmonella typhi if the employee's stools are negative for S. typhi based on at least three consecutive stool specimen cultures that are taken: 
1.	Not earlier than one month after onset;
2.	At least 48 hours after discontinuance of antibiotics; and
3.	At least 24 hours apart;
b.	If one of the cultures taken as specified in subsection a. is positive, repeat cultures are taken at intervals of one month until at least three consecutive negative stool specimen cultures are obtained; 
c.	An employee who was infected with Shigella spp. or Escherichia coli O157:H7 if the employee's stools are negative for Shigella spp. or E. coli O157:H7 based on testing of two consecutive stool specimen cultures that are taken: 
1.	Not earlier than 48 hours after discontinuance of antibiotics;
2.	At least 24 hours apart; and
d.	An employee who was infected with hepatitis A virus if:
1.	Symptoms cease; or
2.	At least two blood tests show falling liver enzymes.
(6)	Who shall report? Certain persons, as required in 25 Texas Administrative Code (TAC), Chapter 97, § 97.2, shall report certain confirmed and suspected foodborne diseases. 
(Ord. No. 2001-004, § 26, 4-12-2001) 
Secs. 18-207—18-221. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - JUNKYARDS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Junkyard regulations, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 396.001 et seq. 
Sec. 18-222. - Junkyard defined. 
Junkyard includes any building, lot, land or area within the city where old scrap material or metals, rags, scrap automobile parts or junked, scrapped or inoperable automobiles are kept or stored incident to the commercial purchase or sale of such items. In addition, the term shall also include any lot or other area where three or more inoperable or junk motor vehicles are kept, maintained or stored for more than 60 days or any lot where more than 30 previously used tires are stored and displayed in public. 
(Ord. No. 1995-0003, § 1(1), 2-9-1995)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2  
Sec. 18-223. - Restriction as to location. 
No junkyard shall be maintained or operated on any lot, plot or tract of land any part of which is located in a predominantly residential area and within 250 feet of any occupied residential dwelling, church or school. 
(Ord. No. 1995-0003, § 1(2), 2-9-1995) 
Sec. 18-224. - Enclosure. 
(a)	No person shall keep or maintain any junkyard within the city unless the junkyard is entirely enclosed by a gate, fence or building, or combination, so that such yard shall not be accessible to children or stray animals. Such fence shall be at least six feet in height and shall be composed of materials which obscure the outside view. Such fence shall further be constructed of substantial materials securely fastened to supports and to the end that the fence shall be secure against damage from high winds. 
(b)	No scrap or junk automobiles or other scrap or junk materials shall be kept or stored at a junkyard in such a manner as to protrude beyond the fence or enclosure required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 1995-0003, § 1(3), 2-9-1995)
Cross reference— Zoning, app. A.  
Sec. 18-225. - Maintenance. 
Every junkyard shall be kept and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and so as not to attract rodents or insects injurious to the public health. 
(Ord. No. 1995-0003, § 1(4), 2-9-1995) 
Sec. 18-226. - Maximum height for storage of junk. 
No scrap or junk automobiles or other scrap or junk materials, including used tires, shall be stacked, stored or piled to a height in excess of six feet at any junkyard except when such stacking, storing or piling is necessary as an incident to the hauling and removal of such materials, and then only during the time necessary for such hauling and removing. 
(Ord. No. 1995-0003, § 1(5), 2-9-1995) 
Sec. 18-227. - Smoke and cinder nuisances prohibited. 
No person shall burn any materials in a junkyard which shall cause smoke or cinders of such a nature as to constitute an unreasonable interference with the use and enjoyment of surrounding properties. 
(Ord. No. 1995-0003, § 1(6), 2-9-1995) 
Sec. 18-228. - Permit. 
(a)	Required. No junkyard shall be operated within the city unless the owner has a current permit issued by the city secretary in accordance with this section. 
(b)	Application. Application for a permit required by this section shall be filed in the city secretary's office and shall contain the applicant's name, the location and a description of the junkyard for which the permit is sought and such other information as the city secretary may require. A permit fee for each permitted junkyard is on file in the city secretary's office. 
(c)	Inspection and determination of compliance with prerequisite to issuance. No permit shall be issued under this section until the building inspector has inspected the junkyard and determined that it is in compliance with all provisions of this article. 
(d)	Expiration and renewal. A permit issued under this section shall expire on December 31 of the year in which issued, and annual renewals shall be required. The inspection and determination prescribed in this section shall be a prerequisite to any renewal of such a permit. 
(e)	Revocation. A permit issued under this section shall be subject to revocation by the city council upon a determination that the owner has violated any of the provisions of this article or that the junkyard is being operated or maintained in violation of any such provision. 
(Ord. No. 1995-0003, § 1(7), 2-9-1995) 
Sec. 18-229. - Application. 
This article shall not apply to junkyards in operation at their current location on February 9, 1995. 
(Ord. No. 1995-0003, § 1(8), 2-9-1995) 
Secs. 18-230—18-261. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - OIL AND GAS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-262. - Fences and protective devices required for wells. 
All wells producing oil and/or gas shall be enclosed in a chain link fence at least eight feet in height and have such protective devices as may be necessary to prevent blowouts and keep the premises in a sightly condition. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0004, § 11.52, 4-23-1982) 
Secs. 18-263—18-281. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 18-282. - Required. 
Any person desiring to drill a well for oil and/or gas in the city limits shall make application for a permit to the city manager showing the location and the route to be traveled in carrying equipment and supplies to the drill site. A fee on file in the city secretary's office shall be charged by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0004, § 11.50, 4-23-1982) 
Sec. 18-283. - Requirements. 
No well shall be drilled within 300 feet of any private dwelling, public building or church. The city manager shall have the authority to designate the route which shall be traveled in delivering equipment and supplies to the drill site, and shall require the drilling company and the lessee to sign an agreement that any street used in going to and from the drill site will be restored within 90 days to its condition prior to such use. The drilling company on completion will drain and fill all pits, level the drill site and leave it in a sightly condition. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0004, § 11.51, 4-23-1982) 
Secs. 18-284—18-311. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS 
 
Sec. 18-312. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Peddler means any person who sells goods or merchandise in any manner other than in an established retail or wholesale store and is not a solicitor as hereafter defined. 
Solicitor means a person who sells goods or merchandise by personally calling upon residences either in person or by telephone. 
(Ord. No. 1978-0008, § 1, 11-14-1978)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2  
Sec. 18-313. - Permit required. 
All peddlers and solicitors must receive a permit from the city secretary to conduct their activities within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1978-0008, § 2, 11-14-1978)
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74  
Sec. 18-314. - Permit charges for peddlers, solicitors. 
The charge for a peddler or solicitor permit is on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Ord. No. 1978-0008, § 3, 11-14-1978) 
Sec. 18-315. - Charge for permit for seller of seasonal farm produce. 
The charge for a peddler permit for a seller of seasonal farm produce is on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Ord. No. 1978-0008, § 4, 11-14-1978) 
Sec. 18-316. - Charge for nonprofit organizations. 
There shall be no charge for a solicitor or peddler permit for a person or organization selling for a nonprofit cause. Such person or organization shall apply to the city manager for a permit. 
(Ord. No. 1978-0008, § 5, 11-14-1978) 
Sec. 18-317. - Compliance with zoning requirements. 
The activities of all peddlers or solicitors selling for a profit shall comply with the provisions of the zoning ordinance of the city, appendix A to this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1978-0008, § 6, 11-14-1978)
Cross reference— Zoning, app. A.  
Sec. 18-318. - Resolution of disputes. 
The city manager shall make all determination regarding any definitions or provisions of this article that are in dispute. Any person aggrieved by the ruling of the city manager may appeal to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1978-0008, § 7, 11-14-1978) 
Secs. 18-319—18-340. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 2004-001, §§ A.—P., adopted March 9, 2004, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as article VIII, §§ 18-341—18-356 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 18-341. - Definitions. 
Adult bookstore/adult video store means a commercial establishment, which as one of its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(1)	Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or 
(2)	Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
(1)	Persons who appear in state of nudity;
(2)	Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or 
(3)	Films, motion pictures, videocassettes slides, or other photographic reproductions, which are characterized by the depiction or description of, specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)	Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; and has a sign visible from the public right of way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; 
(2)	Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
(3)	Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
City shall mean the City of Gilmer, Texas. 
Person shall mean an individual, partnership, or corporation or other entity. 
Residential area shall mean any area zoned R-1, R-2, R-3 single-family; duplex; apartment; or single-family/manufactured homes. 
Sexually oriented business shall mean any commercial enterprise whose major business is the offering of a product or service which is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer, and which is distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" or where the employer, employees, or patrons in the presence of another adult, may be nude, partially nude, or with specified anatomical areas not covered. This term shall include, but not be limited to, adult video arcades, adult bookstores, adult cabarets, adult video stores, adult movie theaters, adult theaters, sex parlors, massage parlors, nude studios, modeling studios, love parlors, adult tanning salons, topless or nude bars, topless carwashes or other establishments where services are performed nude or topless, and other similar establishments. 
Specified anatomical areas shall mean any of the following: less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic regions or pubic hair, buttock, female breast or breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or any combination of the foregoing; or human male genitals in a discernibly erect state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities shall mean the depiction or display of, in person, or by picture of, any one of the following: human genitals in a discernible state of sexual stimulation or arousal; acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic regions or pubic hair, buttock or female breast or breasts; or any combination of the foregoing. 
(Ord. No. 2004-001, § A, 3-9-2004) 
Sec. 18-342. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)	It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city; to protect and preserve the quality, property values, and character of the city; to prevent the concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city; and to minimize the potential negative impacts of sexually oriented businesses on residential areas, churches, schools and public areas. 
(b)	It is expressly not the intent or effect of this article to impose a limitation upon rights granted under the First Amendment. 
(Ord. No. 2004-001, § B, 3-9-2004) 
Sec. 18-343. - Location of sexually oriented businesses and signage. 
(a)	A sexually oriented business shall be located at least 1,000 feet from the property line of any residentially-zoned property, and at least 1,500 feet from the property line of any lot on which is located a church, school, college, child/adult care center, park, hospital, nursing home, or swimming pool. For the purposes of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church, school, park, college, child care center or residential district. 
(b)	Each sexually oriented business shall comply with all of the city's sign ordinance requirements, including all requirements, as it may be amended from time to time. Additional, such signs as are used shall not advertise, either graphically or verbally, either by explicit or literal expression, connotation, or implied referenced any specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(Ord. No. 2004-001, § C, 3-9-2004) 
Sec. 18-344. - License required. 
(a)	All sexually oriented businesses to be operated within the city shall first obtain a valid license under the provisions of this article. A license shall be valid for one year, but may be renewed annually. 
(b)	A license shall only be issued for sexually oriented businesses that fulfill the locational requirements of section 18-343 
(c)	A business is not exempt from regulation under this article because it holds a license or permit under the Alcoholic Beverage Code authorizing the sale or service of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2004-001, § D, 3-9-2004) 
Sec. 18-345. - Display of license. 
A license issued under these regulations shall be displayed at all times in an open and conspicuous place on the premises of the sexually oriented business for which it was issued. 
(Ord. No. 2004-001, § E, 3-9-2004) 
Sec. 18-346. - Application for a license. 
(a)	Any person desiring a license shall file a sworn written application with the city secretary. The application shall set forth the following: 
(1)	The name of the applicant and whether the applicant is an individual, general partnership, limited partnership, corporation or other entity. 
(2)	The name under which the sexually oriented business to be operated and general description of the services or products to be provided. 
(3)	The address and legal description of the parcel of land on which the sexually oriented business is to be located. 
(4)	The name, resident address and telephone number of the manager or other individual to be principally in charge of the operation of the sexually oriented business. 
(5)	A written declaration that the information contained in the application is true and correct. 
(6)	If the applicant is an individual, the application shall be signed and verified by the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall be signed and verified by all of the partners thereof. If the applicant is a corporation or other entity, the application shall be signed and verified by the president and the treasurer of such corporation or entity. 
(b)	In addition, the application shall be accompanied by the following:
(1)	Payment of the license fee, as provided in this article.
(2)	A certified copy of the assumed name certificate filed in compliance with the Assumed Business or Professional Name Act (Texas Revised Civil Statues, Business and Commerce Code, ch. 36), if the applicant is to operate the sexually oriented business under the assumed name. 
(3)	If the applicant is a Texas Corporation, a certified copy of the articles of incorporation, together with all amendments thereto, shall be filed. 
(4)	If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a certified copy of the certificate of authority to transact business in the state, together with all amendments thereto, shall be filed. 
(5)	If the applicant is a foreign or limited partnership, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership, together with all amendments thereto, filed in the office of the clerk of state under the Texas Limited Partnership Act (Article 6132a of Texas revised Civil Statues). 
(Ord. No. 2004-001, § F, 3-9-2004) 
Sec. 18-347. - Investigation, issuance or denial of license. 
(a)	Upon receiving an application for a license, the city secretary, or their designee, shall conduct an investigation for the purpose of determining whether the requirements of this article have been satisfied or not. The city secretary shall coordinate this investigation with the director of planning in order to determine if the application complies with the locational and sign requirements as set forth in these regulations. The city secretary shall deny the application for a license if any requirement of this article is not satisfied. 
(b)	The city secretary shall deny the application for a license of one or more of the following is determined to be true: 
(1)	An applicant is under 18 years of age;
(2)	An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant or the applicant's spouse in relation to a sexually oriented business; 
(3)	An applicant has failed to provide information reasonable necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a questions or request for information on the application form; 
(4)	An applicant or applicant's spouse has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this article, other than the offense of operating a sexually oriented business without a license, within two years immediately preceding the application; the fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect; 
(5)	The license fee required by this article has not been paid;
(6)	An applicant has been employed in a sexually oriented business in a managerial capacity with the preceding 12 months and has demonstrated an inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business premises in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers; 
(7)	An applicant or an applicant's spouse or any employee has been convicted of a crime involving: 
a.	Any of the following offenses as described in the V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 43: Prostitution; promotion of prostitution; aggravated promotion of prostitution; obscenity; sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to minors; sexual performance by a child; possession of child pornography; 
b.	Any of the following offenses as described in the V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 21: Public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; 
c.	Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in the V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 22; or 
d.	Incest, solicitation of a child, or harboring a runaway child as described in the V.T.C.A., Penal Code ch. 25; or 
e.	Criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses;
(c)	The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or applicant's spouse. 
(d)	The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(e)	The city secretary shall notify each applicant of his or her eligibility for a license within 20 days of receipt of the completed application. If the applicant complies with the provisions of these regulations, then the city secretary shall issue a license. In the even that any applicant fails to comply with these regulations, then the applicant shall be so notified and be entitled to a hearing held pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-001, § G, 3-9-2004) 
Sec. 18-348. - License fee. 
To defray the costs of processing the license application, the applicant shall pay a fee in the amount of $500.00. No portion of any fee collected under this section shall be returned after a license has been issued or denied. The license may be renewed annually, if all provisions of this article have been complied with, upon payment of $100.00 renewal fee. 
(Ord. No. 2004-001, § H, 3-9-2004) 
Sec. 18-349. - Transfer of license. 
A license shall not be transferred to another nor shall a license holder operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. 
(Ord. No. 2004-001, § I, 3-9-2004) 
Sec. 18-350. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos. 
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, which exhibits a film, video cassette, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)	Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more a manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The city secretary may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal application if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)	The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
(3)	No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the city secretary. 
(4)	It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that a least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)	The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)	It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (5) remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (1). 
(7)	The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one foot-candle as measured at the floor level. 
(8)	It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises to ensure that the illumination described above, is maintained at all times that any patron is present on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2004-001, § J, 3-9-2004) 
Sec. 18-351. - Additional regulations for adult motel. 
(a)	Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment has been rented an vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult as that term is defined in this chapter. 
(b)	A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented business license, he rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or subrents the same sleeping room again 
(c)	For purposes of subsection (b), the terms "rent" or "subrent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(Ord. No. 2004-001, § K, 3-9-2004) 
Sec. 18-352. - Enforcement and inspection. 
(a)	The chief of police, or his designee, shall have the power to administer and enforce the provision of these regulations upon presentation of proper identification to the owner, agent, or tenant in chare of any premises where a sexually oriented business is located. The chief of police, or his designee, any enter for the purposes of inspection in investigation to insure compliance with the terms of these regulations, any building, structure or other premises where the sexually oriented business is located, at any time it is occupied and open for business. 
(b)	A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits an offense if he refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the city secretary, their designee, or the chief of police at any time it is occupied of open for business. 
(c)	However, when the city secretary, his designee, or the chief of police, or his designee, is denied permission to inspect any premises, inspection shall be made only under the authority of a warrant issued by a magistrate authorizing the inspection for violation of these regulations. In applying for such warrant, the chief of police, or his designee, shall submit an affidavit to a magistrate setting forth his belief that a violation of these regulations exists with respect to the premises sought to be inspected and the reasons for such belief. The affidavit shall designee the location of such operator, or occupant thereof. If the magistrate finds that probable cause exists for a search of the premises, such warrant describing the premises with sufficient certainty to identify the same. A warrant so issued shall constitute authority for the chief of police, or his designee, to enter upon or inspect the premises described therein. 
(Ord. No. 2004-001, § L, 3-9-2004) 
Sec. 18-353. - Suspension and revocation of licenses. 
The city manager, or his designee, is hereby granted, and shall have the power to suspend any and all licenses authorized by these regulations, if he determines that a licensee or employee or business invitee or guest of licensee has: 
(1)	Violated or is not in compliance with any provision of this article;
(2)	Engaged in sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually oriented business premises; 
(3)	A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(4)	A licensee or employee has been convicted of an offense listed in subsection 18-347(b); 
(5)	A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any specified sexual activities to occur in or on the sexually oriented business premises; or 
(6)	A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for taxes, fees, fines, or penalties.
(Ord. No. 2004-001, § M, 3-9-2004) 
Sec. 18-354. - Unlawful acts. 
(a)	False or fraudulent statements. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false, fraudulent or untruthful statement, either written or oral, or in any way knowingly to conceal any material fact or to give or use any assumed name or fictitious name other than the one duly filed for record in compliance with the Assumed Business or Profession Name Act (Texas Business and Commerce Code Annotated, ch. 36.) 
(b)	Use of another's license unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any individual, partnership, corporation or other entity to use a license, which has been issued to another individual, partnership, corporation or other entity. 
(c)	Unlawful to deface, alter, etc. a license. It shall be unlawful for any person to counterfeit, forge, change, deface or alter a license. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful for any person to serve, possess, or consume alcoholic beverages on the premises of any sexually oriented business. 
(Ord. No. 2004-001, § N, 3-9-2004) 
Sec. 18-355. - Injunction. 
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license or in violation of this article is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. 
(Ord. No. 2004-001, § O, 3-9-2004) 
Sec. 18-356. - Not to legalize anything prohibited by state law or city ordinance. 
These regulations do not legalize anything prohibited under the penal code or any other state law or city ordinance. Further any violation of the penal code or other state law or city ordinance shall be deemed grounds for revocation of the license issued. 
(Ord. No. 2004-001, § P, 3-9-2004)  
Chapter 22 - CEMETERIES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74 
State Law reference— Cemeteries, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 712.001 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 22-1—22-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 22-31. - Authorized cemeteries. 
The cemeteries existing on July 14, 1983, within the limits of the city are recognized and authorized as legal and proper places for the interment of persons who may die in the city or may be brought to the city for burial. 
(Ord. No. 1983-0018, § 2-50, 7-14-1983) 
Sec. 22-32. - Extension of cemeteries. 
The limits of cemeteries, as they exist on July 14, 1983, shall never be extended unless authority has been granted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1983-0018, § 2-51, 7-14-1983) 
Secs. 22-33—22-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CEMETERY BOARD 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Boards, committees, commissions, § 2-31 et seq. 
Sec. 22-51. - Creation and members. 
There is created in and for the city an administrative board designated as the cemetery board, which shall consist of seven members appointed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1983-0018, § 2-60, 7-14-1983) 
Sec. 22-52. - Terms of members. 
The term of office of the members of the cemetery board shall commence on February 1, except for the filling of vacancies. The members shall be appointed for a term of three years. The city council shall set the expiration date of the original board. 
(Ord. No. 1983-0018, § 2-61, 7-14-1983) 
Sec. 22-53. - Removal of members from office. 
Any member of the cemetery board shall be subject to removal from office by the city council for any cause deemed by the council sufficient in the interest of public service. 
(Ord. No. 1983-0018, § 2-62, 7-14-1983) 
Sec. 22-54. - Filling of vacancies. 
All vacancies occurring in the membership of the cemetery board shall be filled by appointment by a majority vote of the city council and for the unexpired term of the vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 1983-0018, § 2-63, 7-14-1983) 
Sec. 22-55. - Ex officio member. 
One member of the city council, appointed by the council, shall serve on the cemetery board as an ex officio member. 
(Ord. No. 1983-0018, § 2-64, 7-14-1983) 
Sec. 22-56. - Organization. 
The members of the cemetery board shall organize and select a president, vice-president and secretary from its members. 
(Ord. No. 1983-0018, § 2-65, 7-14-1983) 
Sec. 22-57. - Meetings. 
The members of the cemetery board shall hold such meetings as the board may determine or shall meet at the request of the city council or the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1983-0018, § 2-66, 7-14-1983) 
Sec. 22-58. - Rules of procedure; record of proceedings. 
The cemetery board shall adopt its own rules of procedure and keep a record of its proceedings. A copy of such record shall be filed with the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 1983-0018, § 2-67, 7-14-1983) 
Sec. 22-59. - Quorum. 
A simple majority of the members of the cemetery board shall constitute a quorum of the board for the transaction of all business. 
(Ord. No. 1983-0018, § 2-68, 7-14-1983) 
Sec. 22-60. - Powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the cemetery board shall be as follows: 
(1)	To act in an advisory capacity to the city council and the city manager in all matters pertaining to the cemeteries in the city. 
(2)	To make such recommendations to the city council and the city manager as it deems proper in the planning, designing and upkeep of the cemeteries in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1983-0018, § 2-69, 7-14-1983) 
Sec. 22-61. - Recommendations subject to city council. 
All recommendations of the cemetery board shall be subject to modification or veto by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1983-0018, § 2-70, 7-14-1983) 
Secs. 22-62—22-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 22-91. - Interment outside authorized cemetery prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to bury the body of any deceased person anywhere within the limits of the city other than in a duly authorized cemetery and recognized as a public burying ground under the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1983-0018, § 2-52, 7-14-1983) 
Sec. 22-92. - Interment of other than lot purchaser's family. 
A lot purchased from the city in any cemetery is intended as a family burial place, whether this is on a purchased lot or on a family established lot in the cemetery; and while the owner of a lot may permit the interment in his lot of one not of his family, heir of the owner cannot bury one not a member of the family without the prior consent of all the heirs. 
(Ord. No. 1983-0018, § 2-53, 7-14-1983) 
Sec. 22-93. - Graves to be level. 
All graves in the cemeteries shall be level with the ground, except mausoleums or vaults in which a body might be buried. 
(Ord. No. 1983-0018, § 2-54, 7-14-1983) 
Sec. 22-94. - Opening and closing graves. 
(a)	The funeral home in charge of the funeral shall contact the city prior to the opening of any grave within the city. 
(b)	The funeral home or mortuary in charge of the funeral in any cemetery within the city shall be responsible for opening and closing the graves; and the same funeral home or mortuary shall be responsible for the removal and disposition of surplus dirt within 48 hours after the funeral. Failure to properly remove and dispose of surplus dirt within the 48-hour period following the funeral may result in a charge to the funeral home in charge of the funeral. 
(Ord. No. 1983-0018, § 2-56, 7-14-1983) 
Sec. 22-95. - Trees, shrubs, flowers in areas platted by city. 
(a)	In all cemetery areas, all trees, shrubs and flowers will be planted by the city, and by no other person. The city shall have the right to remove from any cemetery any structure, object, tree, shrub or other installation that may be deemed objectionable, detrimental, dangerous, inconvenient or interfering with the care, use and maintenance of the cemetery. 
(b)	The city shall, through whatever method it deems appropriate, be responsible for removal of flowers and flower stands from an authorized cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 1983-0018, § 2-57, 7-14-1983) 
Sec. 22-96. - Sprinkler system. 
Installation of sprinkler systems shall be permitted in authorized cemeteries in city; however, no sprinkler system shall be installed in an authorized cemetery without prior approval of the city. All such sprinklers shall meet city specifications and be installed under the direction of the city at the owner's expense. The owner shall be responsible for maintenance of the sprinkler system but will not be charged for the water used in such sprinkler system. Failure of the owner to properly maintain his sprinkler will result in disconnection of water service. 
(Ord. No. 1983-0018, § 2-58, 7-14-1983) 
Sec. 22-97. - Unlawful acts in cemeteries. 
It shall be unlawful for any person except cemetery personnel to deposit or throw any rubbish in any cemetery, disturb or remove any flowers or shrubs, or break, destroy or remove any monument, or commit any other act of vandalism in any cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 1983-0018, § 2-59, 7-14-1983) 
Sec. 22-98. - Items prohibited on graves. 
No slats, cradles, boxes, glass jars, shells, trinkets or similar items shall be permitted on any grave. In addition to these items, no slabs will be permitted in any authorized cemetery newly developed on or after July 14, 1983. 
(Ord. No. 1983-0018, § 2-55, 7-14-1983) 
Chapter 26 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; emergency services, ch. 30; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38; law enforcement, ch. 50; municipal court, ch. 58  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 26-1—26-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Emergency management and disaster preparedness, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.001 et seq. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-31. - Offenses; penalties. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article, or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article. 
(b)	It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. 
(c)	Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal or the termination of a warning shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article and shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this article. 
(d)	Convictions for violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable as provided in section 1-14 
(Ord. No. 1988-6, § 8, 11-22-1988)
State Law reference— Penalty, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.173.  
Secs. 26-32—26-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2  
Sec. 26-51. - Office created. 
(a)	The office of emergency management director shall be held by the mayor in accordance with V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.108. An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director. 
(b)	The emergency management director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this article. He may delegate authority for execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the emergency management director. 
(c)	The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the emergency management director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. 
(Ord. No. 1988-6, § 1, 11-22-1988) 
Sec. 26-52. - Emergency management director; powers and duties. 
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following: 
(1)	Conduct an ongoing survey of actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the city and an ongoing program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur. 
(2)	Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city and shall recommend for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of such plan. 
(3)	Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary. 
(4)	Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives which are necessary for carrying out the purposes of this article. Such proclamations, regulations or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring its contents to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city secretary. 
(5)	Direction and control of the operations of the city's emergency management organization as well as the training of emergency management personnel. 
(6)	Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city. 
(7)	Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal emergency management organizations. 
(8)	Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan. 
(9)	Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which the city is located and with other municipalities within the county, for the countywide coordination of emergency management efforts. 
(10)	Supervision of and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city. 
(11)	Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes. 
(12)	Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for in this article. 
(13)	Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act 1975, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.001 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 1988-6, § 2, 11-22-1988) 
Secs. 26-53—26-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PLANS AND PROGRAMS 
 
Sec. 26-71. - Development, maintenance. 
A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign responsibilities, tasks, duties and powers, and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this article. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state division of emergency management. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered supplementary to this article and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster. 
(Ord. No. 1988-6, § 3, 11-22-1988) 
Sec. 26-72. - Interjurisdictional program. 
The mayor is authorized to join with the county judge and the mayors of the other cities in the county in the formation of an emergency management council for the county and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of a joint emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a countywide program of emergency management insofar as the program may affect the city. 
(Ord. No. 1988-6, § 4, 11-22-1988) 
Sec. 26-73. - Override. 
At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent with this article. 
(Ord. No. 1988-6, § 5, 11-22-1988) 
Sec. 26-74. - Liability. 
This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health and safety; and neither the city, its agents and representatives, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association or trustee, nor any of their agents, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of such activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack or natural or manmade disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of or injury to any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of or damage to the property of such person. 
(Ord. No. 1988-6, § 6, 11-22-1988) 
Sec. 26-75. - Commitment of funds. 
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this article without prior approval by the city council; nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life or property. 
(Ord. No. 1988-6, § 7, 11-22-1988)
State Law reference— Local finance, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 418.107.  
Chapter 30 - EMERGENCY SERVICES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18; civil emergencies, ch. 26; fire prevention and protection, ch. 38; law enforcement, ch. 50  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 30-1—30-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Burglar alarms, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 218.001 et seq. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 30-31—30-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - FIRE ALARMS 
 
Sec. 30-51. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to protect the emergency services of the city from misuse. 
(Ord. No. 1991-0006, § 1, 9-10-1991) 
Sec. 30-52. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
False alarm means an alarm signal requiring an answer by the fire department in a situation where an emergency does not exist. Unless otherwise provided, the head of the fire department shall be the sole and exclusive judge of whether an alarm is a false alarm for the purpose of this division. 
Fire alarm system means any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged to signal the occurrence or possible occurrence of a fire or other activity requiring the urgent attention to which the fire department is expected to respond. 
Fire alarm user means the person in control of any building, structure or facility where a fire alarm system is maintained. 
(Ord. No. 1991-0006, § 2, 9-10-1991)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2  
Sec. 30-53. - Fine for excessive false alarms. 
If the fire department shall receive from any one location in any one calendar year more than three false alarms, the alarm user shall be fined the sum of $200.00 for each false alarm after the third false alarm. 
(Ord. No. 1991-0006, § 3, 9-10-1991)
State Law reference— False alarms or reports, V.T.C.A., Penal Code §§ 37.08, 42.06.  
Chapter 34 - ENVIRONMENT 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 6; rabies control, § 6-131 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; dangerous buildings, § 14-101 et seq.; flood prevention and protection, ch. 42; parks and recreation, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; subdivisions, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 90; storage of hazardous/dangerous materials, § 90-200; zoning, app. A. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 34-1—34-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LITTER 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Texas Litter Abatement Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 365.001 et seq. 
Sec. 34-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Authorized private receptacle means a storage or collection container for litter as required and authorized by section 34-32. 
Handbill means any commercial, printed or written advertising material, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, paper, booklet or any other printed material or literature distributed free of charge. 
Litter includes those items described in section 34-34 and shall also include refuse or other matters blowing from or spilled by motor vehicles, including vehicles transporting concrete. 
Park means all public and private property opened to the public and reserved for recreational purposes. 
Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes but is not limited to streets, highways and common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops. All other property is considered private property. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0022, § 8.40, 8-24-1982)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2  
Sec. 34-32. - Disposal requirements. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit litter in or upon any public or private property within the city except in public receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection or in official city dumps. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0022, § 8.41, 8-24-1982) 
Sec. 34-33. - Litter from trucks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any truck or other vehicle within the city unless such truck or vehicle is constructed or loaded in a manner that prevents any of the contents of the truck or vehicle from being blown or deposited on any street, alley or other public or private property. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0022, § 8.42, 8-24-1982)
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 86  
Sec. 34-34. - Handbills. 
It shall be unlawful for any person either directly or indirectly to deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or on any public place within the city. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the distribution of any handbill to any person willing to accept the handbill. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0022, § 8.43, 8-24-1982) 
Sec. 34-35. - Handbills on vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person either directly or indirectly to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the distribution of any handbill to the owner or occupant of any vehicle who is willing to accept such handbill. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0022, § 8.44, 8-24-1982)
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 86  
Sec. 34-36. - Distributing handbills on private property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person either directly or indirectly to distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any handbill in or upon any private property in the city. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the distribution of any handbill to the owner or occupant of private property who is willing to accept such handbill. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0022, § 8.45, 8-24-1982)
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74  
Sec. 34-37. - Improper posting of handbills. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to affix in any manner any handbill upon public property at any time and on private property without the express consent of the owner of such property. It is a defense to this section that the owner of such property has given express consent to the person to affix a handbill to their property. The provision of this section shall not be deemed to apply to lawfully posted legal notices. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0022, § 8.46, 8-24-1982) 
Sec. 34-38. - Procedure for removing litter. 
(a)	When it has been determined that litter exists upon and has been allowed to accumulate upon private property, the owner of the property, according to the tax rolls of the city, shall be given written notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, that litter is present upon his property, that he has five days after the receipt of the letter to remove the litter from his property, that after five days the city will remove the litter from his property and charge him the cost of that removal, and that if the costs of removal are not paid within 30 days after receipt of that bill of cost, a privileged lien will be filed against the property for the cost of removal. 
(b)	Where the owner of the property is unknown or cannot be located, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city three times within a consecutive ten-day period, describing the property on which the litter exists and has accumulated, stating the names of the owners who cannot be located or that the owners of the property are unknown, stating that the property shall be cleaned within five days after the tenth day following the first day of publication in the newspaper, stating that if the property is not cleaned within such time period the city shall clean the property, and stating that a privileged lien will be filed against the property for the cost incurred by the city in the cleaning. 
(c)	Any privileged lien for the cost incurred in cleaning litter from private property shall bear interest at the rate of ten percent from the date the lien is filed. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0022, § 8.47, 8-24-1982) 
Sec. 34-39. - Penalty. 
Any person violating the terms of any section of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction in the municipal court shall be fined as provided in section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 1982-0022, § 8.48, 8-24-1982) 
Secs. 34-40—34-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - UNSIGHTLY, UNSANITARY CONDITIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 34-71—34-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MAINTENANCE OF PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 34-91. - Prohibiting holes on property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own any lot in the city to permit or allow holes or places on such lots where water may accumulate and become stagnant, or to permit holes to remain. 
(Ord. No. 1984-0003, § 9.40, 3-27-1984) 
Sec. 34-92. - Prohibiting accumulation of stagnant water. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own any lot in the city to permit or allow the accumulation of stagnant water on the lot, or to permit such water to remain. 
(Ord. No. 1984-0003, § 9.41, 3-27-1984) 
Sec. 34-93. - Prohibiting accumulation of filth. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own any house, buildings, establishment, lot or yard in the city to permit or allow any carrion, filth or other impure or unwholesome matter to accumulate or remain on such place. 
(Ord. No. 1984-0003, § 9.42, 3-27-1984) 
Sec. 34-94. - Abandoned appliances. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own any property in the city to permit or allow the open storage of any icebox, refrigerator, stove, glass, building material or similar items. It shall be the duty and responsibility of every such owner to keep the premises of such property free and clear of all such items and remove such items upon notice from the city. 
(Ord. No. 1984-0003, § 9.43, 3-27-1984) 
Sec. 34-95. - Prohibiting other unsanitary matter to accumulate. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own any property in the city to allow weeds or brush to grow in excess of 18 inches, rubbish, or any other unsightly, objectionable or unsanitary matter to accumulate or grow on the property. 
(Ord. No. 1984-0003, § 9.44, 3-27-1984)
State Law reference— Authority, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code §§ 342.003, 342.004.  
Sec. 34-96. - Buffering and screening. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a junkyard or salvage yard, which is not surrounded by a continuous solid fence at least eight feet in height without openings except for entrance and exits, which shall be equipped with unpierced gates. 
(Ord. No. 1984-0003, § 9.45, 3-27-1984) 
Sec. 34-97. - Stagnant water, failure to perform filling or drainage work; unwholesome conditions. 
The owner of property that has places thereon where stagnant water may accumulate and/or which are not properly drained or the owner of any premises or building upon which carrion, filth or other impure or unwholesome matter may accumulate shall drain and/or fill the lots and remove such filth, carrion or other unwholesome matter, as the case may be, after notice as provided in section 34-121. If such owner fails or refuses to abate such conditions, the city may proceed as provided in division 2 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1984-0003, § 9.46, 3-27-1984)
State Law reference— Authority to require, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.001.  
Sec. 34-98. - Growth of weeds, grass, plants, uncultivated plants. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent, occupant, or anyone having supervision or control of any lot, tract, parcel of land, or a portion, occupied or unoccupied, within the city to suffer or permit grass, weeds or any plant that is not cultivated to grow to a greater height than 18 inches on an average or to grow in rank profusion upon such premises. 
(Ord. No. 1984-0003, § 9.47, 3-27-1984; Ord. No. 1991-0005, § 9.47(A), 6-25-1991; Ord. No. 1991-0005R, § 9.47(A), 10-8-1991) 
State Law reference— Authority, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.004.  
Secs. 34-99—34-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - ABATEMENT 
 
Sec. 34-121. - Failure to remove weeds, rubbish, abandoned vehicles and appliances and provide adequate fencing for junkyards. 
(a)	It is unlawful for an owner of any property within the city to permit the conditions prohibited in sections 34-91 or 34-92 or to allow weeds or brush to grow in excess of 18 inches; or to allow rubbish, abandoned vehicles, appliances or any other unsightly, objectionable or unsanitary matter to grow or accumulate on such property. If such owner fails and/or refuses to cut down and/or remove such weeds, rubbish, brush or other unsightly, objectionable or unsanitary matter or to provide adequate fencing around a junkyard, as the case may be, within ten days after notice given personally to the owner or if personal service cannot be made, within ten days after notice by publication as many as two times within ten consecutive days in a newspaper in the county or by posting such notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on such property, such owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined as provided in section 1-14 
(b)	If the owner of any lot or premises under the provisions of this article shall be a corporation and shall violate any provision of this article, the president, vice-president, secretary, treasurer of such corporation, or any manager, agent or employee of such corporation shall be also liable for the penalties provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 1984-0003, § 9.47, 3-27-1984)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.006.  
Sec. 34-122. - Right of city to perform work. 
If the owner refuses or fails to comply with the provisions of this article, despite penalties, or if the owner cannot be contacted, and if the violation represents an immediate threat to health or safety in the view of the mayor or city health officer, the city may perform the necessary work to eliminate the threat and pay for the work or improvements made and may assess and charge the expense to the owner of the property. 
(Ord. No. 1984-0003, § 9.48, 3-27-1984)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.007.  
Sec. 34-123. - Right of recovery of expenses incurred by city. 
The mayor or city health officer shall file a statement of such expenses incurred under section 34-122, giving the amount of such expenses and the date on which the work was done or improvements made with the county clerk; and the city shall have a privileged lien on such lot or real estate upon which the work was done or improvements made to secure the expenditures so made, in accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.007, which lien should be second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements; and this amount shall bear ten percent interest from the date the statement was filed. For any such expenditures and interest, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure of the lien may be had in the name of the city; and the statement of expenses so made or a certified copy of the statement shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for such work or improvements. 
(Ord. No. 1984-0003, § 9.49, 3-27-1984)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 342.007.  
Secs. 34-124—34-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - AIR POLLUTION 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Smoking in certain places, V.T.C.A., Penal Code § 48.01. 
Sec. 34-151. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative area means the area of an establishment not generally accessible to the public, including but not limited to individual offices, stockrooms, employee lounges or meeting rooms. 
Enclosed means closed in by a roof and walls with appropriate openings for ingress and egress, but does not include areas commonly described as public lobbies. 
Hospital means any institution that provides medical, surgical and overnight facilities for patients. 
Movie theater means any establishment engaged in the business of exhibiting motion pictures to the public. 
Public service area means any area to which the general public routinely has access for municipal services or which is designated a public service area in a written policy. 
Public place means any enclosed indoor area that may be used by the general public, and includes but is not limited to stores, offices and other commercial establishments, restaurants, public and private institutions of higher education, and health care facilities. 
Smoke and smoking include the carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind, or any other lighted smoking equipment or device, and the lighting of or the emitting or exhaling the smoke of a pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 1990-0013, § I(9.91), 12-11-1990)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2  
Sec. 34-152. - Smoking prohibited in certain areas. 
(a)	A person commits an offense if he smokes or possesses a burning tobacco, weed or other plant product, or any lighted or burning pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind in any of the following indoor or enclosed areas: 
(1)	An elevator used or which may be used by the public;
(2)	A hospital, nursing home or health care facility except in areas designated and clearly marked as smoking areas; 
(3)	Any conference room, meeting room or public service area of any facility owned, operated or managed by the city, except those conference rooms, meeting rooms, administrative areas or office areas which are not generally open to the public; 
(4)	An area within an enclosed public place marked with a "No Smoking" sign in accordance with subsection (b) of this section by the owner or person in control; or 
(5)	An enclosed theater, movie theater, library, museum and transportation vehicles such as buses and taxicabs, except on chartered buses for private hire or in taxicabs clearly designated by the operator to permit smoking. 
(b)	The owner or person in control of an establishment or area designated in subsection (a) of this section may post a sign, conspicuous to ordinary public view, at or near each public entrance. The sign shall contain the words "No Smoking except in Designated Areas, City of Gilmer Ordinance" and have the universal symbol for no smoking or other language that clearly prohibits smoking. 
(c)	Every hospital shall:
(1)	Allow all patients, prior to elective admission, to choose to be in nonsmoking patient room; and 
(2)	Require that all employees or visitors obtain express approval from all patients in a patient room prior to smoking. 
(d)	It is a defense to the prosecution under this section if the person was smoking in a situation in which a person is present at an event in which an entire room or hall is used for a social function sponsored by a private entity or individual and seating arrangements are under the control of the sponsor of the function and not of the proprietor or person in charge of the place. However, the sponsor of the social function may designate a smoking area. 
(Ord. No. 1990-0013, § I(9.92), 12-11-1990) 
Sec. 34-153. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be fined an amount not less than $25.00 nor more than $200.00; however, if a defendant has previously been convicted under this article, he shall be fined an amount not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00 for a second conviction under this article, and shall be fined an amount of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 for a third conviction under this article and for each conviction thereafter. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1990-0013, § I(9.93), 12-11-1990) 
Sec. 34-154. - Owner reporting requirements. 
This article does not require the owner, operator, employer, manager or any employee of an establishment to report a violation or to take any action against any individual violating sections 34-151 through 34-154. 
(Ord. No. 1990-0013, § I(9.94), 12-11-1990) 
Secs. 34-155—34-190. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - JUNKED, WRECKED, ABANDONED PROPERTY 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Junked and abandoned vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 683.001 et seq. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 34-191—34-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 86 
State Law reference— Abandoned vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code §§ 683.001—683.057. 
Sec. 34-211. - Declared a nuisance. 
Any motor vehicle that is inoperable and more than five years old and left unattended on public property for more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for a period of more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle that has remained on private property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property for more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle left unattended on the right-of-way of a designated city street for more than 48 hours is declared an abandoned vehicle and a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 1996-0002, 1-25-1996) 
Sec. 34-212. - Incorporation of state law. 
The provisions of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code §§ 683.001—683.057 regarding abandoned vehicles is adopted and incorporated by reference in this division.  
Sec. 34-213. - Custody authorized. 
The police department may take into custody an abandoned motor vehicle found on public or private property. The police department may employ its own personnel, equipment and facilities or hire persons, equipment and facilities to remove, preserve and store an abandoned motor vehicle it takes into custody. 
(Ord. No. 1996-0002, 1-25-1996) 
Secs. 34-214—34-230. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - JUNKED VEHICLES 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 86  
Sec. 34-231. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Junked vehicle means a vehicle that is self-propelled and inoperable and: 
(1)	Does not have lawfully attached to it:
a.	An unexpired license plate; or
b.	A valid motor vehicle inspection certificate;
(2)	Is wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled or discarded; or
(3)	Has remained inoperable for more than 45 consecutive days.
(Ord. No. 1999-003, § I, 3-25-1999)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2  
Sec. 34-232. - Junked vehicle declared to be public nuisance. 
A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, that is visible from a public place or public right-of-way: 
(1)	Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the public;
(2)	Tends to reduce the value of private property;
(3)	Invites vandalism;
(4)	Creates a fire hazard;
(5)	Is an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors;
(6)	Produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of municipalities; and 
(7)	Is a public nuisance.
(Ord. No. 1999-003, § II, 3-25-1999) 
Sec. 34-233. - Offense. 
(a)	A person commits an offense if the person maintains a public nuisance as described in this division. 
(b)	An offense under this section is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not to exceed $200.00. 
(c)	The court shall order abatement and removal of the nuisance on conviction.
(Ord. No. 1999-003, § III, 3-25-1999) 
Sec. 34-234. - Notice to abate or remove. 
Whenever such public nuisance as defined in section 34-232 exists in the city in violation of this division, the chief of police or his designated agent or employee shall be given the authority to abate the nuisance and to give notice of such abatement to the proper parties. 
(Ord. No. 1999-003, § IV, 3-25-1999) 
Sec. 34-235. - Procedures for abatement. 
(a)	The chief of police or his agent or employee shall give notice of abatement to the proper parties as set out in section 34-236. A public hearing shall be required before removal, and the notice required identifying the vehicle shall be given to the department of transportation not later than the fifth day after the date of removal. By this division, the city is prohibited from allowing the vehicle from being reconstructed or made operable after removal. 
(b)	The municipal court may issue necessary orders to enforce these procedures.
(c)	The chief of police or his agent or employee may enter private property to examine a public nuisance, to obtain information to identify the nuisance, and to remove or direct the removal of the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 1999-003, § V, 3-25-1999) 
Sec. 34-236. - Notice. 
(a)	To abate and remove a public nuisance, the chief of police or his agent or employee must provide not less than ten days' notice of the nature of the notice, sent by certified mail with a five-day return requested, to: 
(1)	The last known registered owner of the nuisance;
(2)	Each lienholder of record of the nuisance; and
(3)	The owner or occupant of:
a.	The property on which the nuisance is located; or
b.	If the nuisance is located on a public right-of-way, the property adjacent to the right-of-way. 
(b)	The notice must state that:
(1)	The nuisance must be abated and removed not later than the tenth day after the date on which the notice was mailed; and 
(2)	Any request for a hearing must be made before that ten-day period expires.
(c)	If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the nuisance is unknown, notice may be placed on the nuisance or, if the owner is located, hand delivered. 
(d)	If notice is returned undelivered, action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the 11th day after the date of the return. 
(Ord. No. 1999-003, § VI, 3-25-1999) 
Sec. 34-237. - Hearing. 
(a)	The city council shall conduct hearings under the procedures adopted under this division.
(b)	If a hearing is requested by a person for whom notice is required under section 34-236, the hearing shall be held not earlier than the 11th day after the date of the service of notice. 
(c)	At the hearing, the junked motor vehicle is presumed, unless demonstrated otherwise by the owner, to be inoperable. 
(d)	If the information is available at the location of the nuisance, a resolution or order requiring removal of the nuisance must include the vehicle's: 
(1)	Description;
(2)	Vehicle identification number; and
(3)	License plate number.
(Ord. No. 1999-003, § VII, 3-25-1999) 
Sec. 34-238. - Inapplicability of division. 
(a)	Scope. Procedures adopted under this division may not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part that is: 
(1)	Completely enclosed in a building in a lawful manner and is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
(2)	Stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or that is an antique or special-interest vehicle stored by a motor vehicle collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle or part and the outdoor storage area, if any, are: 
a.	Maintained in an orderly manner;
b.	Not a health hazard; and
c.	Screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including a fence, rapidly growing trees or shrubbery. 
(b)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Antique vehicle means a passenger car or truck that is at least 35 years old. 
Motor vehicle collector means a person who: 
(1)	Owns one or more antique or special-interest vehicles; and
(2)	Acquires, collects or disposes of an antique or special-interest vehicle or part of an antique or special-interest vehicle for personal use to restore and preserve an antique or special-interest vehicle for historic interest. 
Special-interest vehicle means a motor vehicle of any age that has not been changed from original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist. 
(Ord. No. 1999-003, § VIII, 3-25-1999) 
Sec. 34-239. - Junked vehicle disposal. 
(a)	A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, may be removed to a scrapyard, a motor vehicle demolisher or a suitable site designated by the chief of police. 
(b)	The city may:
(1)	Finally dispose of a junked vehicle or vehicle part; or
(2)	Transfer it to another disposal site if the disposal is scrap or salvage only.
(Ord. No. 1999-003, § IX, 3-25-1999) 
Chapter 38 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Fire department, §§ 4.05—4.05.3.
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; civil emergencies, ch. 26; emergency services, ch. 30  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 38-1. - Code adopted. 
This code shall be known as the City of Gilmer Fire Prevention Code. The articles of the International Fire Code (IFC), 2000 edition, shall be the fire prevention code of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1994-0016, § 1, 9-27-1994; Ord. No. 2002-008, 10-29-2002; Ord. No. 2004-003, 5-11-2004)  
Sec. 38-2. - Issuance of permit authorized. 
The fire marshal is empowered to issue, upon application being duly presented to him, a special permit to any group of persons seeking to stage or present an exhibition or celebration using the devices mentioned in this article and article II of this chapter provided such group of persons gives evidence that all reasonable precautions will be taken at such exhibition or celebration for the safety of the public. Such permit shall be valid for one performance or exhibition only. It shall be the duty of the fire marshal or his deputies that if the safety of the public is at any time being endangered by the exhibition or celebration, to immediately terminate the exhibition or celebration until such precautions as are necessary and reasonable are taken for public safety. Nothing in this section shall empower the fire marshal or his deputies to issue permits for the sale of the devices in this article and article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1997-0003, § 1, 3-13-1997) 
Sec. 38-3. - Enforcement. 
(a)	Enforcement; office of fire marshal. The fire code shall be administered and enforced by the office of the fire marshal, and the assistant fire marshal, as established in the Home Rule Charter of the city, Article IV, Section 4.05.2 and Section 4.05.3 
(b)	Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or shall fail to comply therewith or with any requirements thereof or shall interfere in any way with the enforcement thereof shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable to a fine and, upon conviction of any violation, shall be fined as provided in section 1-14 or as provided for by state law whichever is greater. 
(Ord. No. 1997-0003, § 1, 3-13-1997; Ord. No. 2002-008, 10-29-2002; Ord. No. 2004-003, 5-11-2004)  
Sec. 38-4. - Amendments. 
The International Fire Code (IFC), 2000 edition, and the Gilmer Fire Prevention Codes are amended and changed as published in the following respects: 
(1)	SECTION 102-APPLICABILITY. 
a.	SECTION 102.4 (IFC) Application of building code is amended as follows: The adoption of this fire code shall not automatically adopt any other edition of the International Model Codes. 
b.	SECTION 102.6(IFC) is amended as follows: The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be those that are listed in Chapter 45 and such codes, when specifically adopted, and standards, the provisions of this code shall apply. Whenever amendments have been adopted to the referenced codes and standards, each reference to said code and standard shall be considered to reference the amendments as well. Any reference to N.F.P.A. 70 or the I.C.C. Electrical Code shall mean the Electrical Code as adopted. 
(2)	SECTION 202 GENERAL DEFINITIONS (IFC) is amended to include the following definitions: 
c.	CODE OFFICIAL The fire marshal, or assistant fire marshal, or a duly authorized representative.
d.	EMERGENCY ACCESS EASEMENT An access road or fire lane located on private property dedicated by the owner(s) of the property to provide fire apparatus access. 
e.	HIGH RISE BUILDING. Any structure used for human occupancy and/or storage more than forty (40) feet above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, or with three (3) or more stories, excluding the basement. For the purpose of this code, building height shall be the highest point of the structure. 
(3)	VEHICLE PARKING AND STORAGE. 
a.	No motor vehicle shall be stored; assembled or disassembled, at any time within any apartment, multi family, motel, hotel, or commercial building unless authorized by the fire marshal. 
Exemption: Vehicles within structures properly zoned as motor vehicle sales or service that comply with the other provisions of this code. 
b.	No motor vehicle shall be parked within ten (10) feet of any patio, stairs, or egress path at any apartment, multi-family, motel, hotel, or commercial structure unless on an approved parking space. 
(4)	GENERAL FIRE SAFETY. 
a.	Keep warm fires will be allowed at construction sites, provided the fire is kept in a metal barrel or can, covered with wire screen and attended at all times. The keep warm fire must be at least ten (10) feet from all structures. The Fire Marshall may prohibit keep warm fires when wind or weather conditions are such that a fire hazard will be created. 
b.	The construction of commercial and multi-family structures shall not be allowed above the foundation until a fire lane and adequate water supply for fire protection has been provided in compliance with this code. 
c.	A temporary fire lane and water supply may be installed during construction when approved by the Fire Marshal. 
d.	Open burning as defined in Section 302 (IFC) shall be prohibited unless approved and permitted by the Fire Marshal due to special circumstances, civil disaster, or as provided in Section 38-63 
e.	Exit doors and exit ways with electronic locking devices that must be released or operated to accomplish an emergency exit shall disconnect or "drop out" when the fire alarm system is activated. 
(5)	PARKING AND STORAGE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS VEHICLES. 
a.	No motor vehicle designed or utilized to transport hazardous materials, or required to post Department of Transportation (DOT) warning placards, shall be parked within the city without a Fire Marshal's permit. 
Exception: Vehicles may be parked for one (1) hour for the purpose of loading or off loading cargo or eating a meal. 
b.	Hazardous materials vehicles shall not be parked within on hundred (100) feet of a residential structure except to deliver cargo, and for less than one (1) hour. 
(6)	SUMMARY ABATEMENT. 
a.	If the Fire Marshal or his authorized representative becomes aware of a condition or situation that by its very nature causes a hazard, they shall have the authority to have the hazard corrected immediately. 
b.	If the hazard cannot be immediately corrected, the Fire Marshal shall have the authority assign the necessary fire protection personal to provide as safe a situation as possibly, until the hazard is corrected. 
(7)	COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATION. 
c.	A notarized letter shall be required by the Fire Marshal that indicates compliance with the fire codes regarding technical installations of fire related equipment and systems. 
d.	Notarized letters may be required for the following:
i.	Automatic fire alarm systems
ii.	Automatic fire extinguishing systems;
iii.	Storage and use of explosives;
iv.	Storage of hazardous materials;
v.	Fire appliance servicing;
vi.	Flame retardant application;
vii.	Liquefied gas installations and operations;
viii.	Radioactive material storage and handling.
e.	The letter shall be on company letterhead, and filed with the office of the Fire Marshal before final approval of the activity or installation. 
f.	All fire extinguishing system installations shall be inspected by the Fire Marshal.
g.	All compliance testing shall be witnessed by the Fire Marshal.
(8)	EXIT WAYS—HOTELS, MOTELS, AND MULTI-FAMILY. 
a.	All public exit ways and balconies shall be constructed of material having a class "C" flame spread (75 to 200 flame spread). 
b.	All balconies and landings utilized as exit ways shall have a minimum height of eight (8) feet, and a minimum width of four (4) feet. 
(9)	FIRE HYDRANTS. 
a.	All fire hydrants, located on public or private property, shall be painted an approved shade of red. 
b.	Hydrants may be color coded to indicate the water flow of water main size as required by N.F.P.A. Standard 291- "Fire Flow Testing and Marking of Hydrants". 
c.	Fire Hydrants shall be installed as follows:
1.	SECTION 508.0.1 (IFC) Where required is amended as follows: When a portion of the facility or building hereafter constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction is more than 300 feet from a hydrant of the fire apparatus access road, as measured by an approved route around the exterior of the facility or building, on site fire hydrants and mains shall be provided where required by the Fire Marshal. 
Exception: For Group R-3 and Group U occupancies, the distance requirement shall be 500 feet. 
2.	The location of fire hydrants on private property or along fire access road shall be approved by the Fire Marshal. 
3.	Fire system connections: Fire hydrants shall be located within a three hundred (300) foot hose lay of the fire department connection the protection system(s). Fire Department connections shall have a 42" by 42" concrete pad below each connection. 
4.	Fire hydrants not installed on public streets shall be looped to provide a water supply from two directions. 
5.	All fire hydrants installed shall be of a size, type, and manufacture as approved by the Fire Department, and Public Works Department of the City of Gilmer. 
6.	All fire hydrants shall be installed with the steamer connection in a direction as approved by the Fire Department of the City of Gilmer. 
(10)	AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS. 
a.	SECTION 903 (IFC) DEFINITIONS is hereby amended to include the following definitions:
i.	FIRE AREA- The aggregate floor area of a building regardless of the installation of firewalls, fire barriers, fire partitions, or demising walls. For the purpose of calculating fire sprinkler requirements the total building will be considered one structure. Buildings must be separated by at least twenty (20) feet to be considered separate buildings. 
b.	SECTION 902.1.2 (IFC) RESIDENTIAL SPRINKLERS is amended as follows:
1.	Unless specifically allowed by this code, residential sprinkler systems installed in accordance with N.F.P.A. 13D or N.F.P.A. 13R shall not be recognized for the purpose of exemptions or reductions, commonly known as "trade offs", permitted by other requirements of this code. 
2.	In addition, residential sprinkler systems installed in accordance with N.F.P.A. 13R must include attic protection. 
c.	SECTION 903.2.10.2 (IFC) BULK STORAGE OF TIRES is amended as follows: Buildings and structures where the area for the storage of tires exceeds 10,000 cubic feet shall be equipped throughout with an automatic fire sprinkler system meeting the requirements of N.F.P.A. standard 13. 
d.	SECTION 903.2.12.4 (IFC) HIGH-PILED COMBUSTIBLE STORAGE is amended as follows: Any building designed or used for high-piled storage, with a clear height exceeding twelve (12) feet shall be equipped throughout with an automatic fire sprinkler system meeting the requirements of N.F.P.A. standard 13. 
e.	SECTION 903.2.12.5 (IFC) SPRAY BOOTHS AND ROOMS. New spray booths and spraying rooms shall be protected by an automatic fire extinguishing system. 
f.	SECTION 903.2.12.6 (IFC) BUILDINGS OVER 6,000 SQUARE FEET. All provisions of this code are hereby amended to require an automatic fire sprinkler system throughout all buildings with a fire area over 6,000 square feet, or where the structure is three or more stories in height. 
g.	SECTION 903.5 (IFC) WATER SUPPLIES Water supplies for automatic sprinkler systems shall comply with this section and the standards referenced in Section 903.3.1. The potable water supply shall be protected against back flow in accordance with the requirements of this section and with the requirements of the adopted plumbing code. 
h.	SECTION 905.9 (IFC) VALVE SUPERVISION is amended to include the following: Sprinklers and standpipe system water-flow detectors shall be provided for each floor tap to the sprinkler system and shall cause an alarm upon detection of water-flow for more than 45 seconds. All control valves in the sprinkler and standpipe systems except for the fire department hose connection valves shall be electrically supervised to initiate a supervisory signal at the station upon tampering. 
i.	SECTION 907.1.0 (IFC) DESIGN STANDARDS is amended as follows: All fire alarm systems new or replacement service fifty (50) or more alarm actuating devices shall be addressable fire detection systems. Fire alarm systems serving more than seventy-five (75) smoke detectors or more than two hundred (200) total activating devices shall be analog intelligent addressable fire detection systems. 
j.	SECTION 907.2.3 (IFC) GROUP E is amended as follows: An automatic fire alarm system shall be installed in Group E educational occupancies. When automatic sprinkler systems and smoke detectors are installed, such systems or detectors shall be connected to the building fire alarm system. An approved smoke detector system shall be installed in Group E day care occupancies. Unless separated by a minimum of 1,000 feet open space, all buildings whether portable buildings or main building, will be considered one building for occupant load consideration and the interconnection of fire alarm systems. 
k.	SECTION 907.3 (IFC) WHERE REQUIRED is amended as follows: All manual alarm actuating devices shall be an approved double action type. 
l.	Notarized letter indicating all work has been performed as permitted and that the work meets code requirements must be submitted at the final inspection. 
m.	No system shall be approved until a complete inspection of materials and a functional test has been completed and witnessed by the Fire Marshal. The installer/technician must be present for all inspections and testing. 
n.	Installation schedule: Approved fire sprinkler systems and fire alarm systems shall be operational in a building under construction when the building goes under conditioned atmosphere. 
(11)	FIRE ALARMS. 
a.	SECTION 907.2.1 (IFC) GROUP A is amended as follows: A manual fire alarm shall be installed in accordance with N.F.P.A. 72 in Group A occupancies having an occupant load of 150 or more. Portions of Group E occupancies occupied for assembly purposes shall be provided with a fire alarm as required for Group E occupancies. 
b.	All fire alarm systems shall be designed and constructed so the failure, malfunction, or removal of any single device, or failure of the wiring to a device does not interfere with the operation of the other devices in the system. 
c.	Pre-recorded or voice fire alarms shall not be approved unless accompanied by a fire alarm signal of audio-visual devices that meet the minimum standards of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). 
d.	Notarizes letter indicating all work has been performed as permitted and that the work meets code requirements must be submitted at final inspection. 
e.	No system shall be approved until a complete inspection of materials and a functional test has been completed and witnessed by the Fire Marshal. The installer/technician must be present for all inspections and testing. 
(12)	FIRE APPARATUS, FIRE LANES AND EMERGENCY ACCESS EASEMENTS SECTION 503 (IFC) FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS is amended as follows: 
a.	SECTION 503.2.1 DIMENSIONS. Fire apparatus access roads and fire lanes shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 24 feet, except for approved security gates in accordance with Section 503.6, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 14 feet. Fire lanes shall have a minimum centerline turning radius of 30 feet. 
b.	SECTION 503.2.2 AUTHORITY. The Fire Marshal shall have the authority to require an increase in the minimum access widths and vertical clearances where they are inadequate for fire rescue operations. 
c.	SECTION 503.3 MARKINGS.
1.	Striping- Fire apparatus access roads shall be marked by painted lines of reflective red traffic paint a minimum of four (4) and a maximum of six (6) inches in width to show the boundaries of the lane. The words "FIRE LANE-TOW AWAY ZONE" shall appear in four (4) inch white letters at twenty five (25) feet intervals on the red bordered marking along both sides of the fire lane. Where a curb is available the striping shall be on the vertical face of the curb. 
2.	Signs- shall read "FIRE LANE-TOW AWAY ZONE" and shall be a minimum of 12" wide and 18" high. Signs shall be reflective, on a white background with letters and borders in red, using not less than 2" lettering. Signs shall be permanently affixed to a stationary post and the bottom of the sign shall be six feet, six inches (6'6") above finished grade. Signs shall be spaced not more than fifty (50) feet apart. Signs shall be installed on permanent buildings or walls or as approved by the Fire Marshal. 
d.	SECTION 503.4 OBSTRUCTIONS of FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROADS. Fire apparatus access road shall not be obstructed in any manner, including the parking of vehicles. The minimum widths and clearances established in Section 503.3 shall be maintained at all times. A vehicle stopped of standing in a fire lane, when attended by a licensed driver capable of relocating the vehicle on command, shall not be deemed in violation of this section, provided the vehicle does not impede the designed traffic flow. 
e.	Dead end fire access roads/lanes are prohibited unless an approved turn around is installed to comply with Appendix D-103.4 (IFC). At no time shall the minimum required width of the access road/fire lane be less than twenty-four feet. 
f.	Emergency access easements and access roads, when assigned a street name for the purpose of addressing, shall have street signs a minimum of six and a half inches high in a format approved by the City of Gilmer Public Works Department. Installation and maintenance of the signs shall be the responsibility of the owner/operator of the property. 
(13)	FIXED FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS. 
a.	A permit shall be required for the installation, reconstruction, modifications, moving or alteration of any fixed system. 
b.	The permit application shall be submitted to the office of the Fire Marshal and must have attached to the application detailed construction plans and a copy of the applicant's State license. 
c.	The permit fee for the construction, repair, alterations of relocation of a fixed system shall be determined by Building Inspection Department of the City of Gilmer. 
d.	Work shall not begin on any system without first obtaining permit.
Exception: Emergency repairs due to system malfunctions or discharge may begin, provided a permit is obtained the next working day. 
e.	Notarized letters indicating all work has been performed as permitted and that the work meets code requirement must be submitted at final inspection. 
f.	No system shall be approved until a complete inspection of materials and a functional test has been completed and witnessed by the Fire Marshal. The installer/technician must be present for all inspections and testing. 
(14)	SPECIAL FIRE INSPECTIONS. 
a.	All fire sprinkler, standpipe, fixed fire extinguishing systems and fire alarms shall inspected every twelve (12) months by a technician properly licensed by the State of Texas, and a copy of each inspection shall be forwarded to the office of the Fire Marshal. 
b.	The licensed technician/company making the inspection shall notify the office of the Fire Marshal and the owner/occupant immediately when a system fails to pass a required test and/or is found in operative. 
(15)	STATE LICENSEES. 
a.	All installation and repairs of fire alarm, fire sprinkler and fixed extinguishing systems shall require the presents of a State of Texas licensed technician on the job site. 
b.	The licensed technician shall be able to present a copy of appropriate State of Texas licenses upon request. 
(16)	RECONSTRUCTION/REMODEL. 
a.	A building that is being altered, remodeled or reconstructed shall comply with current fire codes in regard to: 
1.	Panic Hardware
2.	Fire Alarms
3.	Exit Lights
4.	Emergency Lighting
5.	Exits and Exit Ways
6.	Fire Protection Systems
b.	When applicable, permits shall be obtained and compliance inspections performed.
c.	A building or structure shall be considered under construction or re-construction when: 
1.	Greater than 50% of the total floor area is changed or altered in one or more construction phases over a two year period, or, 
2.	The cost of the construction is greater than 50% of the appraised value of the structure as it appears on the Upshur County Appraisal Districts records. 
(17)	ELEVATOR RECALL. 
a.	Where elevator travel is in excess of two (2) floors the elevator shall be fire fighter recalled to the designated level by the initiation of any automatic fire alarm in the building. 
b.	Where a shunt trip mechanism is present, a smoke and heat activated device shall be provided to return the elevator car to an egress point approved by the Fire Marshal. 
(18)	SECTION 2703.3.1.4 RESPONSIBILITY FOR CLEANUP is hereby amended to include the following: Any cost associated with a fire department response to accomplish control and mitigation of an unauthorized discharge may be charged back to the person, firm, or corporation responsible for the release. 
(Ord. No. 2002-008, 10-29-2002) 
Sec. 38-5. - Storage of flammable or combustible liquids. 
(a)	The storage of flammable or combustible liquids in an outside above ground tank is prohibited. 
Exceptions: 
(1)	An exception may be granted by the fire marshal during an emergency operation, at construction sites, and other locations where underground installations cannot be utilized. At no time will the sale or distribution of flammable or combustible liquids be allowed from above ground storage tanks by gravity, portable pumps powered by vehicle batteries, pneumatic pressure or electric driven pumps. 
(2)	Above ground fuel tanks that comply with IFC chapter 34 may be allowed for commercial and retail purposes when permitted by the fire marshal. 
(b)	The storage of flammable or combustible liquids at construction sites shall require a permit from the fire marshal's office and shall be provided with impact protection. 
(Ord. No. 2002-008, 10-29-2002)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-008, adopted October 29, 2002, enacted provisions intended for use as subsections (1) and (2). To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as subsections (a) and (b).  
Sec. 38-6. - Storage and distribution of liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), compressed natural gas (CNG), and liquefied natural gas (LNG). 
(a)	The storage, sale, and distribution of OPG, CNG and LNG shall be in compliance with the rules and regulations established by the Texas Railroad Commission and the provisions of the IFC. 
(b)	The use of LPG, CNG, or LNG as a heating or cooling fuel shall be prohibited where natural gas service is available. The fire marshal shall approve the size and location of LPG, CNG and LNG storage tanks. 
(c)	LPG storage shall not exceed 250 gallons per installation unless approved by the fire marshal. 
(d)	Storage tanks shall be installed a minimum of ten feet from all ignition sources and property lines, and a minimum of 50 feet from all structures. 
(e)	Where portable LPG containers are required for jewelry repair, dental labs, portable cookers and other services, individual containers shall not exceed 20 pounds water capacity and the aggregate capacity on premises shall not exceed 60 pounds water capacity (three containers). Each container shall be separated from other containers by a distance of not less than 20 feet. 
Exception: Such events where commercial outdoors cooking is required, provided a permit is issued by the city, and the site is inspected by the fire marshal's office. 
(f)	It shall be a violation of this Code to dispense LPG, CNG, or LNG from a vehicle parked on a public street or roadway. 
(Ord. No. 2002-008, 10-29-2002)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-008, adopted October 29, 2002, enacted provisions intended for use as subsections (1)—(6). To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as subsections (a)—(f).  
Sec. 38-7. - Storage of explosives or blasting agents. 
(a)	The storage of explosives or blasting agents within the city is prohibited without a permit from the fire marshal. 
(b)	All use and storage of explosives and blasting agents shall be in compliance with the standards of the national fire code and [this] chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2002-008, 10-29-2002)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2002-008, adopted October 29, 2002, enacted provisions intended for use as subsections (1) and (2). To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as subsections (a) and (b).  
Sec. 38-8. - Collection of fees and cost recovery for providing fire prevention and protection services and other public safety emergency services by the city. 
The city fire department, when rendering services, shall be authorized to collect fees for fire department operations and for other emergency services. Such fees may include charges for all equipment, materials, maintenance and overhead expenses and costs of whatever nature all of which shall constitute full reimbursement to the city for services actually rendered by the city fire department. 
Fees shall be collected for motor vehicle accidents, hazardous material incidents, commercial building fires, rescue and other types of incidents having significant costs. All billing will be done through property owner's insurance carrier that provides payments for such fire department services. 
Revenues received for charges collected shall be located in a special revenue account established by the city and reserved for the purpose of funding fire department apparatus and equipment. Any and all utilization of these revenues must be presented to, and approved by council. 
(Ord. No. 2007-002, 1-23-2007)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2007-002, adopted January 23, 2007, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as § 38-8 is at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 38-9—38-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIREWORKS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Fireworks, V.A.T.S. Insurance Code art. 5.43-4. 
Sec. 38-31. - Discharge of fireworks prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to light or in any way discharge or explode any firecracker, Roman candle, torpedo, sky rocket or any other explosive on the streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public places within the city limits.  
Sec. 38-32. - Sale prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale or exhibit for sale fireworks of any type within the city limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1972-0001, § 1, 1-13-1972) 
Secs. 38-33—38-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OUTDOOR BURNING 
 
Sec. 38-61. - Limited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, suffer, allow or permit any outdoor burning within the corporate limits of the city except as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1997-0003, 3-13-1997) 
Sec. 38-62. - Authorization required. 
Authorization for burning shall be obtained from the fire department. A record of each authorization will be maintained according to recommendation of the fire chief or the fire marshal.  
Sec. 38-63. - Conditions. 
(a)	Outdoor burning within the corporate limits of the city is authorized in each of the following instances: 
(1)	Pursuant to a written grant of authority from the state air control board or executive director, who before granting such authority must determine that there is no practical alternative to outdoor burning and the burning will not cause or contribute to a violation of any federal primary or secondary ambient air standard. 
(2)	Outdoor burning for the purposes of training firefighting personnel when requested in writing and when authorized in writing by the health authority or fire marshal. If notice of denial from the health authority or fire marshal is not received within ten days of the request, the burning is authorized. 
(3)	Outdoor burning of domestic waste at and from a property designed for and used exclusively as a private residence and housing not more than three families when collection of domestic waste is not provided by the city. 
(4)	Outdoor burning consisting of campfires and fires used solely for recreational or ceremonial purposes, or in the noncommercial preparation of food. 
(5)	All other instances or forms of outdoor burning as may be authorized by the orders, determinations, rules, regulations and other actions issued by the state air control board or executive director. 
(6)	Subject to the restrictions and regulations set forth, outdoor burning for the purpose of disposing of large accumulations of brush, undergrowth, uprooted or cut-down trees or parts of either, vegetation and other natural debris resulting from the clearing of undeveloped or raw land when the fire marshal determines that there is no practical alternative to outdoor burning. 
(7)	Subject to the restrictions and regulations set forth in this section, outdoor burning of small accumulations of foliage, leaves, pine cones, pine needles, twigs, branches, small limbs or other natural growth at and from a property designed for and used exclusively as a private residence and housing not more than three families. 
(b)	Outdoor burning authorized by subsections (a)(6) and (7) of this section are subject to the following restrictions and regulations: 
(1)	Such burning shall take place only during daylight hours.
(2)	During each burning, and until completely extinguished, all fires shall be constantly attended by a competent person. 
(3)	No burning shall be authorized or allowed that would result in smoke being carried into adjacent or surrounding residential dwellings, or that would otherwise create a hazard to or endanger adjacent property. 
(4)	No burning shall be authorized or allowed that would create a hazard to motor vehicle traffic. 
(5)	Burning of normal kitchen garbage and domestic waste or trash shall not be authorized or allowed, except as provided by subsection (a)(3) of this section. 
(6)	Burning of all rubber products, including tires, of all types and insulated wire or other objects producing heavy black smoke shall not be authorized or allowed. 
(Ord. No. 1997-0003, § 1, 3-13-1997)  
Chapter 42 - FLOOD PREVENTION AND PROTECTION 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 34; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; subdivisions, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 90; zoning, app. A. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 42-1—42-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt, V.T.C.A., Water Code § 16.315. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 42-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeding in any given year. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
Flood means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Floodplain and floodprone area mean any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Habitable floor means any floor usable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, in any combination. A floor used only for storage is not a habitable floor. 
Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. It does not include recreational vehicles or travel trailers. 
Riverine means relating to, formed by or resembling a river, stream or brook. 
Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a mobile home. 
Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of the structure the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either before the improvement or repair is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. The term does not include either any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions or any alteration of structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. 
(Ord. No. 1981-0011, § 11, 7-9-1981)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2  
Sec. 42-32. - Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard. 
Areas of special flood hazard are identified on flood hazard boundary maps published by the Federal Emergency Management Agency for the city, Community Number 02, and dated June 25, 1976. These maps and any revisions or new publications are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1981-0011, § 3, 7-9-1981) 
Sec. 42-33. - Floodplain administrator. 
(a)	For purposes of administering this article, the city council shall appoint the city manager or his designee to act as the city floodplain administrator with assistance from the council and any other committees as may be deemed necessary. 
(b)	The city council and city floodplain administrator will promulgate forms as may be required for the administration of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1981-0011, §§ 1, 10, 7-9-1981)
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2  
Secs. 42-34—42-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 42-51. - Application requirements. 
(a)	No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, improve, move or demolish any building or structure located in the identified floodplain without first submitting a floodplain permit application to the floodplain administrator and obtaining authorization to proceed with the proposed activity. 
(b)	No manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations shall be commenced within the identified floodplain until a floodplain permit application is submitted and authorization is obtained to proceed. 
(c)	No mobile home shall be placed on improved or unimproved real estate within the identified floodplain without first submitting a permit application and obtaining authorization to proceed. 
(Ord. No. 1981-0011, § 2, 7-9-1981) 
Sec. 42-52. - Application review. 
(a)	The floodplain administrator shall review all permit applications and subdivision proposals to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(b)	The floodplain administrator shall review all permit applications and subdivision proposals to determine whether the designated activity is proposed within the identified 100-year floodplain of the city. 
(c)	The floodplain administrator shall review all permit applications to ensure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972. 
(d)	The floodplain administrator shall notify adjacent communities and the state department of water resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit copies of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(e)	The floodplain administrator shall ensure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(Ord. No. 1981-0011, § 4, 7-9-1981) 
Sec. 42-53. - Issuance of permits. 
(a)	After reviewing the application, the floodplain administrator shall require any additional measures which are necessary to meet the minimum requirements of this article. If a proposed activity is not within the identified floodplain, then no floodplain permit is required and authorization can be given to proceed. 
(b)	For permit requirements, the floodplain administrator shall obtain and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source until such data has been provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. No. 1981-0011, § 5, 7-9-1981) 
Sec. 42-54. - Compliance certification. 
When a floodplain permit is issued for development within the identified floodplain, the following certifications of compliance can be required by the floodplain administrator: 
(1)	A certification from a registered professional engineer, architect or land surveyor, of the elevation of the finished first floor, including basement, in relation to feet mean sea level. 
(2)	If a structure has been floodproofed, a registered professional engineer must certify the elevation to which the structure was floodproofed and that the floodproofing measures utilized are adequate to provide the required protection. 
(3)	A certification of permit compliance from the permit grantee stating that all of the permit requirements have been met. 
(Ord. No. 1981-0011, § 9, 7-9-1981) 
Secs. 42-55—42-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 42-71. - Construction standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)	All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement. 
(2)	All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the base flood elevation as established by the city. 
(3)	All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated or floodproofed above the base flood level as established by the city. 
(4)	All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(5)	All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(6)	New and replacement sanitary sewer systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
(7)	On-site waste disposal systems (septic tanks) shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. Septic tanks are permitted in floodplain areas only when city sewer service is not accessible for topographic reasons. 
(Ord. No. 1981-0011, § 6, 7-9-1981) 
Sec. 42-72. - Mobile home requirements. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)	All mobile homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement by providing over-the-top ties and frame ties to ground anchors. 
(2)	Over-the-top ties be provided at each of the four corners of the mobile home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations and mobile homes less than 50 feet long requiring only one additional tie. 
(3)	Frame ties be provided at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points and mobile homes less than 50 feet long requiring four additional per side. 
(4)	All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds.
(5)	Any additions to the mobile home be similarly anchored.
(Ord. No. 1981-0011, § 7, 7-9-1981) 
Sec. 42-73. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
If a subdivision proposal is in the identified floodplain, the following provisions are required: 
(1)	All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the floodprone area. 
(2)	All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(3)	Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to floods.
(4)	All subdivisions and other proposed new developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, shall include base flood elevation data within such proposals. Plats will have the 100-year floodplain clearly delineated, and minimum slab elevations will be given for each lot within the floodplain. 
(Ord. No. 1981-0011, § 8, 7-9-1981) 
Chapter 46 - HUMAN RELATIONS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 46-1—46-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Fair housing, V.T.C.A., Property Code § 301.001 et seq. 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 46-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Age means the calendar age of an individual 18 years of age or over. 
Creed means any set of principles, rules, opinions and precepts formally expressed and seriously adhered to or maintained by a person. 
Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under sections 46-91, 46-92 or 46-93. 
Dwelling means any building, structure or portion of a building or structure which is occupied as or designed and intended for occupancy as a residence by one or more families or any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location on the land of any such building, structure or portion. 
Family includes a single individual or a group of individuals living together under one common roof. 
Major life activities means functions such as but not limited to caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working. 
Marital status means an individual's status as a single, married, divorced, widowed or separated person. 
Parenthood means a person's status as a parent or legal guardian of a child or children under the age of 18. 
Physical or mental disability means any physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more major life activities. 
Physical or mental impairment includes: 
(1)	Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems: neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory, including speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; genitourinary; hemic and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or 
(2)	Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific learning disabilities. 
Senior adult means a person 55 years of age or older. 
To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let, and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(Ord. No. 1993-0003, § 1, 7-27-1993)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2  
Sec. 46-32. - Interpretation and effect. 
This article shall in no way be interpreted as creating a judicial right or remedy which is the same or substantially equivalent to the remedies provided under title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, or the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act (15 USC 1691). All aggrieved parties shall retain the rights granted to them by title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, and the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act. In construing this article, it is the intent of the city council that the courts shall be guided by federal court interpretations of title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, and the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act, where appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1993-0003, § 2, 7-27-1993) 
Sec. 46-33. - Cumulative legal effect. 
This article is cumulative in its legal effect and is not in lieu of any and all other legal remedies which the person aggrieved may pursue. 
(Ord. No. 1993-0003, § 10, 7-27-1993) 
Sec. 46-34. - Unlawful intimidation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to harass, threaten, harm, damage or otherwise penalize any individual, group or business because he or they have complied with the provisions of this article because he has exercised his rights under this article, or enjoyed the benefits of this article, or because he has made a charge, testified or assisted in any investigation, or in any proceeding under this article or have made any report to the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 1993-0003, § 11, 7-27-1993) 
Sec. 46-35. - Cooperation with the secretary of housing and urban development. 
The administrator and the city attorney are authorized to cooperate with the secretary of housing and urban development and the U.S. Attorney General pursuant to the provisions of title VII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, PL 90-284, and may render such service to the secretary as they shall deem appropriate to further the policies of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1993-0003, § 12, 7-27-1993) 
Sec. 46-36. - Education and public information. 
In order to further the objectives of this article, the administrator may conduct educational and public information programs. 
(Ord. No. 1993-0003, § 13, 7-27-1993) 
Sec. 46-37. - Penalty. 
(a)	Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined a sum not to exceed $200.00 for each violation. Each day a violation continues after passage of 75 days from date of the filing of the initial complaint with the administrator shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(b)	Any person violating any provision of this article may be enjoined by order of a court of competent jurisdiction, and this remedy is in addition to any other penalty provision. 
(Ord. No. 1993-0003, § 14, 7-27-1993) 
Secs. 46-38—46-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2  
Sec. 46-61. - Administrator designated. 
The mayor and city council designate the city manager as the fair housing administrator, who shall have the responsibility of implementing this article, including the investigation of complaints. The administrator may delegate his authority to investigate and conciliate complaints to other city employees under his direction. 
(Ord. No. 1993-0003, § 7, 7-27-1993; Ord. No. 1995-0004, § 1, 2-23-1995) 
Sec. 46-62. - Complaint procedure, form. 
The city will follow the following complaint procedure and form when investigating a fair housing complaint: pu msp 692 pu msp 693 pu msp 694 
(Ord. No. 1995-0004, § 2, 2-23-1995; Res. of 10-28-1999) 
Sec. 46-63. - Complaints. 
(a)	Only the person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice who believes he will be irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that has occurred or is occurring may file a complaint with the fair housing administrator. Such complaints shall be in writing and shall identify the person alleged to have committed or alleged to be committing a discriminatory housing practice and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a discriminatory housing practice are based. The administrator shall furnish the complaint forms in section 46-62 without charge to any person, upon request. 
(b)	A copy of all complaints filed with the city shall be forwarded to the fair housing and equal opportunity division of the region VI office of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
(c)	The administrator shall provide for free administrative counseling to those complainants who wish to file a private suit for relief in the local, state or federal court. 
(d)	If at any time the administrator shall receive or discover credible evidence and shall have probable cause to believe that any person has committed or are committing a discriminatory housing practice as to which no complaint has been filed, the administrator may prepare and file a complaint upon his own motion and in his own name; and such complaint shall thereafter be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by a person aggrieved. 
(e)	The administrator shall receive and accept notification and referral complaints from the U.S. Attorney General and the secretary of housing and urban development pursuant to the provisions of title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, PL 90-284, and shall treat such complaints in the same manner as complaints filed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. 
(f)	All complaints shall be filed within 60 days following the occurrence of an alleged discriminatory housing practice. Upon the filing or referral of any complaint, the administrator shall provide notice of the complaint by furnishing a copy of such complaint to the persons named in the complaint who allegedly committed or were threatening to commit an alleged discriminatory housing practice. The accused may file an answer to the complaint within 15 days of receipt of the written complaint. 
(g)	All complaints and answers shall be subscribed and sworn to before an officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(Ord. No. 1993-0003, § 8, 7-27-1993) 
Sec. 46-64. - Investigation. 
(a)	Upon the filing or referral of a complaint as provided in this division, the fair housing administrator shall cause to be made a prompt and full investigation of the matter stated in the complaint. 
(b)	If the administrator determines that there is not probable cause to believe that a particular alleged discriminatory housing practice has been committed, the administrator shall take no further action with respect to that alleged offense. 
(c)	During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of the notice of complaints, the administrator shall, if it appears that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is threatening to occur, attempt by informal endeavors to effect conciliation, including voluntary discontinuance of the discriminatory housing practice and adequate assurance of future voluntary compliance with the provisions of this article. Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made public by the administrator, by the complainant or by any other party to the proceedings without the written consent of all persons concerned. 
(d)	Upon completion of the investigation and informal endeavors at conciliation by the administrator, but within 30 days of the filing of the complaint with the administrator, if the efforts of the administrator to secure voluntary compliance have been unsuccessful and if the administrator has made a determination that a discriminatory housing practice has in fact occurred, the administrator shall recommend to the city attorney that such violations be prosecuted in the municipal court. With such recommendations, the administrator shall refer his entire file to the city attorney. The city attorney shall, within 30 days after such referral, make a determination as to whether to proceed with prosecution of such complaint in municipal court. If the city attorney determines to prosecute, he shall institute a complaint and prosecute the case to conclusion within 30 days after such determination or as soon thereafter as practicable. 
(Ord. No. 1993-0003, § 9, 7-27-1993) 
Secs. 46-65—46-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED 
 
Sec. 46-91. - Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing. 
Except as exempted by section 46-94, it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)	Refuse to sell or rent, after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of or otherwise make unavailable or deny a dwelling to any person because of race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age. 
(2)	Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of connected services or facilities because of race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age. 
(3)	Make, print, publish or cause to be made, printed or published any notice, statement or advertisement regarding the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age, or any intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination. 
(4)	Represent to any person because of race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(5)	For profit or with the hope or expectation of profit, induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person of a particular race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age. 
(6)	For profit or with the hope or expectations of profit to influence or attempt to influence, by any words, acts or failure to act, any seller, purchaser, landlord or tenant of a dwelling so as to promote the maintenance of racially segregated housing or so as to retard, obstruct or discourage racially integrated housing. 
(Ord. No. 1993-0003, § 3, 7-27-1993) 
Sec. 46-92. - Discrimination in the financing of housing. 
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part of the making of commercial or residential real estate loans to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying for a loan for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against any such person in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, brokerage points, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or their financial assistance, because of: 
(1)	The race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age of such person or of any person associated with him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance; or 
(2)	The race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age of the present or prospective owner, lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwelling for which such a loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given. 
(Ord. No. 1993-0003, § 4, 7-27-1993) 
Sec. 46-93. - Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to deny access to or membership or participation in any multiple listing service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation, on account of race, color, creed, sex, religion or national origin, physical or mental disability, marital status, parenthood or age. 
(Ord. No. 1993-0003, § 5, 7-27-1993) 
Sec. 46-94. - Exemptions and exclusions. 
(a)	There shall be exempted from the application of section 46-91 all transactions involving: 
(1)	The rental of units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such units as his residence. 
(2)	The rental of a single room in a dwelling containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than one family if the person offering such room for rental actually maintains and occupies the remainder of such dwelling as his residence and not more than four such rooms are offered. 
(3)	The sale or rental of any single house by a private individual who owns such house, provided that: 
a.	The sale or rental is made without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman or person; 
b.	The sale is made without the publication, posting or mailing of any advertisement or written notice in violation of this article (this shall not prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title); 
c.	The owner does not own more than three single-family houses at the time of the sale; and 
d.	The owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or any portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental or more than three such single-family houses at any one time. 
If the owner does not reside in the house at the time of sale or was not the most recent resident of such house prior to the sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period. 
(b)	Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious association or society from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, national origin, sex, mental or physical disability, marital status, parenthood or age. 
(c)	Nothing in this article shall prohibit a bona fide private club, not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose provides lodging which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(d)	Nothing in this article shall bar any person from owning and operating a housing accommodation in which rooms are leased, subleased or rented only to persons of the same sex, when such housing accommodation contains common lavatory, kitchen or similar facilities available for the use of all persons occupying such housing accommodation. 
(e)	Nothing in this article shall prohibit the sale, rental, lease or occupancy of any dwelling designed and operated exclusively for senior adults and their spouses unless the sale, rental, lease or occupancy is further restricted on account of race, color, creed, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap and marital status. 
(f)	Nothing in this article shall bar a person who owns, operates or controls rental dwellings, whether located on the same property or on one or more contiguous parcels of property, from reserving any grouping of dwellings for the rental or lease to tenants with a minor child or children; however, if the reserved area is completely leased or rented, the person owning, operating or controlling the rental dwelling may not refuse to rent or lease any other available dwelling to the prospective tenant on the basis of the tenant's status as parent or any other of the protected classifications set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1993-0003, § 6, 7-27-1993) 
Secs. 46-95—46-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - HISTORICALLY UNDERUTILIZED BUSINESSES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 46-121—46-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - OUTREACH PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 46-151. - Guidelines; adopted. 
The city council hereby adopts the following guidelines for a historically underutilized business enterprise outreach program: 
(1)	Coordinate with other state and federal agencies to develop a systematic method for identifying and maintaining an inventory of verified minority and women-owned business enterprises, their capabilities, services, supplies and/or products. 
(2)	The city will forward notice of contract opportunities to small business incubators, Chambers of Commerce and Contract Procurement Centers in the area and advertise contract opportunities in the Dodge Report. 
(3)	The city will utilize the local media, electronic and print, to market and promote contract and business opportunities for minority and women-owned businesses. 
(4)	The city will announce HOME fund awards and projected contract letting schedules in the news media to notify minority business enterprises and women-owned businesses of up-coming business opportunities. 
(Ord. No. 2000-006, 8-31-2000) 
Sec. 46-152. - Procurement procedures. 
(a)	The city will notify potential bidders of procurement opportunities and soliciting bids for historically underutilized businesses, whenever they are potential sources, in local newspapers. 
(b)	The city will identify the nearest minority business development agency from the regional office directory and forward a copy of all advertisements for bidders to that agency. 
(c)	Businesses located in the county or adjoining counties that provide services applicable to the city's needs under the HOME Program and are listed in the state certified historically underutilized business directory will be contacted. 
(d)	Minority and/or women-owned business enterprises identified in the city and surrounding areas will be placed on a bidders list to receive a copy of all advertisements soliciting the type of services provided by that business. 
(Ord. No. 2000-006, 8-31-2000) 
Sec. 46-153. - Records and reports. 
(a)	The city shall maintain records and statistical data on participation by minority businesses and women-owned businesses. 
(b)	The city shall submit a historically underutilized business report upon completion of each project. 
(Ord. No. 2000-006, 8-31-2000) 
Chapter 50 - LAW ENFORCEMENT 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; civil emergencies, ch. 26; emergency services, ch. 30; miscellaneous offenses, ch. 54; traffic and vehicles, ch. 86  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 50-1—50-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - POLICE RESERVE FORCE 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Special police, § 4.04.2 
State Law reference— Police reserve force, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code §§ 141.007, 142.003, 341.012. 
Sec. 50-31. - Created. 
There is created in and for the city a police reserve force in accordance with V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.012, such article to be used as a guideline for the creation of the police reserve force and as a guideline for adopting subsequent rules, policies, procedures or other provisions by which the police reserve force shall be governed and regulated. 
(Ord. No. 1980-0008, § 12-16, 7-10-1980) 
Sec. 50-32. - Size. 
The maximum number of members of the police reserve force shall at no time exceed 20 members. 
(Ord. No. 1980-0008, § 12-17, 7-10-1980) 
Sec. 50-33. - Appointment of members. 
(a)	The chief of police shall appoint the members of the reserve force. Members serve at the chief's discretion. 
(b)	Appointments to the reserve force must be approved by the city council before the person appointed may carry a weapon or otherwise act as a peace officer. After the appointment is approved, the person appointed may carry a weapon only when authorized to do so by the chief of police and only when discharging official duties as a peace officer. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.012(d), (g).  
Sec. 50-34. - Duties of members. 
(a)	The chief of police may call the reserve force into service at any time the chief considers it necessary to have additional officers to preserve the peace and enforce the law. 
(b)	Members of the reserve force serve as peace officers during the actual discharge of official duties. 
(c)	Reserve police officers may act only in a supplementary capacity to the regular police force and may not assume the full-time duties of regular police officers without complying with the requirements for regular police officers. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 341.012(e), (f), (h).  
Chapter 54 - MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Law enforcement, ch. 50; traffic and vehicles, ch. 86  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 54-1. - Panhandling prohibited. 
(a)	Intent and purpose. It is the purpose of this section to regulate panhandling to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the city, and to protect and preserve the quality and character of the city. It is expressly not the intent or effect of this section to impose a limitation upon rights granted under the First Amendment. 
(b)	Definitions. 
Panhandling, for the purposes of this section, is any solicitation made in person requesting an immediate donation of money or thing of value. Panhandling includes the purchase of an item or service under circumstances where a reasonable person would understand that the purchase is in substance a donation. 
(c)	Time of panhandling. Any person who panhandles after sunset or before sunrise is guilty of a class C misdemeanor. 
(d)	Place of panhandling. Any person who panhandles in any public area or any public roadway is guilty of a class C misdemeanor. 
(e)	Manner of panhandling. Any person who panhandles in any of the following manners is guilty of a class C misdemeanor: 
(1)	By blocking the path of the person solicited along a sidewalk or street;
(2)	By following a person who walks away from the panhandler;
(3)	By using profane or abusive language, either during the solicitation or following a refusal; or 
(4)	By any statement, gesture, or other communication which a reasonable person in the situation of the person solicited would perceive to be a threat. 
(f)	Panhandling that is false or misleading. Any person who knowingly makes any false or misleading representation in the course of soliciting a donation is guilty of a class C misdemeanor. False or misleading representations include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)	Stating that the solicitor is homeless when he is not;
(2)	Stating that the solicitor is from out of town and stranded when that is not true;
(3)	Using makeup or device to simulate any deformity;
(4)	Wearing or displaying an indication of physical disability when the solicitor does not suffer the disability indicated; 
(5)	Wearing a military uniform or other indication of military service when the solicitor is neither a present nor former member of the service indicated; or 
(6)	Stating that the donation is needed to meet a need which does not exist or the solicitor already has sufficient funds to meet. 
(g)	Authorization for panhandling by pedestrian. Not withstanding the provisions of subsections (d) and (e) and, as authorized by V.T.C.A., Transportation Code (2005), § 552.0071, a person or persons shall be authorized to stand in a roadway to solicit (as that term is used in subsection (a)) a contribution to an organization defined as charitable by the standards of the United States Internal Revenue Service if the person or persons to be engaged in the solicitation are employees or agents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2006-010, Arts. I—VII, 12-12-2006)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-010, Arts. I—VII, adopted December 12, 2006, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as § 54-1 is at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 54-2—54-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WEAPONS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Hunting, use of dangerous weapons on airport property, § 10-104  
Sec. 54-31. - Discharge of firearms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm within the city limits; however, this section shall not be construed to prohibit any officer of the law from discharging a firearm in the performance of his duty nor to any citizen from discharging a firearm when lawfully defending person or property. Any person found guilty of such unlawful discharge of a firearm within the city limits shall be fined not more than $200.00. 
(Ord. No. 1984-0018, 8-9-1984) 
Sec. 54-32. - Possession of firearm in city-owned building; exception. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to carry onto the premises of, or to possess any firearm on the premises of, any building owned by the city. 
(b)	This section shall not apply to any licensed police officer.
(Ord. No. 1996-0001, arts. I, II, 1-25-1996) 
Secs. 54-33—54-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - MINORS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 54-61—54-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CURFEW 
 
Sec. 54-81. - Scope. 
This division establishes curfew hours for minors within the corporate city limits of the city and shall also apply to its extraterritorial jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1996-0011, § 1, 5-9-1996) 
Sec. 54-82. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Chief of police means the chief of police of the city or a designated representative. 
Curfew hours means: 
(1)	10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. any day except Friday or Saturday; and
(2)	12:00 midnight to 6:00 a.m. Friday and Saturday.
Direct route means the shortest path of travel through a public place to reach a final destination without any detour or stop along the way. 
Emergency means but is not limited to a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Establishment means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment. 
Holding location means a place designated by the chief of police to which a minor taken into custody for a violation of this division will be delivered to await pickup by a parent or juvenile authorities. 
Minor means any person under 17 years of age. 
Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term "operator" includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation. 
Parent means a person who is: 
(1)	A natural or adoptive parent of another person;
(2)	A court-appointed guardian of another person; or
(3)	At least 21 years of age and authorized by a parent or court-appointed guardian to have the care and custody of another person. 
Public place means any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, playground, park, plaza, building or other place used by or open to the public. 
Remain means to: 
(1)	Linger or stay unnecessarily; or
(2)	Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 1996-0011, § 2(2.01(A)), 5-9-1996)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2  
Sec. 54-83. - Offenses. 
(a)	A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(b)	A parent of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits or by insufficient control allows the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(c)	The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. 
(Ord. No. 1996-0011, § 2(2.01(B)), 5-9-1996) 
Sec. 54-84. - Defenses. 
It is a defense to prosecution under section 54-83 that the minor was: 
(1)	Accompanied by the minor's parent;
(2)	On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent and was using a direct route;
(3)	In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
(4)	Engaged in an employment activity, including but not limited to newspaper delivery, and was using a direct route; 
(5)	Involved in an emergency;
(6)	On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police officer about the minor's presence; 
(7)	Attending an official school or religious activity or returning home by a direct route from an official school or religious activity; 
(8)	Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly; or 
(9)	Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with V.T.C.A., Family Code § 31.001 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 1996-0011, § 2(2.01(C)), 5-9-1996) 
Sec. 54-85. - Enforcement. 
(a)	A police officer, upon finding a minor in violation of section 54-83, shall ascertain the name and address of the minor and shall inquire into the reasons for the minor's being in a public place. If the police officer reasonably believes that the minor has violated this division and that no defenses apply, a citation may be issued to the minor; and the police officer may order the minor to go promptly home by a direct route or may take the minor into custody and deliver the minor to a holding location. 
(b)	When a minor is taken into custody under this section, the police department shall immediately notify a parent to pick up the minor at the holding location. After a parent arrives at a holding location and provides the information required by the chief of police to file an incident report, the minor shall be released into the custody of the parent. If a parent cannot be located or fails to take charge of the minor, the police officer shall contact a police department juvenile officer. 
(c)	If a minor is not taken into custody for a violation of section 54-83, the police department shall notify a parent of the minor that the minor has violated section 54-83 and may issue a citation to the minor's parent if reasonable grounds exist to believe that the parent has violated section 54-83 
(d)	A police officer shall, after finding a minor in violation of section 54-83, file a written report on the incident. 
(Ord. No. 1996-0011, § 2(2.01(D)), 5-9-1996) 
Sec. 54-86. - Penalties. 
(a)	A minor may be prosecuted in municipal court for a violation of section 54-83(a). An individual adjudged guilty of a violation of section 54-83(a) shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(b)	A parent of a minor who violates section 54-83(b) may be prosecuted in municipal court. An individual adjudged guilty of violation of section 54-83(b) shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(c)	The owner, operator or employee of an establishment who violates section 54-83(c) may be prosecuted in municipal court. An individual adjudged guilty of violation of section 54-83(c) shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00. 
(d)	Any minor who violates section 54-83(a) three or more times within a 24-month period is subject to appropriate action by a juvenile court in accordance with V.T.C.A., Family Code chs. 51 and 52. 
(Ord. No. 1996-0011, § 2(2.01(E)), 5-9-1996)  
Chapter 58 - MUNICIPAL COURT 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal court, §§ 5.02—5.02.3.
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; civil emergencies, ch. 26 
State Law reference— Municipal court, V.T.C.A., Government Code § 29.001 et seq.; municipal court, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 45.01 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 58-1. - Seal. 
The court shall have a seal, having engraved thereon a star of five points in the center, and the words "MUNICIPAL COURT IN GILMER, TEXAS," the impress of which shall be attached to all processes, except subpoenas, issued out of the court, and shall be used to authenticate the official acts of the clerk and the judge. 
(Ord. No. 1979-0014, § 3, 12-13-1979) 
Secs. 58-2—58-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FUNDS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 58-31—58-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING SECURITY FUND 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Building security fund, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 102.017. 
Sec. 58-51. - Created. 
There is created a city municipal court building security fund. 
(Ord. No. 1998-0014, § 3, 2-10-1998) 
Sec. 58-52. - Security fee. 
There shall be and is hereby assessed a security fee on file in the city secretary's office as a cost of court to be assessed for the purposes of funding the city municipal court building security fund created in this division. Each defendant charged and convicted of a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court (unless exempted in this division) is directed to and shall pay the security fee as a cost of court. For purposes of this section, a person is considered convicted, whether upon a finding of guilt in open court, or by plea of guilt or nolo contendere (by mail or otherwise), or by payment of fine for a moving traffic violation or other violation punishable by a fine only (thereby constituting a finding of guilt in open court and a plea of nolo contendere), if: 
(1)	A sentence is imposed on the person;
(2)	The person receives community supervision, including deferred adjudication; or
(3)	The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
(Ord. No. 1998-0014, § 6, 2-10-1998) 
Sec. 58-53. - Collection; expenditures. 
The clerk of the municipal court shall collect the costs authorized in this division and forward them for deposit to the city treasury, to the credit of the municipal court building security fund. Thereafter, expenditures shall be made from that fund for the purposes authorized in this division in accordance with the directives of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1998-0014, § 7, 2-10-1998) 
Sec. 58-54. - Use. 
The moneys deposited in the municipal court building security fund shall be used exclusively to finance the following items when used for the purpose of providing security services for buildings housing the municipal court, as appropriate: 
(1)	The purchase or repair of X-ray machines and conveying systems;
(2)	Hand-held metal detectors;
(3)	Walk-through metal detectors;
(4)	Identification cards and systems;
(5)	Electronic locking and surveillance equipment;
(6)	Bailiffs or other contract security personnel during times when they are providing appropriate security services; 
(7)	Signage;
(8)	Confiscated weapon inventory and tracking systems;
(9)	Locks, chains or other security hardware; or
(10)	Continuing education on security issues for court personnel and security personnel.
(Ord. No. 1998-0014, § 4, 2-10-1998) 
Sec. 58-55. - Administration. 
The municipal court building security fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1998-0014, § 5, 2-10-1998)
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2  
Secs. 58-56—58-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - TECHNOLOGY FUND 
 
Sec. 58-81. - Created. 
There is created a municipal court technology fund. 
(Ord. No. 2000-007, 9-14-2000) 
Sec. 58-82. - Technology fee. 
(a)	A defendant convicted of a misdemeanor offense in municipal court shall pay a $4.00 technology fee as a cost of court. 
(b)	For purpose of this section, a person is considered convicted if:
(1)	A sentence is imposed on the person;
(2)	The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication; or
(3)	The court defers final disposition of the defendant's case.
(Ord. No. 2000-007, 9-14-2000) 
Sec. 58-83. - Collection; expenditures. 
(a)	The municipal court clerk shall collect the costs and pay the funds to the city financial director for the deposit in the municipal court technology fund. 
(b)	The municipal court technology fund may be used only to finance the purchase of technological enhancements for the municipal court, including: 
(1)	Computer systems;
(2)	Computer networks;
(3)	Computer hardware;
(4)	Computer software;
(5)	Imaging system;
(6)	Electronic Kiosks;
(7)	Electronic ticket writers; and
(8)	Docket management systems.
(Ord. No. 2000-007, 9-14-2000) 
Sec. 58-84. - Administration. 
The municipal court technology fund shall be administered by the city manager under the direction of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2000-007, 9-14-2000) 
Chapter 62 - PARKS AND RECREATION 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 34; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74 
State Law reference— Parks, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code § 1.001 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 62-1. - Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages in public parks prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or consume any alcoholic beverages in any public park within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 1984-0005, § I(3.3), 4-12-1984)
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, § 18-31 et seq.  
Secs. 62-2—62-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 62-31—62-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PARK ADVISORY BOARD 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Board, committees, commissions, § 2-31 et seq. 
Sec. 62-51. - Created, established; officers. 
(a)	There is created and established within the city a park advisory board that shall be composed of seven members to be appointed by the city council for three-year overlapping terms. Appointments shall be made at the first meeting in January of each year. In making the initial appointments, the council shall designate which terms shall expire in January 1999 and January 2001. 
(b)	The board shall select from among its members the chair, vice-chair and secretary and copies of the minutes of all meetings shall be delivered to the city manager. The chair will be responsible for calling all meetings and notifying the city of the time and date in case of conflicting interests. 
(Ord. No. 1998-0002, 3-26-1998) 
Sec. 62-52. - Duties and recommendations. 
The park advisory board shall set up guidelines for the use, equipment, acquisition or lease of any part of park property and expenditure of funds. These guidelines shall be set out in writing and copies made available to the city manager and the city council, who shall review the guidelines and have the authority to make any changes or additions in the guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 1998-0002, 3-26-1998) 
Sec. 62-53. - Authority. 
All authority vested by this Code of Ordinances to parks and public recreation areas is vested in the park advisory board.  
Secs. 62-54—62-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PARKS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 62-81—62-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ABNEY PARK 
 
Sec. 62-101. - Hours open to the public. 
The Abney Street Park shall open to the public at 6:00 a.m., seven days per week, and shall be closed to the public at 12:00 midnight on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday nights. On Friday and Saturday nights, the Abney Street Park shall close to the public at 1:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 1995-0015, 6-22-1995) 
Secs. 62-102—62-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - YAMBOREE PARK 
 
Sec. 62-121. - Hours open to public. 
The Yamboree Park shall open to the public at 6:00 a.m. seven days per week, and shall be closed to the public at 12:00 midnight on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday nights. On Friday and Saturday nights, the Yamboree Street Park shall close to the public at 1:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 1995-0008, § 1(11.41), 5-11-1995) 
Secs. 62-122—62-130. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - LAKE GILMER 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 2001-011, adopted September 27, 2001, enacted provisions intended for use as article IV, §§ 63.1—63.17, 63.26—63.37, 63.46, 63.51, 63.53, 63.54, 63.61, 63.66, and 63.67. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as §§ 62-131—62-146, 62-161, 62-171—62-181, 62-191, 62-201—62-203, 62-211, 62-221, and 62-231  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 62-131. - Area of authority. 
This article applies to all waters impounded by dams constituting Lake Gilmer and its tributaries and the adjacent lands owned or controlled by the city, herein referred to as the lake. Certain area adjacent to the lake have been set aside for development by the city as public parks and picnic areas. 
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001) 
Sec. 62-132. - Authority of peace officers on reservoir property. 
Any peace officer certified as marine safety enforcement officer shall have authority to arrest any person on the lake for any violation of this article, and/or to exclude any person found violating this article from the lake. Any peace officer shall have authority to arrest any person on flood pool or mitigation property. 
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001) 
Sec. 62-133. - Responsibility powers and duties of city. 
The city shall have full charge and control of the waters of the reservoirs and grounds of the lake. The Gilmer Lake Rangers shall keep the peace and patrol the lake in order to enforce this article and all other laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of the city/state relating to the waters of the lake and to make arrests for any violation of this article or other city ordinances and state laws. 
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001) 
Sec. 62-134. - Outlet works and spillways. 
No watercraft, swimming, or fishing is allowed within 100 feet of the mouth of the spillway. 
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001) 
Sec. 62-135. - Dam. 
It is unlawful to operate any motorized vehicle upon the dam on the lake. Foot traffic and fishing are not permitted on the dam. It is unlawful for any person to throw fish line in the rock rip-rapped area. 
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001) 
Sec. 62-136. - Raw water intake. 
It is unlawful for any person except authorized repair or maintenance personnel to approach within a 100-foot radius of the water intake for any reason. 
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001) 
Sec. 62-137. - Camping. 
(a)	Camping on city-owned property is permitted in designated park areas only.
(b)	Camp equipment shall not be abandoned or left unattended for a period of more than 24 hours. 
(c)	No person will be allowed to camp on city-owned property for any one period of one week or longer. 
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-011, adopted September 27, 2001, enacted provisions intended for use as subsections 1.—3. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as subsections (a)—(c).  
Sec. 62-138. - Diving from structures. 
It is unlawful for any person to dive from or off of any structure or part of any public bridge or an appurtenance thereto. This prohibition as to diving also includes using rope, cable, or other apparatus attached to a bridge or other structure or object, including a tree, so as to permit an individual to swing out over the waters of the lake. 
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001) 
Sec. 62-139. - Parking of motor vehicles. 
It is unlawful for any person to leave unattended any motor vehicle with a boat trailer in tow in any designated safety or turn around zone except as necessary while loading or unloading a boat. 
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001) 
Sec. 62-140. - Damaging signs, markers and buoys. 
It is unlawful for any person to deface, destroy or otherwise damage any sign marker or buoys, placed by the city on the lake. 
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001) 
Sec. 62-141. - Livestock and fowl prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any livestock or fowl on city property at the lake. No livestock is allowed in or upon public parks, boat ramps, beaches, designated picnic areas, the dam, or spillway. 
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001) 
Sec. 62-142. - Cutting trees or brush, disturbing sodding. 
(a)	Trees/brush. It is unlawful for any person to cut any trees or brush on any city-owned property at the lake without the approval of the lake manager. 
(b)	Sodding. Sodding may not be disturbed unnecessarily. Soil may not be removed nor the natural contour disturbed in any way on city owned property. 
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-011, adopted September 27, 2001, enacted provisions intended for use as subsections 1. and 2. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as subsections (a) and (b).  
Sec. 62-143. - Dumping of garbage, brush, and trash. 
It is unlawful for any person to dump trash, brush, or garbage of any kind except in places designated by the city. Trash receptacles located in parks, on beaches, and at boat ramps are for facility users only, and no household garbage may be deposited in these containers. 
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001) 
Sec. 62-144. - USACE Permit #199100466. 
These rules and regulations of the city are specifically enacted to comply with terms and conditions of United Corp of Engineers Permit #199100466. 
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001) 
Sec. 62-145. - Flotation devices. 
It is unlawful for any person to place barrels, or other such containers upon, or in the waters of the lake. The city may employ such devices for markers or other similar uses. 
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001) 
Sec. 62-146. - Possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages on Lake Gilmer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess or consume any alcoholic beverage on Lake Gilmer. 
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001) 
Secs. 62-147—62-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 62-161. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
Boat means any watercraft, other than a seaplane on water, used or capable of being used for transportation on water. 
Gilmer Lake rangers means the law enforcement agency commissioned by TCLEOSE, to preserve order within the lake and mitigation and other properties, as noted. 
Lake Gilmer or lake means the lake located in the city, upshur County Texas, created by the construction of the dam on Kelsey Creek by the city and all mitigation and other properties, as noted. 
Motorboat means any watercraft propelled by machinery, whether or not the machinery is the principal source of propulsion. 
Operate means to navigate or otherwise use a boat. 
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001) 
Secs. 62-162—62-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - BOATS AND BOATING REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 62-171. - Boating regulations. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person operating a boat with toilet accommodations to discharge waste materials from the boat's toilet into the waters of Lake Gilmer. 
(b)	No person may operate any boat at a rate of speed greater than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the conditions and hazards, actual and potential, then existing, including weather and density of traffic, or greater than will permit him, in the exercise of reasonable care, to bring the boat to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead, In the boat docking area or inside the "no-wake" area, the operator of a boat shall control the speed of said boat as may be necessary to prevent the leaving of a wake behind said boat. 
(c)	No person may operate a boat propelled in whole or in part by a motor fueled by gas, gasoline, diesel, or naphtha, unless the same is equipped with a muffler, underwater exhaust, or other device capable of adequately muffling the sound of the motor's exhaust. "Adequately muffling" shall mean that the motor's exhaust is at all times so muffled or suppressed as not to create excessive or unusual noise. 
(d)	No motorboat larger than a motorboat classified as "class 2" by V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code § 31.026 may be operated on Lake Gilmer (less than 26 feet). 
(e)	Water skiing and personal watercraft will only be allowed on the area east of the Highway 852 bridge. 
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-011, adopted September 27, 2001, enacted provisions intended for use as subsections 1.—5. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as subsections (a)—(e).  
Sec. 62-172. - Safe operation of boats; tow boat clearance of vessels. 
Boats towing disabled craft have the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001) 
Sec. 62-173. - Anchoring of barges or boats at pier, buoys, etc. 
Except for emergencies it is unlawful for any person to cause or permit any boat, barge or other watercraft to anchor or tie up at any public pier for more than one hour. It is unlawful for any boat, barge or other watercraft to anchor or tie up at any posted sign, buoy, or other marker on the waters of the lake or its tributaries except in case of emergency. 
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001) 
Sec. 62-174. - Unattended boats. 
It is unlawful for any person to leave a boat, barge, or other watercraft unattended on the waters of the lake, except in cases of emergency. 
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001) 
Sec. 62-175. - Obstruction of ramps. 
It is unlawful for any person to block any public boat loading ramp leading to the waters of the lake. 
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001) 
Sec. 62-176. - Removal of unsafe craft from lake. 
The city may require the removal of any boat or other craft from the lake if it is deemed a navigational hazard or is in an unsafe operating condition. In the event of noncompliance by the owner to such order, the craft will be removed from the lake by the city and the owner will be assessed all costs. 
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001) 
Sec. 62-177. - Overloading. 
No person owning or operating a boat, barge, or other watercraft on the lake may permit it to be occupied by more persons than the rated capacity of such boat or other craft, or to be loaded with passengers or cargo beyond its safe capacity, taking into consideration weather and other operating conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001) 
Sec. 62-178. - Passengers to be seated in motorboats. 
(a)	No person operating a motorboat on the lake may allow any person to ride or sit on the gunwales (side rails) thereof or on the decking over the bow of the craft while underway, nor allow any person to stand in such craft while underway. This provision does not apply to the operator of barges or similar craft on which no operator seat is provided. 
(b)	Passengers or other persons aboard a motorboat may stand in the decking over the bow of the boat to moor the boat or to cast of or for nay other necessary purpose. 
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-011, adopted September 27, 2001, enacted provisions intended for use as subsections 1. and 2. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as subsections (a) and (b).  
Sec. 62-179. - Toilets. 
It is unlawful for any person to place or maintain a toilet on any boat or barge except unattached, portable, chemical toilets. Such toilet must be approved and certified by a lake ranger before being taken aboard the craft. All boats, barges, and other watercraft operated on the lake having enclosures large enough to accommodate a toilet are subject to inspections by the lake ranger. 
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001) 
Sec. 62-180. - Abandoned boats, barges and watercrafts. 
(a)	Any boat, barge, or watercraft which is found upon the waters of the lake or upon any public property immediately adjacent thereto and which is inoperable and more than five years old and left unattended for more than 48 hours, is deemed to be an abandoned watercraft. For purposed of this section, "watercraft" shall include any motorboat, outboard motor, or vessel subject to registration under state law. 
(b)	The lake manager may authorize taking into custody any abandoned watercraft found upon the waters of, or on any public property immediately adjacent to the lake. Any watercraft deemed a navigational hazard may be removed from the lake. 
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-011, adopted September 27, 2001, enacted provisions intended for use as subsections 1. and 2. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as subsections (a) and (b).  
Sec. 62-181. - Texas Parks and Wildlife Code Chapter 31 adopted. 
V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code ch. 31 concerning boating safety is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set out herein. 
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001) 
Secs. 62-182—62-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - SWIMMING REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 62-191. - Swimming regulations. 
(a)	No person may swim in any public launch or docking area of Lake Gilmer. Swimming will not be allowed in the area under the bridge or in area marked by buoys. 
(b)	Swimming within Lake Gilmer, even in areas marked as being available for public swimming, shall be at the risk of the swimmer. 
(c)	It is unlawful for glass containers to be used at the designated swim area.
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-011, adopted September 27, 2001, enacted provisions intended for use as subsections 1.—3. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as subsections (a)—(c).  
Secs. 62-192—62-200. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - FISHING 
 
Sec. 62-201. - Fishing regulations. 
(a)	No person shall fish within 100 feet of the city intake tower.
(b)	There shall be no closed season or period of time when it shall be unlawful to take, catch or retain freshwater fish by the use of ordinary hook and line or artificial lure. 
(c)	V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code ch. 66, concerning fishing, as well as the rules and regulations of the parks and wildlife department are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set out herein. 
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-011, adopted September 27, 2001, enacted provisions intended for use as subsections 1.—3. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as subsections (a)—(c).  
Sec. 62-202. - Prohibited in swimming area. 
It is unlawful for any person to fish, or set out trotlines, gang hooks or fish nets in any area or portion thereof of the waters of the lake that has been restricted for swimming. 
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001) 
Sec. 62-203. - Use of metal line, cable prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to place or extend any metal line or cable in, over, on, or across the waters of the lake. This provision shall not apply to any fishing line or fishing device. 
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001) 
Secs. 62-204—62-210. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - WEAPONS, HUNTING PROHIBITED 
 
Sec. 62-211. - Discharging of weapons, hunting prohibited. 
(a)	It is unlawful for a person to shoot, discharge, or hunt with a bow, crossbow, slingshot, gun, firearm, or any other type of weapon in, on, over, across, or upon the mitigation land of Lake Gilmer. 
(b)	No hunting is allowed on the area of the lake that is east of the Highway 852 bridge. Hunting for waterfowl from a boat, barge, or watercraft will be allowed on the area of the lake west of the Highway 852 bridge. 
(c)	It is unlawful for a person to discharge a firearm on city property. However, it shall be lawful for a person to possess and discharge a firearm on the area of the lake west of the Highway 852 bridge as long as the possession and discharge are as part of a lawful activity. It shall also be lawful to possess a firearm from the area of the city boat dock to the area of the Highway 852 bridge if the purpose of such possession of said firearm is to lawfully hunt on the area of Lake Gilmer west of Highway 852 bridge. 
(d)	Non-applicability. V.T.C.A, Penal Code § 46.15(a)(1) peace officer.
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-011, adopted September 27, 2001, enacted provisions intended for use as subsections 1.—4. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as subsections (a)—(d).  
Secs. 62-212—62-220. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - WATER SAFETY 
 
Sec. 62-221. - Compliance with state statutes. 
These rules and regulations of the city are specifically enacted to comply with the terms and conditions of V.T.C.A., Water Safety Act ch. 31, as adopted by 77th Regular Legislative Session. 
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001) 
Secs. 62-222—62-230. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - SCHEDULE OF FINES AND FEES 
 
Sec. 62-231. - Fines and fees. 
(a)	Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor not to exceed $500.00 in municipal court unless otherwise specified by state law. 
(b)	Fees for reclaiming a derelict boat or barge.
(1)	Fees for reclaiming derelict boat: $50.00.
(2)	Fees for reclaiming derelict barge: $100.00.
(Ord. No. 2001-011, 9-27-2001)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2001-011, adopted September 27, 2001, enacted provisions intended for use as subsections 1. and 2. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as subsections (a) and (b).  
Chapter 66 - SALES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; businesses, ch. 18  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 66-1—66-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - GARAGE SALES 
 
Sec. 66-31. - Limited. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Garage sale and yard sale mean the temporary retail use of residentially zoned property consisting of the sale of four or more items acquired by the seller for his ultimate use or consumption. 
(b)	Number limited. No person or family shall conduct garage or yard sales for more than four consecutive calendar days. No person or family shall conduct more than three garage or yard sales in any 12-month period. 
(Ord. No. 1995-0011, § 1, 6-8-1995) 
Chapter 70 - SIGNS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; zoning, app. A. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 70-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Billboard means any single detached sign exceeding 250 square feet in gross area and used as an outdoor display for the purpose of making known, advertising or displaying anything. 
(Ord. No. 1999-002, § 1, 2-25-1999)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2  
Sec. 70-2. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(Ord. No. 1999-002, § 3(XI), 2-25-1999) 
Secs. 70-3—70-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 70-31—70-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 
 
Sec. 70-51. - Required; installation; charge. 
(a)	Sign permits shall be required for all detached signs exceeding 40 square feet in area. 
(b)	All detached signs exceeding 50 square feet in area must be installed or erected by a licensed and bonded sign contractor after obtaining a sign permit from the city. 
(c)	The charge for sign permits shall be on file in the city secretary's office.
(Ord. No. 1999-002, § 3(X), 2-25-1999) 
Secs. 70-52—70-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 70-81. - General sign requirements. 
This section shall apply to any type of sign within any district: 
(1)	Signs that contain, include or are illuminated by any flashing intermittent or moving lights or intermittent message of any nature are prohibited on interstate, state, federal and primary highways, except those giving only public service information such as time, date, temperature, weather or similar information. 
(2)	No sign shall be so illuminated that it interferes with the effectiveness of, or obscures, an official traffic sign, device or signal. 
(3)	Signs shall be located at least ten feet from any street, except signs for shopping centers and shopping malls and billboards shall be at least 25 feet from any street. 
(4)	Attached signs shall not exceed the height of the wall of the building.
(5)	Signs shall not be located in or permitted to project into public rights-of-way.
(6)	When any sign is illuminated, the lights shall be directed, shaded or concealed so that they will not interfere with the vision of motor vehicle operators or shine directly on residential property. 
(7)	Detached signs shall comply with the following height restrictions:
a.	The top of detached signs in R-1, R-2, RM-1 and RM-2 shall not exceed a maximum height of ten feet nor exceed a maximum height of 35 feet. 
b.	The top of detached signs in MF-1 and MF-2 districts shall not exceed a maximum of 35 feet. 
c.	The top of detached signs in B-1, B-2, L-1 and G-1 shall not exceed a maximum height of 50 feet. 
d.	In shopping centers or malls containing ten acres or more, detached signs may be erected up to a maximum height of 75 feet, provided that such detached signs erected at a height greater than 50 feet must be set back from all property lines a minimum distance equal to the height of the sign. 
e.	The top of billboards shall not exceed a maximum height of 35 feet.
f.	Signs projecting from a building or extending over public property shall maintain a clear height of 9½ feet above the sidewalk, and all such signs shall extend not more than within 18 inches of the curbline. 
(8)	Roof-mounted signs shall be permitted provided they comply with all applicable requirements of the city's building code, chapter 14 
(9)	No sign shall be attached to any trees, utility poles or trash receptacles.
(10)	Signs may not be located in such a manner as to obscure or otherwise interfere with the driver's view of approaching, merging or intersecting traffic or with the effectiveness of an official traffic sign or signal device. 
(11)	All signs shall be kept in good repair and repainted as needed. If a sign becomes unsightly and the owner refuses to repair or repaint within 60 days of notice by the city, the city will contract to have the sign repaired and/or repainted and bill the owner for the contract cost. 
(12)	All signs shall be maintained in good appearance and safe structural condition. The general area in the vicinity of any sign shall be kept free and clear of weeds, debris, trash and litter. 
(13)	All illuminated signs shall be installed and wired in accordance with the requirements of the current National Electrical Code. 
(14)	No sign shall be erected or installed closer than five feet to any telecommunications or television cable, power line or streetlight standard. 
(15)	Should any sign become insecure, in danger of falling or otherwise unsafe, the building official shall provide the owner or the person or firm maintaining the sign, ten days' written notice to secure the sign in a manner approved by the building official or to remove the sign. If action to secure and/or remove such sign is not taken within ten days of such notice, the building official may remove such sign at the expense of the owner or the person or firm maintaining the sign. 
(Ord. No. 1999-002, § 3(IX), 2-25-1999) 
Secs. 70-82—70-100. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TYPE OF SIGN 
 
Sec. 70-101. - Off-site signs. 
Off-site signs shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)	No more than one sign located off the premises of an establishment shall be permitted on any lot, vacant or occupied. 
(2)	Off-site signs shall not exceed 40 square feet in area.
(Ord. No. 1999-002, § 3(IV), 2-25-1999) 
Sec. 70-102. - Billboards. 
For the purposes of this division, any single detached sign exceeding 250 square feet in gross area and used as an outdoor display for the purpose of making known, advertising or displaying anything shall be determined to be a billboard and shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)	Billboards shall be allowed only in B-1, B-2 and L-1 districts.
(2)	Billboards shall not be above 35 feet from ground level.
(3)	Billboards shall not exceed 672 square feet in gross area. Billboards that exceed 336 square feet in gross area shall not be stacked or side-by-side. 
(4)	Billboards shall not be erected closer than 300 feet apart on the same side of the street. 
(5)	Billboards may not be located closer than 25 feet to any street.
(6)	Billboards may not be located within 500 feet of any public park, public forest or recreational area, public playground, public school or scenic area designated as such by the city or any other governmental agency. 
(7)	Within cutouts or enclosed open spaces, 80 percent of the area shall be included in calculating the surface area of a billboard. 
(Ord. No. 1999-002, § 3(V), 2-25-1999) 
Sec. 70-103. - Temporary and/or portable signs. 
Temporary and/or portable signs within all districts shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)	Real estate signs pertaining to the lease, hire or sale of real estate shall not exceed 40 square feet in area and shall be located on the lot so advertised provided there is only one sign on each street fronting the property. 
(2)	Construction signs pertaining to the construction or remodeling of a building on the premises shall not exceed 60 square feet in area and shall be located on the lot only for the duration of the construction. No more than one sign shall be permitted on each street fronting the property. 
(3)	Development signs pertaining to residential, office, commercial and industrial development shall not exceed 100 square feet in area and shall be located within the area being developed. No more than one sign shall be permitted on each street fronting the property. 
(4)	Temporary and/or portable signs that contain, include or are illuminated by flashing, intermittent or moving lights are prohibited in all nonbusiness districts or state and federal highways. 
(5)	Temporary and/or portable signs that are illuminated by nonintermittent lighting shall be allowed in the following districts: B-1, B-2, L-1 and G-1. Temporary and/or portable signs located in all other districts shall not be illuminated. 
(Ord. No. 1999-002, § 3(VI), 2-25-1999) 
Sec. 70-104. - Political signs. 
For the purposes of this division, any detached sign designed to promote the support of a candidate for elected office or to promote a particular viewpoint on a matter or issue to be voted upon by the public shall be determined to be a political sign and shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)	Political signs shall not exceed 40 square feet in area.
(2)	Political signs shall not be located in or permitted to project into public rights-of-way and shall be located at least ten feet from any street. 
(3)	Political signs shall not be attached to any trees, utility poles or trash receptacles.
(4)	Political signs shall not be placed, located or erected in any public park, public forest or recreational area, public playground and/or on any property owned by the city. 
(5)	Political signs shall be removed within ten days after the primary, runoff or general election to which the signs pertain, or after the termination of candidacy, whichever occurs first. 
(6)	Political signs that contain, include or are illuminated by flashing, intermittent or moving lights are prohibited in all districts. 
(7)	Political signs that are illuminated by nonintermittent lighting shall be allowed only in the following districts: B-1, B-2, L-1 and G-1. Political signs located in all other districts shall not be illuminated. 
(8)	Political signs placed, located or erected in violation of this division shall be subject to immediate removal, confiscation and disposal by city personnel. 
(Ord. No. 1999-002, § 3(VII), 2-25-1999) 
Sec. 70-105. - Garage sale signs. 
Signs for garage sales shall be limited to the following requirements: 
(1)	Only one sign shall be allowed for each garage sale, and that sign shall be located on the same property where the garage sale is located. 
(2)	Garage sale signs shall not be illuminated.
(3)	Signs for garage sales shall not exceed 12 square feet in area.
(4)	Garage sale signs shall be removed within 24 hours after the garage sale has concluded.
(Ord. No. 1999-002, § 3(VIII), 2-25-1999) 
Secs. 70-106—70-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - MAIN STREET HISTORIC AREA 
 
Sec. 70-131. - Scope. 
This division only applies to signs located in the Gilmer Main Street Designated Area. In historic areas the character of a street is established as much by the elements attached to the buildings as by the structures themselves. Section 70-137 illustrates the Proper Signage for Gilmer Main Street Historic Buildings. 
(Ord. No. 1999-002, § 2, 2-25-1999) 
Sec. 70-132. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Awning sign means any sign painted or applied to the face, valance or side panels of an awning. 
Hanging sign means any sign suspended from an awning or canopy. 
Pedestrian sign means any sign oriented to pedestrian or street level visibility (including window signs, nameplates and plaques). 
Projecting sign means any sign attached to and placed perpendicular to a building facade. 
Signboard means any flat sign mounted or applied to a building facade. 
Window sign means any sign painted or applied to window glass. 
(Ord. No. 1999-002, § 2(I), 2-25-1999)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2  
Sec. 70-133. - Number of signs. 
(a)	Each building may have one signboard, awning sign or projecting sign oriented to its primary or entrance facade. 
(b)	A building located at a corner may also have one signboard oriented to its secondary or side street frontage. 
(c)	In addition to a signboard, projecting sign or awning face sign, a building may have one pedestrian sign oriented to each street on which the premises have frontage relating to each occupancy within the building or commodities sold in the building. 
(d)	Buildings with public rear entrances may also have one pedestrian sign oriented to the rear of the building relating to each occupancy within the building. 
(e)	Temporary signs and/or banners shall not be continuously displayed for more than 21 calendar days or for more than 100 calendar days per year. 
(Ord. No. 1999-002, § 2(II), 2-25-1999) 
Sec. 70-134. - Location of signs. 
(a)	No sign shall be allowed above the second story windows of a building.
(b)	Awning signs shall be allowed when such signs are painted or applied flat against the awning surface. 
(c)	Hanging signs shall be allowed when such signs have a minimum clearance of seven feet from the sidewalk and do not extend beyond the awning or canopy projection. 
(d)	Projecting signs shall have a minimum clearance from the sidewalk of 9½ feet.
(Ord. No. 1999-002, § 2(III), 2-25-1999) 
Sec. 70-135. - Size of signs. 
(a)	Signboard maximum size shall be based on the following:
(1)	For every one linear foot of building primary or entrance footage, two square feet of sign area shall be allowed. 
(2)	Signboards on secondary or side street frontage shall not extend the size of signboards on the primary or entrance frontage. 
(b)	Window signs shall cover no more than 30 percent of the total glass areas of the window on which they are placed. The sign coverage shall be determined by an imaginary square or rectangle that encompasses the window sign graphics. 
(c)	Each face of a hanging sign shall be no more than eight square feet in size.
(d)	Awning sign size shall not exceed the surface of the awning.
(e)	Projecting signs shall be no more than 15 square feet in size, with a maximum sign height of three feet and shall not project more than 60 inches or half of the sidewalk width, whichever is less. 
(Ord. No. 1999-002, § 2(IV), 2-25-1999) 
Sec. 70-136. - Sign approval and permits. 
(a)	Permits shall be required for all signboard, awning or projecting signs to be installed in the designated Main Street Area. 
(b)	The Main Street director or his designated representative will review signs for compliance with this division. 
(Ord. No. 1999-002, § 2(V), 2-25-1999) 
Sec. 70-137. - Proper signage for Gilmer Main Street historic buildings. 
(a)	The following subsections of this section is an excerpt from Neighborhood Commercial District Design Guidelines, published by the Landmark Preservation Council of Illinois, written by Wallace Rappe, AIA, and edited by Emily J. Harris. Many of these suggestions can apply to Gilmer Main Street. 
(b)	Oversized, projecting and crowded signs compete with each other and produce confusion. Guide all signage decisions by remembering that the building itself is the best sign. A sensitively rehabilitated, well-maintained building is the best advertisement for a business's attention to detail and the quality of its products and services. The following ground rules for signage will create positive images for individual businesses, enhance the visual harmony of the shopping district, and create an environment that attracts customers. They may also dramatically cut signage costs. 
(1)	Use flat signs in consistent places. Place signs on the buildings sign frieze, which is the horizontal flat bank above the store windows. Original signs, either on flat signboards or made of individual letters attached to the sign frieze, were designed as an integral part of the building. Limit signs on other areas of the building. 
(2)	Remove most projecting signs. Signs that hang over the sidewalk can be counterproductive to business because they often obscure individual buildings and interrupt the visual harmony of the street. If projecting signs are to be used, it is essential that they be small in scale and that they be coordinated with surrounding buildings and signs. 
(3)	Limit the information on signs. The shortest message on a sign has the most impact on pedestrians. The name of the business and the street number are essential. Symbols or cutouts of familiar objects, such as a pharmacist's mortar and pestle, can communicate a great deal of information without lettering at all. 
(4)	Limit the size of the sign. Do not allow signs to conceal any of the building's ornamental or architectural features. Adjust the size of the message to the distance that the shopper is from the store. 
(5)	Use materials and colors that are compatible with the building and the streetscape. The simple signs that were originally used on these buildings serve as the best example for new signs. Individual letters made of wood, metal or some types of plastic that can be mounted directly on the frieze are always appropriate. The number of colors used should be limited. Contrasting the lettering with its background is more important for legibility than using bright colors. 
(6)	Use lighting judiciously. While flashing signs or moving signs should be avoided, lighted signs do identify businesses at night and can encourage evening window-shopping. 
(7)	Preserve original and historic signs. Many older buildings display the names of their original owners on the upper part of the building or above doorways at the street level. These should be preserved as part of the neighborhood's history and character. 
(Ord. No. 1999-002, app. A, 2-25-1999) 
Secs. 70-138—70-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - OTHER SPECIFIC AREAS 
 
Sec. 70-161. - Scope. 
The regulations set forth in this division qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the district regulations appearing elsewhere in this article. For the purposes of this division, the term "sign" shall refer to both single-faced and double-faced signs, calculated on the basis of only one face of the sign. 
(Ord. No. 1999-002, § 3, 2-25-1999) 
Sec. 70-162. - Signs within R-1, R-2, MF-1, MF-2, RM-1 and RM-2 districts. 
Signs in the R-1, R-2, MF-1, MF-2, RM-1 and RM-2 districts shall be limited to the following: 
(1)	One-family and two-family dwelling units are limited to a nameplate of four square feet. 
(2)	One attached owner-identification sign shall be permitted for each thoroughfare when more than one thoroughfare abuts the property. 
(3)	One detached owner-identification sign shall be permitted for each thoroughfare when more than one thoroughfare abuts the property. 
(4)	Detached signs shall not exceed 40 square feet in area.
(5)	Signs for bed and breakfast or similar home occupations shall not exceed four square feet and shall comply to all city zoning regulations as described by section 16-7, home occupations of appendix A, zoning, with the exception of IV-C. 
(Ord. No. 1999-002, § 3(I), 2-25-1999)
Cross reference— Zoning, app. A.  
Sec. 70-163. - Signs within B-1, B-2, L-1 and G-1 districts. 
Signs in the B-1, B-2, L-1 and G-1 districts shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)	One attached sign pertaining to the occupancy of the premises or commodities sold on the premises shall be permitted for each thoroughfare when more than one abuts the property. 
(2)	One detached sign pertaining to the occupancy of the premises or commodities sold on the premises shall be permitted for each thoroughfare when more than one abuts the property. 
(3)	In instances where the abutting thoroughfare is a designated state or federal highway, detached signs shall not exceed 250 square feet in area on any one such street or thoroughfare. 
(4)	In instances where the abutting thoroughfare is not a designated state or federal highway, detached signs shall not exceed 200 square feet in area on any one such street or thoroughfare. 
(5)	Signs with three or more surfaces or signs with circular or spherical surfaces shall be allowed only in L-1 and G-1 districts. The total surface area of such signs shall not exceed 300 square feet in area. 
(Ord. No. 1999-002, § 3(II), 2-25-1999)
Cross reference— Zoning, app. A.  
Sec. 70-164. - Shopping center and shopping mall signs. 
Signs for shopping centers and shopping malls shall be limited to: 
(1)	One attached sign per occupant of a shopping center or mall shall be permitted for each thoroughfare when more than one thoroughfare abuts the property. 
(2)	Only one detached sign, identifying the premises and/or its occupants, shall be permitted for each shopping center and/or mall. This detached sign may be a single sign or may be a composite of several signs erected on and supported by the same structure. 
(3)	Single detached signs for shopping centers and/or malls shall not exceed 250 square feet in area. 
(4)	The aggregate gross area of composite detached signs for shopping centers and/or malls shall not exceed 300 square feet, with no single sign exceeding 200 square feet in area. 
(5)	Detached signs for shopping centers and/or malls shall not be located closer than 25 feet to any street or thoroughfare. 
(6)	In shopping centers or malls containing ten acres or more, detached signs may be erected up to a maximum height of 75 feet; provided that such detached signs erected at a height greater than 50 feet must be set back from all property lines a minimum distance equal to the height of the sign. 
(Ord. No. 1999-002, § 3(III), 2-25-1999)
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18  
Chapter 74 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Streets and public property, §§ 2.03, 2.04 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing, vacating, etc., any street or public way saved from repeal, § 1-10(a)(5); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes saved from repeal, § 1-10(a)(7); any ordinance prescribing through streets, parking and traffic regulations, speed limits, one-way traffic, limitations on load of vehicles or loading zones saved from repeal, § 1-10(a)(8); any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street saved from repeal, § 1-10(a)(10); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-10(a)(11); any ordinance authorizing street maintenance agreements saved from repeal, § 1-10(a)(17); aviation, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; peddlers and solicitors, § 18-313; cemeteries, ch. 22; environment, ch. 34; distributing handbills on private property, § 34-36; flood prevention and protection, ch. 42; parks and recreation, ch. 62; signs, ch. 70; subdivisions, ch. 78; required improvements for street paving in subdivisions, § 78-111 et seq.; traffic and vehicles, ch. 86; specific street regulations, § 86-71 et seq.; utilities, ch. 90; vehicles for hire, ch. 94; zoning, app. A. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 74-1. - Consumption of alcohol prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage in any public place, or for any person to possess any alcoholic beverage in any public place for the purpose of consuming such alcoholic beverage in such public place, within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 1984-0005, § I(3.1), 4-12-1984)
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, § 18-31 et seq.  
Secs. 74-2—74-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STREETS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 74-31—74-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - OBSTRUCTIONS  
Subdivision I. - In General 
 
Secs. 74-51—74-60. - Reserved.  
Subdivision II. - Clear Sight Visibility Triangle 
 
Sec. 74-61. - Areas regulated. 
(a)	The areas in the city which are subject to this subdivision are as follows:
(1)	Those street intersections controlled by a stop sign and railroad street intersections controlled by railroad traffic control devices. 
(2)	A triangular area established beginning with the point in the center of the street or railroad being intersected, that area being in the center of the intersection; then along a straight line from the center point along the intersected street or railroad for the distance set out in subsection (b) of this section; then along a straight line back to the stop sign, traffic control device, or railroad control device; then to the point of beginning at the center point, forming a triangle. 
(b)	The distances in feet mentioned in subsection (a) along the intersected street or railroad are as follows: 
	30mph	35mph	40mph	45mph	50mph	55mph
2-lane	300	350	400	450	500	550
4-lane	350	400	450	500	600	650
 
(Ord. No. 1979-0002, §§ I, II, 1-15-1979) 
Sec. 74-62. - Height limitations; exceptions. 
(a)	No property owner shall allow any object, vegetation, fence, structure, or any element, except grass or other landscaping or vegetation which can never grow to a height exceeding 2½ feet above the top of the curb elevation or three feet above the edge of the roadway where no curb exists, within the sight distance triangle as described in section 74-61 at any public and private street or railway intersections other than a street intersection controlled by a signal light within the city. 
(b)	The following shall be exempted from the restriction of subsection (a) of this section:
(1)	Single trunk trees when trimmed completely to a height of seven feet.
(2)	Signs when supported by a single post not exceeding one foot in diameter and such sign is at least ten feet above the top of the curb elevation, sidewalk elevation, or 10½ feet above the edge of the pavement where no curb or sidewalk exists. 
(3)	Utility poles installed under provisions of existing franchises within the city.
(Ord. No. 1979-0002, § III, 1-15-1979) 
Sec. 74-63. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this subdivision shall not apply to any business building, family dwelling or apartment house existing in the city on January 15, 1979, and not in violation of any law of the state or ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1979-0002, § IV, 1-15-1979) 
Sec. 74-64. - Effect on city administration. 
The provisions of this subdivision shall have no bearing or effect upon the right of the city to administer and control the remaining portions of its public street rights-of-way not involved in the triangular corner areas provided for in this subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 1979-0002, § V, 1-15-1979) 
Secs. 74-65—74-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 74-101. - Placement of obstructions in gutter. 
No person shall place or have placed in the gutter of any street in the city any type of fixed object or matter, including driveway ramps. Placement of such obstruction in the gutter of any street in the city by any person will subject that person to the provisions of section 1-14, and that person will also be responsible for removal of the obstruction at his expense. 
(Ord. No. 1981-0015, § 9.67, 7-9-1981) 
Secs. 74-102—74-120. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 74-121. - Required. 
No person shall make any excavation of any kind under or across any alley, street, avenue, curb and gutter or sidewalk, without a special permit from the city after paying a fee on file in the city secretary's office; and while such excavation is open, he shall, at his own expense, place proper guide lamps and signal lights in and around the excavation, sufficient to warn the public of such excavation so that all persons using reasonable care shall be protected from accident, and will hold the city harmless against all claims growing out of the work. All cuts of curbs and sidewalks are subject to city review, with the city having the authority to location of all curb and sidewalk cuts. 
(Ord. No. 1981-0015, § 9.65, 7-9-1981) 
Sec. 74-122. - Restoring area to former condition. 
When any part of any street, avenue, curb and gutter, sidewalk or alley or other public place in the city shall be torn, dug up or taken up, for any purpose, the person doing such work shall, immediately upon the completion of such purpose and as fast as practicable during the accomplishment, return the earth and ram and paddle the earth to firm and solid bearing, and in such manner as will entirely present the settling of such earth, and shall also re-lay the paving, macadamizing or gravel in a skillful and permanent manner, and in every case to the entire satisfaction of the city's agent; and if such work is not done to the satisfaction of the city, the city may have it done at the expense of the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 1981-0015, § 9.66, 7-9-1981) 
Chapter 78 - SUBDIVISIONS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Platting of property, § 11.01 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision saved from repeal, § 1-10(a)(12); buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 34; flood prevention and protection, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 90; zoning, app. A; mobile home subdivision district, app. A, § 9-1 et seq..
State Law reference— Subdivisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 212.001 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 78-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Plat means a map or chart of the subdivision. It includes plan, plat or replat, and includes both singular and plural. 
Resubdivision means the division of an existing subdivision, together with any change of lot size in the subdivision, or with the relocation of any street lines. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more parts or lots for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development or transfer of ownership, and shall include resubdivision. 
(Ord. No. 1994-0006, § 1-2, 5-24-1994)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2  
Sec. 78-2. - Scope. 
This chapter shall govern every person owning any tract of land within the city limits or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, who may hereafter divide the tract into two or more parts for the purpose of laying out any subdivision of any tract of land or any addition to the city, or for laying out suburban lots or building lots, or any lots, and streets, alleys or parks or other portions intended for public use, or the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent to the tract. 
(Ord. No. 1994-0006, § 1-1, 5-24-1994) 
Sec. 78-3. - Policy. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any owner or agent of any owner of land to lay out, subdivide, plat or replat any land into lots, blocks and streets within the city or within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction without the prior approval of the city planning commission. It shall also be unlawful for any such owner or agent to offer for sale or sell property which has not been laid out, subdivided, platted or replatted with the approval of the city planning commission. 
(b)	The city defines its policy to be that the city will withhold all city improvements of whatsoever nature, including the maintenance of streets and the furnishing of sewer facilities and water service from all additions and subdivisions, the platting of which has not been approved by the city planning commission. 
(c)	No street number and no building permit shall be issued for the erection of any building in the city on any place of property other than an original or resubdivided lot in a duly approved and recorded subdivision without the written approval of the planning commission. 
(d)	The attention of each subdivider is directed to V.T.C.A., Property Code § 12.002, which states in part: 
"The county clerk or a deputy of the clerk with whom a plat or replat of a subdivision of real property is filed for recording shall determine whether the plat or replat is required by law to be approved by a county or municipal authority or both. The clerk or deputy may not record a plat or replat requiring approval unless it is approved as provided by law by the appropriate authority…. If a plat or replat does not indicate whether land covered by the plat or replat is in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the municipality, the county clerk may require the person filing the plat or replat for recording to file with the clerk an affidavit stating that information." 
(Ord. No. 1994-0006, § 1-3, 5-24-1994) 
Sec. 78-4. - General requirements. 
(a)	Streets in general must conform to the following:
(1)	Minimum right-of-way width of 60 feet; however, greater width may be required.
(2)	Shall connect with existing streets in adjoining subdivisions.
(3)	Be named to provide continuity with existing streets.
(4)	Avoid dead ends, except for future planning courts.
(5)	Platted with appropriate regard for all topographical features lending themselves to attractive treatment and layout of utilities. 
(b)	Alleys shall have minimum width of 15 feet.
(c)	Residential lots shall meet the requirements for the area's intended zoning designation of either R-1 or R-2 as defined by the city's zoning ordinance, appendix A to this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1994-0006, § 1-4, 5-24-1994) 
Sec. 78-5. - Survey requirements. 
(a)	Monuments consisting of three-eighths-inch re-rod, 18 inches in length shall be placed at all corners of the block lines, the point of intersection of curves and tangents of the subdivision. 
(b)	One benchmark for each five acres of property or fraction thereof shall be permanently installed in an approved manner, with their location and the elevation shown on the plat. 
(c)	Lot markers shall be metal or concrete placed at each corner of all lots, flush with the average ground elevation, or they may be countersunk, if necessary to avoid being disturbed. 
(Ord. No. 1994-0006, § 1-5, 5-24-1994) 
Sec. 78-6. - Authority. 
(a)	Where extraordinary hardship may result from strict compliance with this chapter, the planning commission or the city council may vary this chapter so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; however, such variation shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(b)	The city council may refuse to approve a plat unless it is evident that proper water and sewer facilities can be supplied within a reasonable length of time. 
(Ord. No. 1994-0006, § 1-9, 5-24-1994) 
Sec. 78-7. - As-built plans. 
The subdivider must provide to the city as-built plans for all paving, drainage, water lines and sewer lines within 30 days after completion of the project. 
(Ord. No. 1994-0006, § 1-10, 5-24-1994) 
Sec. 78-8. - Fees and charges. 
(a)	Fees and charges shall be paid into the general fund of the city when any map or plat is tendered to the city planning commission; and each of the fees and charges provided in this section shall be paid in advance; and no action of the city planning commission shall be valid until the fee shall have been paid. The city manager or his deputies or assistants shall calculate the fees and charges in accordance with the schedule on file in the city secretary's office. 
(b)	For approval of multiple dwelling areas, business, or industrial areas not subdivided into lots, both the preliminary and final plat shall carry a fee on file in the city secretary's office per acre. 
(c)	The fees shall be charged on all plats, regardless of the action by the city planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 1994-0006, § 1-11, 5-24-1994) 
Secs. 78-9—78-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PLATS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 78-41—78-60. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PRELIMINARY PLATS 
 
Sec. 78-61. - Submission. 
Three copies of a preliminary plat shall be submitted to the city manager for presentation to the city planning commission five days prior to the meeting at which approval is asked. The plat shall be drawn to a scale of 200 feet to one inch or larger, and shall show or be accompanied by the following information: 
(1)	Name of subdivision.
(2)	Names of the owner and engineer or surveyor responsible for the survey and design.
(3)	Boundary lines, existing building lines, and width and location of platted streets and alleys within and adjacent to the property. 
(4)	Width and depth and/or area of proposed lots.
(5)	Physical features of the property, including location of watercourses, culverts, bridges, proposed drainage ditches and present structures, streets and alleys, highways, etc., including widths and names. 
(6)	A designation of the proposed uses of land within the subdivision.
(7)	Adequate off-street parking must be provided for lots set aside or planned for business, public or institution use. 
(8)	A map on a small scale must be presented to show the nearest subdivision, and how the streets, alleys or highways in the subdivision submitted may connect with those nearby. 
(9)	Profiles of streets and ditches may be called for.
(10)	In subdividing property, due consideration shall be given to suitable sites for schools, and to the dedication of parks and playgrounds. Such provision should be indicated on the preliminary plan in order that it may be determined when and in what manner such areas will be dedicated to the public use. Such property shall not be less desirable nature than other property in the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 1994-0006, § 1-8(A), 5-24-1994) 
Sec. 78-62. - Action on preliminary plats by planning commission. 
(a)	Following a review of the preliminary plat and negotiations with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of improvements to be made by him, the planning commission shall, within 30 days, act on the changes as submitted or modified, and if approved shall express its approval as conditional approval and state the conditions of such approval, if any, or if disapproved, shall express its disapproval and the reasons for disapproval. 
(b)	The action of the planning commission shall be noted on three copies of the preliminary plat, referenced and attached to any conditions determined. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider, one copy presented to the city council and the third retained by the planning commission. 
(c)	Approval of the preliminary plat does not constitute acceptance of the subdivision but is merely authority to proceed with the preparation of the final or record plat. No work shall be done of the subdivision before the final plat is accepted and recorded. Approval of a preliminary plat expires at the end of 90 days unless final or record plat has been submitted to the city council. Any changes by the planning commission, the city engineer or other may require submission of another preliminary plat. 
(Ord. No. 1994-0006, § 1-8(B), 5-24-1994) 
Secs. 78-63—78-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FINAL PLAT 
 
Sec. 78-81. - Submittal. 
Two white print copies of the final or record plat with reproducible tracing of the final plat shall be submitted to the city council after the preliminary plat has been approved by the planning commission and all changes and alterations made. No final plat will be considered unless a preliminary plat has first been submitted and approved. Such plats shall be filed with the city manager at least five days prior to the meeting at which approval is requested. The final plat shall show or be accompanied by the following data: 
(1)	Plats shall be drawn upon sheets of 24 by 36 inches and to the scale of 100 feet to the inch. 
(2)	A title, including name of subdivision owners, and licensed land surveyor or registered engineer or registered public surveyor responsible for the plat, and the scale and location of the subdivision with reference to original land grants or surveys, the date and north point. 
(3)	The certificate of the registered engineer or licensed surveyor who surveyed, mapped and monumented the land should be placed on the face of the plat. 
(4)	A certificate of ownership and dedication of all streets, alleys, parks and playgrounds to public use forever, signed and acknowledged before a notary public by the owner and lienholder of the land. A complete and accurate description of the land subdivided and the street dedicated. 
(5)	An accurate on-the-ground boundary survey of the property with bearings and distances and showing the lines of all adjacent land, streets and alleys with their names and width. Streets, alleys and lot lines in adjacent subdivision shall be shown dotted. All necessary data to reproduce the plat on the ground must be shown on the plat. 
(6)	Approval of the preliminary plat signed by the city planning commission placed on the face of the plat. 
(7)	Two sets of plans and specifications for water, sewer, paving and drainage prepared by a registered civil engineer, which must be approved by the city council prior to the beginning of any construction in the subdivision. 
(8)	A letter from the appropriate drainage commission addressed to the city planning commission stating that plans for drainage of the subdivision are approved by the drainage commission. 
(9)	Coordination with servicing utility companies regarding the furnishing of utilities.
(10)	Two copies of deed restrictions.
(Ord. No. 1994-0006, § 1-8(C), 5-24-1994) 
Sec. 78-82. - Action on final plat by city council. 
(a)	Following a review of the final plat and when to the satisfaction of the city council all conditions and requirements have been met, the city council shall approve the final plat. 
(b)	Should the final plat as submitted fail to meet the conditions and requirements of the city council or fail to meet the previous recommendations of the planning commission, the city council shall disapprove the plat and note its disapproval on the plat, and attach to the plat a statement of reasons for disapproval. 
(c)	Approval or disapproval of the final plat shall be voted by the city council within 30 days after the submission of the final plat. 
(Ord. No. 1994-0006, § 1-8(D), 5-24-1994) 
Secs. 78-83—78-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74  
Sec. 78-111. - Street paving. 
The subdivider shall improve all streets in the subdivision. Improvements shall be installed to a permanent line and grade and to the satisfaction of the city engineer. All street construction work shall be performed by a bonded contractor who has filed a faithful performance bond with the city. Approval of the plat shall not impose any duty upon the city concerning the maintenance of such improvements until the city shall have made actual acceptance of the improvements. The minimum improvements which the subdivider shall make, or agree to make, prior to acceptance and approval of the final plat by the city council shall be: 
(1)	Grading, drainage and drainage structures necessary to properly drain the area.
(2)	Pavements of a width suitable for the traffic on the street.
(3)	Curb and gutter of 2,500 pounds per square inch concrete.
(Ord. No. 1994-0006, § 1-6(A), 5-24-1994) 
Sec. 78-112. - Utilities. 
The minimum improvements which the subdivider shall make, or agree to make, prior to acceptance and approval of the final plat by the city council shall be: 
(1)	Water systems with mains of sufficient size and having a sufficient number of outlets to furnish adequate domestic water supply, furnish fire protection to all lots and to meet the requirements of the city. 
(2)	Sanitary sewer facilities to service the subdivision and meet the requirements of the city. 
(3)	All services for utilities shall be made available for each lot in such a manner as will obviate the necessity for disturbing the street paving, gutter, curb and drainage structures when connections are made. 
(Ord. No. 1994-0006, § 1-6(B), 5-24-1994)
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 90  
Sec. 78-113. - Paving and utilities. 
The subdivider shall award the contract and make payments directly to the contractor after the plans and specifications have been approved by the city council for all grading, paving, drainage structures and utilities in the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 1994-0006, § 1-7, 5-24-1994)
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 90  
Chapter 82 - TAXATION 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Taxation, §§ 6.19—6.24.
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issue of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness or any contract, right, agreement, lease, deed or other instrument or obligation assumed by the city saved from repeal, § 1-10(a)(2); the ordinance adopting the budget or any appropriation ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-10(a)(6); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes saved from repeal, § 1-10(a)(7); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements saved from repeal, § 1-10(a)(11); administration, ch. 2; finance, § 2-121 et seq.; businesses, ch. 18 
State Law reference— Local taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 302.101 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 82-1—82-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SALES AND USE TAX 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note—A one percent sales and use tax was adopted by referendum on December 9, 1967. An additional one-half of one percent sales and use tax was adopted by referendum on November 27, 1990, to be used for improving and promoting economic and industrial development in accordance with V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.001 et seq. and Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 5190.6.
State Law reference— Municipal sales and use tax, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.001 et seq. 
Sec. 82-31. - Effective date of gas, electricity tax. 
The imposition of the one percent city sales tax on residential use of gas and electricity shall remain in effect after October 1, 1979. 
(Ord. No. 1979-0003, 2-14-1979)
State Law reference— Sales tax on residential use of gas and electricity, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 321.105.  
Secs. 82-32—82-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18 
State Law reference— Hotel occupancy tax, V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.001 et seq. 
Sec. 82-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Consideration means the cost of the room in a hotel only if the room is ordinarily used for sleeping, and not including the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant of such room not related to the cleaning and readying of such room for occupancy. 
Hotel means a building in which members of the public obtain sleeping accommodations for consideration. The term includes a hotel, motel, tourist home, tourist house, tourist court, lodginghouse, inn, roominghouse, or bed and breakfast. The term does not include a: 
(1)	Hospital, sanitarium or nursing home; or
(2)	Dormitory or other housing facility owned or leased and operated by an institution of higher education or a private or independent institution of higher education as those terms are defined by V.T.C.A., Education Code § 61.003, used by the institution for the purpose of providing sleeping accommodations for persons engaged in an educational program or activity at the institution. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room in a hotel if the room is one which is ordinarily used for sleeping and if the occupant is other than a permanent resident. 
Occupant means anyone who, for a consideration, uses or possesses any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, rite of access, license, contract or agreement, other than a permanent resident. 
Permanent resident means any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any room in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days during the calendar year or preceding year and there is no interruption in the payment for that period. 
Tax assessor-collector means the tax assessor and collector of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1994-0017, § 13.3, 12-13-1994)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Tax Code §§ 156.001, 156.051.  
Sec. 82-62. - Levied; amount. 
There is levied a tax of seven percent of the price paid for a room in a hotel on every person who, under a lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement, pays for the use or possession or for the right to the use or possession of a room that is in a hotel, cost $25.00 or more each day, and is ordinarily used for sleeping. The price of a room in a hotel does not include the cost of food served by the hotel and the cost of personal services performed by the hotel for the person except those services related to the cleaning and readying of the room for possession. No tax shall be imposed on a permanent resident as defined in section 82-61. 
(Ord. No. 1994-0017, § 13.4, 12-13-1994; Ord. of 6-25-1998) 
Sec. 82-63. - Exemptions. 
(a)	A United States governmental entity described in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 156.103(a) is exempt from the payment of tax authorized by this article. 
(b)	A state governmental entity described in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 156.103(b) shall pay the tax imposed by this article but is entitled to a refund of the tax paid. 
(c)	A person who is described by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 156.103(d) is exempt from the payment of the tax authorized by this article. 
(d)	A person who is described by V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 156.103(c) shall pay the tax imposed by this article but the state governmental entity with whom the person is associated is entitled to a refund of the tax paid. 
(e)	To receive a refund of tax paid under this article, the governmental entity entitled to the refund must file a refund claim on a form provided by the city and containing the information required by the city. The state comptroller by rule shall prescribe the form that must be used and the information that must be provided. 
(f)	A governmental entity may file a refund claim with the city under this article only for each calendar quarter for all reimbursements accrued during that quarter. 
(Ord. No. 1994-0017, § 13.4, 12-13-1994) 
Sec. 82-64. - Collection of tax. 
Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax levied by this article for the city. 
(Ord. No. 1994-0017, § 13.5, 12-13-1994) 
Sec. 82-65. - Quarterly reports to tax assessor-collector. 
On the last day of the month, every person required to collect the tax imposed by this article shall file a report with the assessor-collector of taxes showing the price paid for all room occupancies in the preceding quarter, the amount of tax collected on such occupancies, and any other information the assessor-collector may reasonably require. Such person shall pay the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing such report. The report shall be in a form prescribed by the assessor-collector. The assessor-collector is authorized and directed to do all such things necessary or convenient to carry out the terms of this article. The assessor-collector shall have the authority to request and receive within a reasonable time documentation for information contained in the report by the hotel. 
(Ord. No. 1994-0017, § 13.6, 12-13-1994) 
Sec. 82-66. - Rules and regulations of tax assessor-collector; access to books and records. 
The assessor-collector shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are reasonable and necessary to effectively collect the tax levied by this article and shall upon reasonable notice have access to books and records necessary to enable him to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article and the amount of taxes due under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1994-0017, § 13.7, 12-13-1994) 
Sec. 82-67. - Penalties. 
(a)	If any person shall fail to file a report as required in this article or shall file a false report or shall fail to pay to the tax assessor-collector the tax as imposed in this article when the report of payment is due, he shall forfeit five percent of the amount due as penalty; and after the first 30 days, he shall forfeit an additional five percent of such tax. However, such penalty shall never be less than $1.00. Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of ten percent per annum beginning 60 days from the due date. 
(b)	Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, including hotel operators who fail to collect the tax, fail to file a return, file a false return, or who are delinquent in their tax payment, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction be fined as provided in section 1-14 
(Ord. No. 1994-0017, § 13.8, 12-13-1994) 
Sec. 82-68. - Additional penalties. 
The city is authorized to take the following actions against any person required to collect the tax imposed by this article and pay the collection over to the city and who has failed to file a report, or filed a false report, or failed to pay the tax when due: 
(1)	Bring suit against the hotel for noncompliance; and/or
(2)	Bring suit against the hotel seeking any other remedies provided under state law.
(Ord. No. 1994-0017, § 13.9, 12-13-1994) 
Sec. 82-69. - Additional authorization to bring suit. 
The city attorney is authorized to bring suit against any person required to collect the tax imposed by this article and required to pay the collection over to the city and who has failed to file a report, or filed a false report, or failed to pay the tax when due. Such suit may seek to collect such tax not paid or to enjoin such person from operating a hotel in the city until the tax is paid or the report is filed or both, as applicable and as provided in the injunction. 
(Ord. No. 1994-0017, § 13.10, 12-13-1994) 
Sec. 82-70. - Use of revenue derived from levy of hotel occupancy tax. 
(a)	The revenue derived from any hotel occupancy tax imposed and levied by this article may be used only to promote tourism and the convention and hotel industry, and that use is limited to the following: 
(1)	The acquisition of sites for and the construction, improvement, enlarging, equipping, repairing, operation and maintenance of convention center facilities (as such is defined in V.T.C.A., Tax Code § 351.001); 
(2)	The furnishing of facilities, personnel and materials for the registration of convention delegates or registrants; 
(3)	Advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to attract tourists and convention delegates or registrants to the city or its vicinity; 
(4)	The encouragement, promotion, improvement and application of the arts, including instrumental and vocal music, dance, drama, folk art, creative writing, architecture, design and allied fields, painting, sculpture, photography, graphic and craft arts, motion pictures, radio, television, tape and sound recording, and other arts related to the presentation, performance, execution and exhibition of these major art forms; and 
(5)	Historical restoration and preservation projects or activities or advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to encourage tourists and convention delegates to visit preserved historic sites or museums which are: 
a.	At or in the immediate vicinity of convention center facilities; or
b.	Located elsewhere in the city or its vicinity that would be frequented by tourists, convention delegates or other visitors to the city. 
(b)	Revenue derived from the hotel occupancy tax shall be expended only in a manner which directly enhances and promotes tourism and the convention and hotel industry as delineated in subsection (a) of this section. Such revenue shall not be used for the general revenue purposes or general governmental operations of the city which are not directly related to promoting the hotel and convention industry or tourism in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1994-0017, § 13.11, 12-13-1994) 
Sec. 82-71. - Administrative requirements; accountability; keeping of records. 
(a)	The city council may, by contract, delegate to a person, including another governmental entity or a private organization, the management or supervision of programs and activities funded with revenue from the hotel occupancy tax. The city council shall approve in writing in advance the annual budget of the entity to which it delegates those functions and shall require the entity to make periodic reports to the city council at least annually, listing the expenditures made by the entity of revenue from the tax provided by the city. 
(b)	The entity must maintain the revenue provided by the city from the tax in a separate account established for that purpose and may not commingle that revenue with any other money or maintain it in any other account. 
(c)	The city may not delegate to any person or entity the management or supervision of its convention and visitors programs and activities funded with revenue from the hotel occupancy tax other than by contract as provided in this article. 
(d)	The approval by the city council of the annual budget of the entity to which these functions are delegated creates a fiduciary duty in the person or entity with respect to the revenue provided by the city to the person or entity under the contract. 
(e)	A person or entity with whom the city contracts to conduct authorized activities shall maintain complete and accurate financial records of each expenditure of hotel occupancy tax revenue made by the person or entity and, on request of the city council or other person, shall make the records available for inspection and review. 
(f)	Hotel occupancy tax revenue may be spent for day-to-day operations, supplies, salaries, office rental, travel expenses and other administrative costs only if those administrative costs are incurred directly in the promotion and servicing of expenditures previously authorized. The portion of the total administrative costs for activities for which hotel occupancy tax revenue may be used may not exceed the administrative costs actually incurred in conducting the authorized activities. 
(g)	Hotel occupancy tax revenue may not be spent for travel for a person to attend an event or conduct an activity the primary purpose of which is not directly related to the promotion of the person's job in an efficient and professional manner. 
(Ord. No. 1994-0017, § 13.12, 12-13-1994) 
Secs. 82-72—82-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OCCUPATION TAX 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18 
State Law reference— Occupation tax authorized, Tx. Const. art. VIII, § 1, V.T.C.A., Tax Code §§ 101.008, 302.101, 302.102. 
Sec. 82-101. - Levied. 
As provided in the Texas Constitution, art. VIII, § 1, the city council levies an occupation tax of half the amount of the state occupation tax authorized in state law. 
(Ord. No. 1960-0002) 
Chapter 86 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Operation of vehicles on runways restricted, § 10-102; litter from trucks, § 34-33; handbills on vehicles, § 34-35; abandoned motor vehicles, § 34-211 et seq.; junked vehicles, § 34-231 et seq.; law enforcement, ch. 50; miscellaneous offenses, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; vehicles for hire, ch. 94 
State Law reference— Rules of the road, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 541.001 et seq. 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 86-1. - Roller skates, coasters, skateboards, bicycles and similar vehicles prohibited in central business district. 
No person shall ride in, ride upon, or in any manner operate any roller skates, coaster, skateboard, toy vehicle, bicycles, or like vehicle or device upon any sidewalk, roadway and/or street within the central business district of the city. The provisions of this section shall not apply to wheelchairs or other devices designed to aid handicapped or impaired persons. For the purposes of this section, the central business district shall be defined as that portion of the city bounded by Highway 271 on the east, Cass Street on the north, Montgomery Street on the west and Butler Street on the south. 
(Ord. No. 1995-0016, § 1, 7-18-1995)
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate time, place and manner of roller skating on a street, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(5).  
Sec. 86-2. - Engine retarding braking devices. 
The use of engine retarding braking devices is prohibited within the city limits. Violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and upon conviction a fine shall be levied not to exceed the maximum allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 2003-012, 11-18-2003)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2003-012, adopted November 18, 2003, did not specify manner of inclusion, hence, inclusion as § 86-2 is at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 86-3—86-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Traffic control devices, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 544.001 et seq. 
Sec. 86-31. - Conformity with state rules. 
All traffic control devices, including signs, signals and markings on pavement and/or curb installed or used for the purpose of directing and controlling traffic within the city shall conform with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, volumes I and II. All signs, signals and markings erected or used by the city shall be uniform and be located so far as practicable according to the directions shown in the manual throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 1978-0009, § 1, 11-14-1978)
State Law reference— Sign manual, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 544.001.  
Sec. 86-32. - Obedience required; exceptions. 
The driver of any vehicle, motor vehicle or animal shall obey the instructions of any applicable official traffic control device, sign, signal or marking placed in accordance with this article, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle permitted by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1978-0009, § 2, 11-14-1978) 
Sec. 86-33. - Applicability to authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)	The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, as that term is defined by state law, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions stated in this section. 
(b)	The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
(1)	Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this section or any ordinance.
(2)	Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation. 
(3)	Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he does not endanger life or property.
(4)	Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions.
(c)	The exemptions granted in this section to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when such vehicle is making use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 547.702, except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red light visible from the front of the vehicle. 
(d)	The provisions of subsections (a)—(c) of this section shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
(e)	Provisions of this article applicable to drivers upon the highways shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United States; the state; or any county, city, town, district or any other political subdivision of the state, subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth in this article with reference to authorized emergency vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 1978-0009, § 3, 11-14-1978)
State Law reference— Emergency vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code §§ 545.156, 545.365, 546.001 et seq.  
Sec. 86-34. - Unauthorized signs prohibited. 
(a)	No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway, street or alley any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official control device or any railroad sign or signal. 
(b)	No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway, street or alley any traffic sign or signal bearing any commercial advertising. 
(c)	This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways, streets or alleys of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs. 
(d)	Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is declared to be a public nuisance, and the chief of police is empowered to remove it or cause it to be moved without notice. 
(Ord. No. 1978-0009, § 4, 11-14-1978)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 544.006.  
Sec. 86-35. - Damaging signs prohibited. 
No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic control device, sign or signal or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield, or insignia on or any part of such device, sign or signal. 
(Ord. No. 1978-0009, § 5, 11-14-1978)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 544.005.  
Sec. 86-36. - Prima facie evidence of validity. 
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the city manager or his designee, acting pursuant to an ordinance of the city, to install or cause to be installed any signal, sign or device purporting to direct the use of the streets or the activities on those streets of pedestrians, vehicles, motor vehicles, or animals, proof, in any prosecution for a violation of this article or any traffic ordinance of the city that any traffic control device, sign, signal or marking was actually in place on any street shall constitute prima facie evidence that it was installed by the city manager or his designee pursuant to the authority of this article and of the ordinance directing the installation of such device, signal or marking. 
(Ord. No. 1978-0009, § 7, 11-14-1978) 
Sec. 86-37. - Erection. 
(a)	The city council shall by ordinance direct that the city manager or his designee shall have the duty of erecting or installing upon, over, along or beside any highway, street or alley signs, signals and markings, or cause them to be erected, installed or placed in accordance with this article and consistent with the state manual adopted in section 86-31. Such traffic control devices shall be installed immediately or as soon as such specific device, sign or signal can be procured. 
(b)	Whenever the city manager or his designee has erected and installed any official traffic control device, signal or sign at any location in the city or has caused the same to be done under his direction, in obedience to this article and the state manual shall thereafter file a report with the city secretary in writing and signed officially by the city manager or his designee, stating the type of traffic control device, sign or signal, and when and where it was erected and installed. The city secretary shall file and maintain such report of the city manager or his designee among the official papers of the office of the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 1978-0009, § 6, 11-14-1978)
State Law reference— Authority to place and maintain signs, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 544.002.  
Secs. 86-38—86-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SPECIFIC STREET REGULATIONS 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74 
State Law reference— Authority to establish stop or yield intersections, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(8). 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 86-71—86-90. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ONE-WAY STREETS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to designate one-way streets, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(10). 
Sec. 86-91. - Designated. 
The following areas are designated one-way streets: 
(1)	Allen Street from Buffalo Street north to Scott Street during the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m., on all days during which school is in session at the Gilmer Elementary School, with all traffic on Allen Street being directed in a northerly direction from Buffalo Street to Scott Street during these hours. 
(2)	Bledsoe Street from Scott Street south to Cass Street during the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m., on all days during which school is in session at the Gilmer Elementary School, with all traffic on Bledsoe Street being directed in a southerly direction from Scott Street to Cass Street during these hours. 
(3)	Silver Alley between Harrison Street and Tyler Street all the time.
(Ord. No. 1980-0013, § 14.3, 10-9-1980) 
Secs. 86-92—86-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SPEED LIMITS 
 
Sec. 86-111. - Speed limit on Old Coffeeville Road. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any automobile, motor scooter or any type of motor vehicle in excess of 30 miles per hour on Old Coffeeville Road from Highway 271 and Old Coffeeville Road to the southwestern side of the intersection of Oasis Street and Old Coffeeville Road. 
(Ord. No. 1984-0004, 4-12-1984; Ord. No. 2001-003, 4-12-2001) 
Sec. 86-112. - Speed limit on South Montgomery Street. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any automobile, motor scooter or any type of motor vehicle in excess of 30 miles per hour on South Montgomery Street from the city limits on the south to the northern side of the intersection of Warren Avenue and South Montgomery Street. 
(Ord. No. 1984-0004, 4-12-1984; Ord. No. 2001-003, 4-12-2001) 
Sec. 86-113. - Speed limit on Scott Street, Bledsoe Street, Buffalo Street, Bruce Street and Bradford Street. 
(a)	For traffic traveling in either direction on Bruce Street from its intersection with State Highway 300 to its intersection with State Highway 271, the speed limit shall be 20 miles per hour from 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m., on all days during which school is in session at the Gilmer Junior High School. 
(b)	For traffic traveling in a westerly direction on Buffalo Street from its intersection with Bradford Street to the intersection of REA Road, the speed limit shall be 20 miles per hour from 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m., on all days during which school is in session at the Gilmer High School. 
(c)	For traffic traveling in an easterly direction on Buffalo Street from its intersection with REA Road to its intersection with Bradford Street, the speed limit shall be 20 miles per hour from 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m., on all days during which school is in session at the Gilmer High School. 
(d)	For traffic traveling in a northerly direction on Bradford Street from its intersection with Buffalo Street to its intersection with Scott Street, the speed limit shall be 20 miles per hour from 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m., on all days during which school is in session at the Gilmer High School. 
(e)	For traffic traveling in a southerly direction on Bradford Street from its intersection with Scott Street to its intersection with Bradford Street, the speed limit shall be 20 miles per hour from 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m., on all days during which school is in session at the Gilmer High School. 
(Ord. No. 1981-0001, 1-5-1981) 
Sec. 86-114. - Travel on U.S. 271. 
(a)	For traffic traveling in a southerly direction on U.S. 271:
(1)	Sixty miles per hour from the north city limits (MP 10.998-Cont. 248-04), south for a distance of 0.283 miles, to a point 945 feet north of Harvey St. (MP 11.281-Cont. 248-04) except for that portion from a point at the north city limits (MP 10.998 Cont. 248-04) south for a distance of 0.283 miles, to a point 945 feet north of Harvey St. (MP 11.281-cont. 248-04) the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour when the school speed zone flashing beacons are in operation on school days. 
(2)	Fifty-five miles per hour from a point 945 feet north of Harvey St. (MP 11.281-Cont. 248-04) south for a distance of 0.257 miles, to a point 190 feet north of Yamboree Grounds Dr. (MP 11.538-Cont. 248-04). 
(3)	Forty-five miles per hour from a point 190 feet north of Yamboree Grounds Dr. (MP 11.538-Cont. 248-04) south for a distance of 0.582 miles, to a point 100 feet north of Coffeeville Rd. (MP 12.120-Cont. 248-04). 
(4)	Forty miles per hour from a point 100 feet north of Coffeeville Rd. (MP 12.120-Cont. 248-04) south for a distance of 1.230 miles, to a point 486 feet north of Warren Ave. (MP 12.449-Cont. 248-05). 
(5)	Forty-five miles per hour from a point 486 feet north of Warren Ave. (MP 12.449-Cont. 248-05) south for a distance of 0.776 miles, to a point 544 feet south of Dean St. (MP 13.225-Cont. 248-05) except for that portion from a point 850 feet south of Warren Ave. (MP 12.702-Cont. 248-05) south for a distance of 0.209 miles, to a point 264 feet north of SH 300 (MP 12.911-Cont. 248-05) the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour when the school speed zone flashing beacons are in operation on school days. 
(6)	Fifty-five miles per hour from a point 544 feet south of Dean St. (MP 13.225-Cont. 248-05) south for a distance of 0.563 miles, to a point 3,464 feet south of Dean St. (MP 13.778-Cont. 248-05). 
(7)	Sixty miles per hour from a point 3,464 feet south of Dean St. (MP 13.788-Cont. 248-05) south for a distance of 0.376 miles, to a point 5,502 feet south of Dean St. (MP 14.164-Cont. 248-05) said point being the south city limits also point of termination. 
(b)	For traffic traveling in a northerly direction on U.S. 271.
(1)	Sixty miles per hour from the south city limits (MP 14.164-Cont. 248-05) north for a distance of 0.376 miles, to a point 3,464 feet south of Dean St. (MP 13.788-Cont. 248.05). 
(2)	Fifty-five miles per hour from a point 3.464 feet south of Dean St. (MP 13.778-Cont. 248-05) north for a distance of 0.563 miles, to a point 544 feet south of Dean St. (MP 13.225-cont. 248-05). 
(3)	Forty-five miles per hour from a point 544 feet south of Dean St. (MP 13.225-Cont. 248-05) north for a distance of 0.776 miles, to a point 486 feet north of Warren Ave. (MP 12.449-Cont. 248-05) except for that portion from a point 264 feet north of SH 300 (MP 12.911-cont. 248-05) north for a distance of 0.209 miles, to a point 850 feet south of Warren Ave. (MP 12.702-Cont. 248-05) the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour when the school speed zone flashing beacons are in operation on school days. 
(4)	Forty miles per hour from a point 486 feet north of Warren Ave. (MP 12.449-Cont. 248-05) north for a distance of 1.230 miles, to a point 100 feet north of Coffeeville Rd. (MP 12-120-Cont. 248.04). 
(5)	Forty-five miles per hour from a point 100 feet north of Coffeeville Rd. (MP 12.120-Cont. 248-04) north for a distance of 0.582 miles, to a point 190 feet north of Yamboree Dr. (MP 11.538-Cont. 248-04). 
(6)	Fifty-five miles per hour from a point 190 feet north of Yamboree Dr. (MP 11.538-Cont. 248-04) north for a distance of 0.257 miles, to a point 945 feet north of Harvey St. (MP 11.281-Cont. 248-04). 
(7)	Sixty miles per hour from a point 945 feet north of Harvey St. (MP 11.281-Cont. 248-04) north for a distance of 0.283 miles, to a point 2,439 feet north of Harvey St. (MP 10.998-cont. 248-04) said point being the north city limits and also point of termination except for that portion from a point 945 feet north of Harvey St. (MP 11.281-Cont. 248-04) north for a distance of 0.283 miles, to a point 2,439 feet north of Harvey St. (MP 10.998-cont. 248-04) the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour when the school speed zone flashing beacons are in operation on school days. 
(c)	The hereinabove speeds for vehicular traffic traveling upon the hereinabove designated section of U.S. 271 in the direction herein specified be and they are hereby found to be reasonable and safe prima fascia speed limits therefore. The fact that this regulation of the speed of motor vehicles is needed, creates and emergency which is for the immediate preservation of public safety and general welfare, requires that this ordinance take effect immediately from and after its passage and it is accordingly so ordained. 
(d)	The state department of transportation is authorized to erect signs indicating the speed limits herein designated. 
(Ord. No. 1999-011, §§ 1—3, 10-14-1999; Ord. No. 2007-001, §§ 1—3, 1-9-2007) 
Secs. 86-115—86-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - TURNING 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate turning, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(7). 
Sec. 86-131. - Streets designated. 
(a)	Traffic going south on Davis at its intersection with Buffalo must turn right on Buffalo.
(b)	Traffic going north on Silver at its intersection with Tyler must turn right on Tyler.
(Ord. No. 1983-0005, 2-10-1983) 
Secs. 86-132—86-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - STOPPING, STANDING, PARKING 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Off-street parking and loading requirements, app. A, § 16-11; parking, storage, keeping of commercial and recreational vehicles, app. A, § 16-12 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate stopping, standing or parking, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 542.202(2). 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 86-161. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Central business district means the geographical area encompassed by the following boundaries: Cass Street on the north, Harrison Street on the south, Trinity Street on the west, and up to but not including Highway No. 271 on the east. 
Operator means and includes any individual who shall operate a vehicle as its owner or as the agent, employee or permittee of the owner. 
Park and parking mean the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not. 
Street means any public street, avenue, road, boulevard, highway or other public place located in the city, and established for the use of vehicles. 
Vehicle means any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street or highway, except those operated upon rails or tracks. 
(Ord. No. 1983-0038, § 14.20, 12-22-1983)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2  
Sec. 86-162. - Parking over the time limit in central business district. 
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to permit a vehicle to remain in a parking space within the central business district for a period in excess of the posted time limit, or if not posted, in excess of two hours. 
(Ord. No. 1983-0038, § 14.22, 12-22-1983) 
Sec. 86-163. - Parking within designated spaces in central business district. 
(a)	Any vehicle parked within the central business district shall be parked within the lines designating individual parking spaces. It shall be unlawful and an offense to park any vehicle in such a manner that the vehicle is not wholly contained within the lines designating individual parking spaces. 
(b)	The city manager or his designee shall place lines on the streets and/or curbs within the central business district clearly marking individual parking spaces. 
(Ord. No. 1983-0038, § 14.24, 12-22-1983) 
Sec. 86-164. - Exempted parking zones. 
(a)	The city council, or such officer or employee as they may designate, is authorized to establish theater and such other zones as are required by law, and to alter and/or exempt such zones from the provisions of this article. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to occupy or park a vehicle in the zones designated pursuant to the authority of subsection (a) of this section for any reason whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 1983-0038, § 14.25, 12-22-1983) 
Sec. 86-165. - Declaring nuisance. 
(a)	No person shall allow, suffer or permit any vehicle registered in their name or subject to their control to be parked within the central business district or upon any street within the city limits in violation of any of the provisions regulating the parking of vehicles. 
(b)	If any vehicle is found within the central business district or upon any street within the city limits in violation of any of the provisions regulating vehicles and if the identity of the driver cannot be determined within a reasonable period of time, the vehicle may be declared a nuisance; and the registered owner or other person who has the vehicle subject to his control may be held responsible for such violation. 
(Ord. No. 1983-0038, § 14.26, 12-22-1983) 
Sec. 86-166. - Duty of police officers. 
It shall be the duty of each police officer and/or parking patrol officer, who shall observe a vehicle violating the time limits as specified in section 86-162, to note the vehicle's state license number, the time and date of such offense, make of the vehicle, and to issue in writing on such form as may be provided by the city a notice to be conspicuously placed on the vehicle, advising the operator to answer to the offense of violation of section 86-162 within 48 hours of the date of issuance of the notice at the location and time specified in the notice. 
(Ord. No. 1983-0038, § 14.23, 12-22-1983) 
Secs. 86-167—86-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - SPECIFIC PLACES 
 
Sec. 86-191. - Parking within central business district. 
(a)	No vehicle shall remain parked within the central business district for a period longer than is designated by sign or as is provided at any time between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. of any day of the week except Sundays. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful and an offense for any vehicle transporting flammable and/or toxic substances to park within the central business district at any time. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to utilize a parking space within the central business district to park any vehicle when such person is utilizing the vehicle to sell, aid in the sale or store items that the person is selling or attempting to sell to the public. 
(Ord. No. 1983-0038, §§ 14.21, 14.38, 14.40, 12-22-1983) 
Sec. 86-192. - Parking on Cass Street. 
It shall be unlawful for any person at any time to park or leave any motor vehicle or any other object on the south side of Cass Street in the city between Trinity Street and the intersection of Wood Street, which is U.S. Highway No. 271. 
(Ord. No. 1983-0038, § 14.27, 12-22-1983) 
Sec. 86-193. - Parking on Scott Street. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave parked any motor vehicle or other vehicle on the north side of Scott Street between Bledsoe Street and Allen Street from 7:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., on all days during which school is in session at the Gilmer Elementary School. 
(Ord. No. 1983-0038, § 14.33, 12-22-1983) 
Sec. 86-194. - Parking on Bledsoe Street. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave parked any motor vehicle or other vehicle on the east side of Bledsoe Street between Scott Street and Cass Street from 7:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., on all days during which school is in session at the Gilmer Elementary School. 
(Ord. No. 1983-0038, § 14.34, 12-22-1983) 
Sec. 86-195. - Parking on Allen Street. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave parked any motor vehicle or other vehicle on the east and west side of Allen Street from the intersection of Cass Street and Scott Street from 7:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. on all days in which school is in session at the Gilmer Elementary School, except for loading or unloading students. 
(Ord. No. 1984-0002, 2-9-1984) 
Sec. 86-196. - Parking on Buffalo Street. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave parked any motor vehicle or other vehicle on the north side of Buffalo Street between the Gilmer High School Gymnasium and the creek, a total of 513 feet, at any time, and on the south side of Buffalo Street between Bradford Street on the east and the REA Road on the west from 6:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on all days during which school is in session at the Gilmer High School. 
(Ord. No. 1990-005, § 14.41, 3-13-1990) 
Sec. 86-197. - Parking on Wood Street. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave parked any motor vehicle or other vehicles on either side of Wood Street in the city, which is U.S. Highway No. 271, between the south municipal boundary to the intersection of State Highway No. 155 on the north. The state highway department is charged with the installation of the appropriate signs on the street or on the curbs bearing the words "NO PARKING." 
(Ord. No. 1955-0008, § 1, 10-13-1955) 
Sec. 86-198. - Parking on Tyler Street and Montgomery Street. 
The following parking restrictions are placed in effect: 
(1)	No parking at any time on S.H. 154 (Tyler Street) from Montgomery Street to the St. Louis & Southwestern Railroad Grade Crossing and from Montgomery Street to a point approximately 225 feet west from the center of Montgomery Street. 
(2)	No parking at any time on Montgomery Street on either side for a distance of 20 feet from the crosswalk at intersection of Tyler Street and Montgomery Street and other parking on Montgomery Street to be restricted to parallel parking on one side only for one block north and south of S.H. 154 (Tyler Street); except that off street parking shall be permitted between the gutter line and sidewalk on the east side of Montgomery Street north of Highway 154 (Tyler Street). 
(3)	No parking at any time for a distance of 100 feet from the crosswalk on the west side of Montgomery Street north of Highway 154 and on the east side of Montgomery Street south of Highway 154 (Tyler Street). 
(Ord. No. 1956-0005, § 1, 11-14-1957) 
Sec. 86-199. - Parking on Chandler Street and Simpson Street. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave parked any motor vehicle or other vehicle at any time on the following named streets of the city: 
(1)	On Chandler Street from Marshall Street to Harrison Street.
(2)	On Simpson Street from Buffalo Street to Cass Street.
(Ord. No. 1958-0001, § 1, 3-13-1958) 
Sec. 86-200. - No parking zones. 
(a)	There is designated certain areas of the streets and/or alleys of the city as no parking zones. At no time may a vehicle be parked on either side of a street or alley designated as a no parking zone. 
(b)	The following areas are designated as no parking zones:
(1)	Dean Street, north side, from South Wood Street west to South Montgomery Street. 
(2)	Warren Street, south side, from South Wood Street west to St. Louis and Southwestern Railway. 
(3)	Silver Street, east side, from Butler Street north to Tyler Street. 
(4)	Dedicated alleys, running east and west between Tyler Street and Harrison Street, from Trinity Street to Henderson Street. 
(5)	Chandler Street, between Marshall Street and Butler Street, east side only. 
(6)	Spring Street, running north from Tyler Street parallel to the St. Louis and Southwestern Railway to Walnut Street. 
(7)	Dedicated alley, between Buffalo Street and Tyler Street from Trinity Street and north to Buffalo Street. 
(8)	Davis Street, on the west side, from Buffalo Street to Cass Street. 
(9)	Hollis Street, south side, from North Cypress Street to Silver Moon Cafe. 
(10)	Milburn Street, west side, from State Highway 300 south to Hilltop Avenue. 
(11)	Erwin Street, east side, from Hilltop Avenue south to Pattonfield Road. 
(12)	Warren Street, north side, from South Wood Street to Henderson Street. 
(13)	Titus Street, west side, from Madison Street north to Walker Street. 
(14)	North Titus Street, east side, from Redbud Street north to North Wood Street. 
(15)	Simpson Street, located parallel to and between Titus Street and Wood Street, running north from Cass Street to Taylor Street. 
(c)	Any vehicle parked in such areas designated no parking zones is in violation of subsection (b) and may be towed away and impounded. All charges for towing and storage shall be the responsibility of the owner of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1983-0038, § 14.37, 12-22-1983) 
Sec. 86-201. - Provision for fines for violation. 
(a)	The city council or such other officer or employee as they may designate is authorized to issue a schedule of fines for violations of the provisions of this division. They are also authorized in their discretion to provide for additional penalties for repetitive offenders and delinquent offenders. 
(b)	For the purpose of this section, a repetitive offender means a person who commits five or more violations of this division within any 30-day period. 
(c)	For the purpose of this section, a delinquent offender means a person who fails to appear and answer to the charges of any violation of this division within the time period prescribed on the notice for the violation. 
(Ord. No. 1983-0038, § 14.39, 12-22-1983) 
Secs. 86-202—86-220. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SPECIFIC VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 86-221. - Vehicles over 1½ tons. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, park or stand any truck tractor, road tractor, trailer, semitrailer, bus, trailer coach (trailer house), boats or RV's on streets or any commercial motor vehicle with a rated capacity of 1½ tons or more, according to the manufacturer's classification, or the equivalent, upon any public street, restricted public street in any area, alley, parkway, right-of-way, utility corridor, boulevard, lot, yard, public driveway, private driveway, city park or public park within or adjacent to any area zoned as either B-1 or B-2 in a residential area, single-family district R-1 or R-2 or RM-1 or RM-2 mobile home, or multifamily district MF-1 or MF-2, under this division. This section shall not prevent the parking or standing of such vehicles in such zoned areas for the purpose of expeditiously loading and unloading of passengers, freight or merchandise; but this section shall not apply to street construction, maintenance and repair equipment, such as trucks, rollers and implements or equipment, as well as trucks, trailers and vehicles used by public service utility companies engaged in repairing or extending public service utilities; and to motor buses when taking on or discharging passengers at customary bus stops. 
(Ord. No. 1999-007, 5-13-1999) 
Sec. 86-222. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this division or fail to comply with any of its requirements shall be liable to a fine of not more than $500.00, and each day such violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1999-007, 5-13-1999) 
Secs. 86-223—86-240. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Administrative adjudication of parking regulations, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 682.001 et seq. 
Sec. 86-241. - Handicapped parking zones. 
(a)	In compliance with V.T.C.A., Transportation Code §§ 502.253, 681.001 et seq., the following provisions are adopted: 
(1)	There are designated two parking places for persons with disabilities directly in front of the Med-Shop Pharmacy, two parking places for persons with disabilities directly in front of Gilmer Walmart Store, and two parking places for persons with disabilities directly in front of Gilmer Brookshires Store. At no time may any vehicle other than that of a person with a disability be parked in any of these designated places. 
(2)	There are designated two parking places for persons with disabilities on the east side of the County Courthouse and one parking place for persons with disabilities on the east side of the Library Activities Building. 
(b)	Any person who violates any portion of subsection (a) of this section is also subject to the penalty provisions of section 1-14. Such offense is considered a class C misdemeanor. 
(c)	Any vehicle other than that of a person with a disability parked in such areas designated "HANDICAPPED PARKING" is in violation of subsection (a) and may be towed away and impounded. All charges for towing and storage shall be the responsibility of the owner of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1990-006, § 14.43, 3-13-1990; Ord. No. 1992-006, § 14.44, 9-8-1992) 
Secs. 86-242—86-270. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - TRUCK ROUTES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 86-271—86-290. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - WEIGHT LIMITS ON SPECIFIC STREETS 
 
Sec. 86-291. - Truck traffic on Bruce Street. 
No through trucks exceeding three-quarter-ton capacity shall be driven on Bruce Street from its intersection with State Highway 300 to its intersection with State Highway 271. 
(Ord. No. 1987-008, § 14.10(A), 8-25-1987) 
Sec. 86-292. - Truck traffic on Cypress Street. 
No through trucks exceeding three-quarter-ton capacity shall be driven on Cypress Street from Highway 154 to Highway 155. 
(Ord. No. 1990-008, § 14.10(A), 6-12-1990) 
Sec. 86-293. - Truck traffic on Roberts Street. 
No through trucks exceeding three-quarter-ton capacity shall be driven on Roberts Street from Highway 154 to Highway 155. 
(Ord. No. 1990-009, § 14.10(A), 6-12-1990) 
Sec. 86-294. - Truck traffic on Butler Street. 
(a)	No through trucks exceeding three-quarter-ton capacity shall be driven on Butler Street from the intersection of Highway 271 to Roberts Street and on Roberts Street from the intersection of Highway 154 to Butler Street. 
(b)	Violation of this section by any person is declared to be a misdemeanor, and upon adjudication of guilt a fine not to exceed $200.00 shall be assessed against such violator. 
(Ord. No. 1995-0014, § 1, 6-22-1995) 
Secs. 86-295—86-320. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - RAILROADS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Railroads and railroad crossings, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 471.001 et seq. 
Sec. 86-321. - Maximum speed. 
It shall be unlawful for a person to operate, run or cause to be operated or run, within the corporate limits of the city, any railroad engine, car or train of cars at a greater rate of speed than 35 miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 1986-0007, § 1, 9-11-1986) 
Sec. 86-322. - Audible warning required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, run or cause to be run, any railroad engine, car or train of cars, approaching any street intersection within the city limits of the city, without sounding some audible warning device to warn vehicular traffic of the railroad engine, car or train of cars, to the crossing. 
(Ord. No. 1986-0007, § 2, 9-11-1986) 
Sec. 86-323. - Obstructing intersections. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any employee, officer, agent, servant or receiver of any railroad corporation to obstruct any street railway crossing or public highway within the city limits by permitting a train, including either the engine, car or train of cars, to obstruct or cross such street or crossing for more than ten minutes at any one time. 
(b)	An offense under this section is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 or more than $300.00. 
(c)	An officer charging a railway company for an offense under this section shall prepare in duplicate a citation to appear in court and attach one copy of the citation to the train or deliver the copy to an employee or other agent of the railway company. The citation must show the: 
(1)	Name of the railway company;
(2)	Offense charged; and
(3)	Time and place that a representative of the railway company is to appear in court.
(d)	It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the train obstructs the street, railroad crossing or public highway because of an act of God or breakdown of the train. 
(e)	The hearing must be before a magistrate who has jurisdiction of the offense in the city. 
(f)	An appearance by counsel complies with the written promise to appear in court.
(Ord. No. 1986-0007, § 3, 9-11-1986)
State Law reference— Similar provisions, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code § 471.007.  
Sec. 86-324. - Maintenance of crossings. 
It shall be the duty of every railroad company at the crossing of its tracks with any avenue, street or highway within the city limits, to put and maintain the crossing in proper condition of repair for the entire width of the street at a place where it is crossed by the railroad tracks, in accordance with grades and by methods approved by the city engineer, and at its own costs and expense, maintain the crossing in a proper condition over the entire width of the designated passenger travel, and general use by the public. 
(Ord. No. 1986-0007, § 5, 9-11-1986) 
Sec. 86-325. - Jumping on or off, clinging to moving train. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, not being a regular passenger, employee or official of the railroad company, to jump on or off, to cling or to hang from or on to any railroad engine, car, or train of cars, while it is in motion. 
(Ord. No. 1986-0007, § 4, 9-11-1986) 
Chapter 90 - UTILITIES 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Ord. No. 2005-010, adopted October 11, 2005, amended chapter 90 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, chapter 90 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1990-005(1), § 11.55(A), adopted May 15, 1990; Ord. No. 1998-007, § 2, adopted July 27, 1998; Ord. No. 1998-013, §§ 1(1)(A—D), (2)(A—M), (2.1), (3.0)(A—L), (3.1)(A—C), (4)(A—F), (4.1)(A), (4.2)(A, B), (4.3)(A—D), (4.4)(A—F), adopted December 10, 1998; Ord. No. 2000-002, §§ I—XII, adopted March 9, 2000; Ord. No. 2001-007, adopted September 11, 2001; Ord. No. 2001-007A, adopted September 19, 2002; Ord. No. 2002-007, adopted September 19, 2002; Ord. No. 2003-005, adopted August 26, 2003.
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; electrical, § 14-51 et seq.; businesses, ch. 18; electricians, § 18-111 et seq.; environment, ch. 34; flood prevention and protection, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; subdivisions, ch. 78; required improvements for utilities in subdivisions, § 78-112; required improvements for paving and utilities in subdivisions, § 78-113  
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 90-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed as follows: 
Bulk water sale means the sale of water on a non-regular basis (metered or unmetered) at a location specified by the city. 
City means the City of Gilmer, Texas. 
Department means the department of utilities public works of the city. 
Design guidelines for water and sewer lines means the revised guidelines for design of water and sanitary sewer system improvements within subdivision developments in the city. 
Developer means one who subdivides or provides to tracts of land the infrastructure necessary or convenient for urban usage. As used in this chapter, this term includes the owner of property being developed. 
Developmental improvements means street and drainage improvements. 
Director means the director of utilities and public works of the city. 
Engineer means a person duly authorized under the provisions of the Texas Engineering Practice Act, as heretofore or hereafter amended, to practice the profession of engineering in the state. 
Governing body means the city council of the City of Gilmer, Texas. 
Inspector means the representative of the city who is specifically assigned to inspect any of all parts of the water and sanitary sewer systems, particularly new subdivision extensions, but who is without authority to revise, alter, or revoke the requirements of the rules, regulations, policies, and procedures of the city or the approved contract documents for the job. Such inspection, or lack of inspection, will not relieve the contractor from any obligation to perform the work in accordance with the requirements of the contract documents and/or applicable city and state codes. 
Multi-family residences, apartments, or mobile parks means that each unit shall mean a separate person. 
Off-site means water or sewer mains built to connect a development for which an extension contract has been executed, with the water or sewer system and located outside the boundaries of the development. 
Oversized lines means water or sewer mains, which are both: 
(1)	Larger than eight inches in diameter; and
(2)	Larger than needed to serve the development for which an extension contract has been executed. 
Person, firm, family unit, business unit, or corporation means any one single-family, commercial or industrial unit. 
Senior citizens means those individuals who are the age 65 or older. 
Sewer tap means the physical connection to a city sewer line to which a private sewer line can be attached. 
Standard specifications means the revised standard specifications for waterworks and sewerage improvements in the city. 
Water tap means the physical connection of a water meter or water line to the city's water lines. 
(Ord. No. 2005-010, 10-11-2005; Ord. No. 2006-005, Exh. A(§ 1), 6-20-2006) 
Sec. 90-2. - Authorization of landowner. 
Any application for extension of water or sewer service shall be signed by the developer. The developer shall furnish proof that: 
(1)	He is record owner of the property being developed, or
(2)	He has a written contract signed and acknowledged by the owner authorizing the developer to develop the property. 
(Ord. No. 2005-010, 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 90-3. - Billing and collection of rates and charges. 
The billing and collection of the charges levied for the services by the chapter shall be administered by the department, and all such fees shall be payable at the department office in city hall. 
(Ord. No. 2005-010, 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 90-4. - Failure to make payment. 
(a)	No partial payment of any of the services prescribed in this chapter will be permitted except as deemed necessary by contract through the city manager or his agent. 
(b)	Payment in full for such services will be made at the department office at the city hall by the 10th working day following the billing cycle date posted on that bill or a ten percent late charge will be added for the service provided. 
(c)	If payment is not made by the 21st day immediately following the billing cycle date posted on that bill, service will be disconnected and a disconnect fee of $25.00 will be charged and to resume service an additional reconnect fee of $25.00 will be charged. 
(d)	A service charge of $25.00 for return checks is charged.
(Ord. No. 2005-010, 10-11-2005)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-010, adopted October 11, 2005, enacted provisions intended for use as subsections (1)—(4). To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as subsections (a)—(d).  
Sec. 90-5. - Senior citizens. 
Senior citizens may apply for a ten percent discount on the minimum water and minimum sewer bill, upon verification of age 65. The discount will be applied to the minimum bill each month. 
(Ord. No. 2005-010, 10-11-2005) 
Secs. 90-6—90-14. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER SERVICE 
 
Sec. 90-15. - Definition. 
All property owned and controlled by the city within or without its limits, and the organization used by the city in furnishing a supply of water to the inhabitants of the city, shall constitute and be known as the "City of Gilmer Department of Utilities and Public Works" and is hereinafter referred to as the department. 
(Ord. No. 2005-010, 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 90-16. - Water meters required; repairs. 
All water furnished by the department to its user shall be measured by meter. The department shall determine the size, type and right to own and control all meters used by the user of its water. The department shall keep all meters owned by it in repair. Repairs made to correct manufacturing defects and defects caused by normal wear shall be made by the department without expense to the customer. When replacements, repairs or adjustments of any meter or meter box are rendered necessary by the act, neglect or carelessness of the owner or occupant of any premises, any expenses cause to the department thereby shall be charged against and collected from the owner or occupants of the premises and if not paid, service will be discontinued. 
(Ord. No. 2005-010, 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 90-17. - Water service rates. 
(a)	There is hereby established a minimum monthly water use charge which shall be based upon the size of the water meter installed as follows: 
Minimum monthly rate: 
Meter Size
In Inches	Oct. 2001	Oct. 2005
5/8	$ 9.50	$12.50
1	9.50	12.50
1½	9.50	12.50
2	19.00	23.00
3	28.50	35.00
4	38.00	47.00
6	47.50	59.00
8	57.00	71.00
10	66.50	83.00
12	76.00	95.00
 
(b)	Subject to the minimum monthly charges as provided in subsection (a), the following rates per month shall be charged for water furnished: 
Charge (per 1,000 gallons): 
Volume	Oct. 2001	Oct., 2005
First 2,000	Minimum	Minimum
Over 2,000	5.00	4.20
 
(c)	The foregoing rates shall apply to services rendered within the city. Rates for services outside the city shall be based upon contract price between city and the individual customer which shall be at least 150 percent of the rates for service within the city, as approved by the city council. 
(d)	(1)	Water taps. For the payment of the water tap fee, city crews will install one water tap and one water meter with meter box, and will extend a water line a distance of 50 feet or to the property line, whichever is less. The city does not connect the meter to the private line; this must be done by a licensed plumber at the customer's expense. The meter and appurtenances remain the property of the city. Water tap fees are as follows: 
¾" water tap .....$600.00+ 
1" water tap .....800.00+ 
2" water tap .....1,500.00+ 
+ Plus street repairs and/or boring multiplied by a factor of 1.25 to cover overhead and administrative costs. 
Tap sizes not listed will be performed on a cost-plus basis; labor, materials, street repairs, and administration, to be determined by the city at the time the request is made to the city. 
(2)	Water meters. 
a.	Water meters shall be installed only after the approval of the city's plumbing inspector or designated representative, and the payment of all the applicable fees and deposits. 
b.	Only one water meter will be installed for each water tap fee paid.
(e)	Miscellaneous fees and charges.
Deposit fees (homeowners) .....$50.00 
Deposit fees (renters) .....80.00 
Service transfer fees .....15.00 
Connection fees .....35.00 
Emergency disconnect fee .....25.00 
Meter disconnect/reconnect fee, each .....25.00 
Returned check fee .....25.00 
Meter testing fee .....75.00 
After hour, weekend and holiday (disconnect/reconnect) .....50.00 
(f)	Rates for service outside the city shall be based upon a contract price between the city and the individual customer. Water rates shall be at least 150 percent of the rate for service within the city. The city manager shall not permit and will not undertake the construction and/or extension of water and/or sewer mains and pipes outside the corporate city limits except to provide service to residents of the city. However, nothing in this subsection shall prevent the governing body from permitting and allowing such construction or extension when in the exclusive judgment of the governing body such is found to being the best interest and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(g)	The water tap and activation fees shall be reviewed annually by the city manager. The city manager shall revise the fee schedule to reflect changes in costs experienced by the department. These changes in the fee schedule shall become effective upon ratification by the city council and filing by the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 2005-010, 10-11-2005; Ord. No. 2006-005, Exh. A(§ 2), 6-20-2006) 
Sec. 90-18. - Averaging charge in case of defective meter. 
Should any meter fail to register correctly the amount of water used by a customer since the previous reading, the right shall exist on the part of the department to estimate the water use based on any three previous like months average. If the customer requests a re-read of their meter, the first re-read shall be at no costs to be the customer; however, all re-reads after the first the customer shall be charged $25.00 per each re-read on a monthly basis. 
(Ord. No. 2005-010, 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 90-19. - Connection and deposit fees. 
A non-refundable connection fee of $35.00 and a refundable deposit of either $50.00 for homeowners or $80.00 for renters to be refunded upon disconnection of utility service shall be required in advance for each meter from all customers to insure against loss due to nonpayment of bills. A customer changing his residence shall have the right to have the deposit transferred to his new residence or place of business if his account is current and not in arrears. 
(Ord. No. 2005-010, 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 90-20. - Billing; delinquency; reconnection charges. 
(a)	Meters shall be read monthly and the consumer shall be billed with a statement showing the amount due by him to the city for the amount of utilities used up to the date the meter is read. The bill shall show the date when the account is due. If the bill is not paid when due, the city shall have the right to turn off or disconnect the utility service. The same shall not be restored or turned on until such time as the full amount of money due and owing the city for the delinquent utility service is paid together with a re-connection fee of $25.00 during business hours from 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. weekdays Monday through Friday and $50.00 after business hours as well as weekends and city declared holidays to cover the cost of disconnecting and restoring such service. A fee of $25.00 for each trip required shall be levied for discontinued utility service. If it becomes necessary to send a service man to disconnect service because of a delinquent account, but the service is not actually disconnected, a $25.00 delinquent handling fee shall be charged for a service call. In the event it becomes necessary to disconnect from sewer service, the city manager shall cause an itemized statement to be prepared for actual cost of disconnection and an estimate for reconnection to such service, and such actual and estimated costs shall be paid prior to restoration of service. In the event that the estimate of cost differs from the actual cost for restoring service, an adjustment will be made in the customer's billing. In the event it becomes necessary to remove the utility meter in order to discontinue service, there shall be a fee levied in the amount of $70.00 to compensate for removal and reinstallation of the utility meter plus other fees as maybe required. 
(b)	If any consumer becomes indebted to the department for service at a previous place of consumption, service at their new place of service shall not be permitted or be discontinued by the department until payment in full, plus any service charges, is made. 
(c)	No plumber or any other person shall open the street curb stop after same has been closed by the department without a written permit first being obtained from the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2005-010, 10-11-2005)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-010, adopted October 11, 2005, enacted provisions intended for use as subsections (1)—(3). To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as subsections (a)—(c).  
Sec. 90-21. - Supplying utility service to another by user. 
No customer shall, without the permission of the city manager, supply utility service to any other person or to other users or suffer them to take it. 
(Ord. No. 2005-010, 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 90-22. - Responsibility for leakage. 
All property owners, their agents and tenants, shall be held responsible as consumers for loss of water/sewer due to leakage in pipe of plumbing inside the discharge side of the meter or on said property, and if lost water is not paid for according to rates provided herein, when it becomes due, the utility service shall be cut off by the department and not turned on until all claims are paid. Service will not be restored until all leaks have been repaired to the satisfaction of the department. If the city manager determines that water loss has occurred due to a concealed or hidden leak and without the knowledge of the customer, the manager may make an adjustment to no more than two monthly utility bills affected by the leak. The customer will pay no less than the normal utility use plus one-half of the calculated loss due to the hidden leak. 
(Ord. No. 2005-010, 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 90-23. - Extending utility service to another premises. 
After utility service is introduced into any building or on any premises, the same shall not be extended by any plumber or any other person to any other premises for additional fixtures. 
(Ord. No. 2005-010, 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 90-24. - Separate service lines. 
Two houses shall not be permitted to be supplied with one service pipe unless written permission is received from the director of the governing body in approving a development plan, and then, such supply by a single service pipe shall not be smaller than one-inch in diameter. In all cases, only one meter service one house at any time. If multiple houses are served by one meter multiple minimums will be charged and the per 1,000 rate shall be charged as normal. 
(Ord. No. 2005-010, 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 90-25. - Right of entry of the city manager or his agents. 
(a)	Every person taking utility service from the department shall at all reasonable times permit the city manager or his agents to enter the premises and building from examination of pipes and fixtures, and the manner in which the utility is used, and refusal by any consumer shall result in refusal of utility service from the department until such permission is granted. 
(b)	Every person taking utility service from the department for a sprinkler system for the purpose of fire protection which is not metered shall at all reasonable times permit the city manager and/or his agents to enter the premises and building for examination of pipes and fixtures and the manner in which the utility service is used, and refusal by any consumer shall result in refusal of utility service from the department until such permission is granted. 
(Ord. No. 2005-010, 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 90-26. - Repair or renewing of utility service pipes. 
The department reserves the right to make all repairs and renewals of service pipes from main to meter and it shall be unlawful for any other person to repair or renew service pipes from main to meter without written consent of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2005-010, 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 90-27. - Boilers. 
All boilers for heating water shall be provided with safety valves, and check valves shall be placed on service pipes to protect the meters from hot water. Any person failing to comply with this provision shall have their utility service cut off and it shall not be turned on again until such valve shall have been installed. All steam boilers connecting directly with the city utility supply are required to provide a tank or tanks for at least 12 hours storage. Churches, auditoriums, theaters, schools, and factories may be supplied through one connection with the water main in the street. 
(Ord. No. 2005-010, 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 90-28. - Single connections for certain multiple dwelling units. 
(a)	Apartment houses, townhouses, condominiums, duplexes, triplexes, apartments and mobile home parks under single ownership may be served by a single meter. Such accounts shall be billed to said owner (or owner's representative), and shall be calculated to include a residential minimum charge per month (as established by the city) for each dwelling unit for water service, and a separate minimum charge per month (as established by the city) for each dwelling unit for sewer service, plus the normal charges (as established by the city) for water and for sewer service for consumption. Garbage to such sites shall be assessed at the residential monthly charge (as established by the city) unless the owner arranges with the city for the placement of a dumpster (or dumpsters) in accordance with the city's established dumpster program and at the fees set therefor by the city. The monthly minimum charges per dwelling shall be the monthly minimum amount established by the city for a 5/8" meter regardless of the actual size meter serving the location. 
(b)	Certain type customers are hereby specifically excluded from the provisions of subsection (a) as heretofore stated. Exclusions shall include hotels, motels, bed and breakfast establishments, and boarding houses which collect and remit to the city a hotel-motel occupancy tax, established and adopted by said city. Also excluded are hospitals, nursing homes, assisted living centers, and other similar establishments as determined by the city manager. Also excluded are water systems approved by the state that may purchase water from the city for resale to their customers. 
(Ord. No. 2006-007, §§ A, B, 7-25-2006)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-007, §§ A, B, adopted July 25, 2006, amended § 90-28 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, § 90-28 pertained to single connection and commercial classification for certain multiple dwellings, and derived from Ord. No. 2005-010, adopted October 11, 2005.  
Sec. 90-29. - Cutting of utility service for repair work. 
The right is reserved by the department to temporarily discontinue and to reconnect without notice the utility service to all users for the purpose of making repairs, connection, extensions, and cleaning of mains, machinery, storage reservoirs or any other appurtenances to the utility service system. All users having boilers, air conditioning equipment or other water consuming devices, which may become damaged due to interruption of water service and which are supplied directly with city water, do so at their own risk. The city shall not be liable for any damage that may occur on account of the water being cut off for any purpose. The department further shall not be liable for any damage to plumbing, pipes, or fixtures on premises caused by pressure from the city utility system. 
(Ord. No. 2005-010, 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 90-30. - Tapping of water mains. 
It shall be unlawful for any plumber or person other than an authorized employee of the department or a contractor employed by the department to tap any water main, make any connections with the water main, or extend service pipes from water main to the meter, and to place a curb stop and meter box at that point. All such equipment shall be under exclusive control of the department. Water main taps, service lines, curb stops, meter boxes, and all other appurtenances installed shall be paid for in advance according to schedule of prices. 
(Ord. No. 2005-010, 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 90-31. - Diversion of water from metered flow. 
Whoever by any means or device prevents water from passing through any meter belonging to the department, or prevents any meter used in connection with the supply of water to any consumer by said department from registering the amount of water passing through such meter, or prevents a meter from duly registering the quantity of water supplied or in any way interferes with the proper action or just registration of a meter, or, without the consent in writing of the city manager, diverts the water from any pipe or pipes of the water utilities, or otherwise uses, or causes to be used, without the consent of the city manager, and water produced or distributed by said department, or retains possession of, or refuses to deliver, any meter or other appliance loaned to him by the department for the purpose of furnishing water through same, shall be in violation of these rules and regulations and shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. The presence at any time on and about any such meter or pipe of any device or pipes resulting in the diversion of water or prevention of its free passage and registration by the meter, or resulting in the diversion from the meter as above defined, or resulting in the prevention of water reaching the meter, or resulting in the prevention of the just registration of the meter or meters or the taking of any water except through a meter as above set forth, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the person owning of having custody and control of the room, building, place, or premises where such device or pipe is, or knows of the pipe of device and be prima facie evidence that the person who would be benefited by the failure of the water to be properly metered is responsible for material of such pipe or device and shall further constitute prima facie evidence of intention on the part of such person or persons to defraud the city by taking water without paying for it. 
(Ord. No. 2005-010, 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 90-32. - Use of fire hydrants; damage in water system. 
It shall be unlawful for any person except a member of the fire department or employee of the department of utilities and public works to take off a cap, to open or use water from a fire hydrant. In exceptional cases where water for construction is not otherwise available on a temporary basis, the city manager may by written permission allow the use of fire hydrants for construction water. In the event such permission is granted, it shall be according to terms and conditions prescribed by the city manager in said written permission. It shall be unlawful for any person to in any manner deface the houses, walls, machinery, equipment, or fixtures connected with or pertaining to the Gilmer Water Utility System. 
(Ord. No. 2005-010, 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 90-33. - Connection to privately owned elevated tanks. 
Elevated water storage tanks located on the roofs of buildings for water distribution shall have a single connection to water mains, six-inch diameter or smaller, and shall fill over the top of the storage tank with a minimum 12-inch air gap between discharge pipe and maximum water level. Said elevation tanks and service connection thereto shall be constructed only after the acceptance of the detailed construction plans by the city engineer and city manager and approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 2005-010, 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 90-34. - Malicious or willful interference with the utility service. 
It shall be unlawful for an person, individually or in association with others, to willfully break, injure or tamper with any part of the utility system including water meters for any purpose whatsoever or to in any manner to willfully or maliciously interfere with or prevent the running and operation of said system and water distribution and sewage collection performed therein. 
(Ord. No. 2005-010, 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 90-35. - Department of water utilities regulations constitute contract. 
All provisions of this article pertaining to the department shall be deemed to be incorporated in every contract between the department and its customers, and each customer shall be charged with the knowledge of such provision, and, by applying for and accepting water from the department, to have assented to the provision hereof. 
(Ord. No. 2005-010, 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 90-36. - Individual water wells prohibited. 
No person, commercial or industrial unit shall be permitted to dig, bore or drill water well within the city limits of the city. Water from water wells existing within the city limits at the time of [the adoption of] this chapter that are being used for human consumption, and that are not connected in any form or fashion to the city's water distribution system shall be permitted to continue to operate so long as the water quality complies with state standards for water well quality. However, once such existing wells fail, or the water quality does not comply with state standards, then in that even said residential, commercial, or industrial unit shall be immediately, or when made available by the city or a developer, be connected to the city's water utility system. Under no circumstances shall there be existing private water well connection and a city water connection to the same residential, commercial, or industrial unit. 
(Ord. No. 2005-010, 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 90-37. - Water used in construction charged to property owner. 
Where a temporary authorization to use water for the construction or repair of property, the water used shall be charged against the owner of the property. A permanent connection for the property shall not be authorized until all temporary use charges are paid. The city reserves the right to estimate the amount of water used. 
(Ord. No. 2005-010, 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 90-38. - Installation of check valve or back siphonage prevention device. 
If, in the judgment of the director of utilities and public works and/or his agents, an approved check valve or backflow and back siphonage prevention device is necessary for the safety of the utility system, the directory will give notice in writing to the customer to install such an approved device immediately. The consumer shall install such approved device at his own expense and failure, refusal or inability on the part of the consumer to install such device at once shall constitute a ground for discontinuing utility service to the premises until such device has been installed. 
(Ord. No. 2005-010, 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 90-39. - Exposing meter or fire hydrant; moving meter or fire hydrant to damage from traffic. 
Whenever the property owner requests the moving of any meter or fire hydrant, the moving cost shall be at the expense of the property owner. Upon deposit of $500.00 for moving a fire hydrant and/or $100.00 for moving a water meter, the department shall proceed to make the desired change in location. 
(Ord. No. 2005-010, 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 90-40. - Vending water. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity, other than water systems approved by the state, to sell or resell water for domestic or any other uses within or without the city, without applying for and receiving a permit to do so from the city manager. Before granting such permit the city manager shall submit such application to the city/county chief sanitation officer for a written recommendation. The fee for said permit is hereby established as $1,000.00 payable to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-010, 10-11-2005; Ord. No. 2006-007, § C, 7-25-2006) 
Sec. 90-41. - Sprinkler or fire service. 
(a)	No connection for a sprinkler or fire service may be permitted unless approved by the building official of the city. A meter of the kind and size prescribed by the director shall be required. The meter shall be furnished and installed at the expense of the consumer. 
(b)	The furnishing, installation, maintenance, and inspection of all meters and services, checks, bypasses, valves, piping, etc., necessary for the installation and operation of sprinkler systems and fire services shall be at the expense of the consumer. 
(c)	When ground storage reservoirs or fire pumps are installed on private property, such pumps shall discharge into a fire system approved by the director and building official. An approved check valve shall be installed in the owner's fire service between the point where the pump discharges into such service and the connection of such fire service to the city mains to prevent backflow from the fire pump into the city distribution system. The water in such fire storage tanks will be maintained in a potable condition and subject to periodic inspection by the department personnel. Such tanks and water quality shall be maintained in compliance with the standards and requirements of the state department of health and city. Such tanks shall not be of the pressure type. The delivery of city water to the tank shall be above the tank flow line with a one-foot air gap. The supply line to this tank shall not be controlled by a quick acting valve, which will cause water hammer in the distribution system. Water tanks shall be equipped with an overflow pipe at least 12 inches below the city inlet pipe. The overflow pipe shall be protected as to prevent access of insects, birds or animal life into the reservoir. The pipe shall be at least two inches in diameter larger than the inlet supply line from the city distribution system. Such storage tank shall be provided with a drain pipe and valve for easy drainage of the tank. The drain pipe may not be connected to the city sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 2005-010, 10-11-2005)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-010, adopted October 11, 2005, enacted provisions intended for use as subsections (1)—(3). To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as subsections (a)—(c).  
Sec. 90-42. - Compulsory connection to sewerage system. 
(a)	Every building required by the building code to have toilet facilities and every building containing a sewage or privy shall be connected to the city sewerage system except premises where connection is not feasible. Connection is hereby declared to be feasible as to any premise abutting a street, alley or other public way or sewer right-of-way in which a gravity sewer line having sufficient capacity to handle sewage from the building exists. Every sewage fixture or privy in use in a building shall be connected to the city sewerage system. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of any persons owning or occupying improved property within the city which can be feasibly connected to the city sewerage system to connect such property and the improvements thereon with the city sewer system if the same exist in the street, alley, or other public way or utility right-of-way abutting the premises. 
(c)	When city sewage becomes available to a residence, which was formerly without available service, the occupant of such property may, at their option, connect the residence to the city sewer. However, if the septic tank system of such residence fails to meet state standards for septic tank systems, the occupant of such residence shall connect the residence to the city sewer immediately, or as soon as is practical. If city sewer service is available to a residence within the city limits, no septic tank systems may be installed at that residence. 
(d)	The city manager shall notify the owner or occupant of every building to which sewerage service becomes available that service is available to make connection with the city sanitary sewer. The city manager shall notify the owner or occupant of every residence to which city sewage services are available and such residence has a septic tank system, which does not meet state standards for septic tank systems that service is available to make connection with the city sanitary sewer. Any owner or occupant of a residential and/or commercial building, who fails to make connection the city's sanitary sewer within 180 days after receipt of such notice from the city manager, shall be deemed in violations of this subsection. If said occupant of such property refuses to connect their residence to the city sewerage system within the above stated time period after the same becomes available, the city may take it upon itself to make the connection or employ a contractor to do the same, and then, place a lien on said property in the amount required to make such connection or disconnect water service. 
(Ord. No. 2005-010, 10-11-2005)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2005-010, adopted October 11, 2005, enacted provisions intended for use as subsections (1)—(4). To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as subsections (a)—(d).  
Sec. 90-43. - Bulk water sales. 
(a)	Customers desiring to purchase water through area fire hydrants shall be responsible for the following (by a written agreement using form attached as exhibit B to Ordinance No. 2006-005): 
(1)	Payment for installation and certification fees, $300.00, related to meter and backflow prevention devices. 
(2)	Water purchased in bulk quantities shall be billed at a rate of $15.00 per thousand gallons with a minimum charge of $75.00. 
(3)	Payment of repair costs for any damage to structures, equipment, streets, fire hydrant, meter, backflow prevention devices. 
(4)	Payment for any and all water which passes through meter during time meter and equipment are in place. 
(b)	Any water purchased at other specified locations, unmetered, shall be witnessed by city personnel (water department or fire department) and billed as set forth herein. 
(c)	The city reserves the right to remove meters, equipment, or otherwise limit bulk water sales at any time without notice depending upon the demands of the city and the water system. 
(Ord. No. 2006-005, Exh. A(§ 4), 6-20-2006)
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2006-005, Exh. A(§ 4), adopted June 20, 2006, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as subsections 90-43(a)—(c) is at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 90-44—90-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SEWER SERVICE 
 
Sec. 90-60. - Sewer service rates. 
(a)	The following rates per month shall be those charged for sanitary sewer service furnished to the users or customers receiving services rendered by the city sanitary sewer system. In calculating the monthly service charge, the rates shall be applied to the volume of water used as measured by the consumer's water meter, except that water usage subject to charges for sanitary sewer service to single-family residences, duplexes, apartment house, townhouses, condominium developments, and mobile home parks shall not exceed 10,000 gallons per single-family residential unit monthly unless the average use for the three lowest months of water consumption during the 12-month period March through February exceeds 10,000 gallons, then the sewage per 1,000 gallon rate will be based on the average of the three lowest month consumption. 
(b)	Rates to commercial, governmental, and institutional customers will be based on monthly water use subject to customer proof of lower sewage discharged. In the event the customer is not supplied water by the city, the volume of water used shall be determined by metering or measuring devices acceptable to the city manager and installed at the consumer expense. Such measuring devices shall be tested annually for accuracy. 
SEWER RATES 
Minimum monthly rates: 
Meter Size in Inches	October 2005
5/8"	$12.50
1"	12.50
1½"	12.50
2"	23.00
3"	35.00
4"	47.00
6"	59.00
8"	71.00
10"	83.00
12"	95.00
 
(c)	Subject to the minimum monthly charges as provided in subsection (b), the following rates per month shall be charged for sewer usage based on water furnished. 
CHARGE (per 1,000 gallons): 
Volume	October 2005
First 2,000	———-
Over 10,000	———-
First 2,000	Minimum
Over 2,000	$2.70/1,000 gallons
 
(d)	In calculating the monthly rates and charges hereunder for apartment houses, townhouses, condominium developments, mobile home parks under single ownership and other buildings designed for or occupied by three or more families, every separate living unit therein shall be considered a separate user or customer receiving services rendered by the city's sanitary sewer system. A minimum bill will apply for each unit and 2,000 gallons will be credited for rate minimum charged before the per 1,000 rate is applied. 
(e)	The foregoing rates shall apply to all commercial and industrial service except industrial waste service, rendered within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2005-010, 10-11-2005) 
Sec. 90-61. - Sewer tap and activation fees. 
(a)	Installation of sewer connections (taps) and services connections from the main to the property line or point of user connection shall be performed only by employees of the department or a contractor approved in writing by the city's utility director. The following charge shall be made for sewer connections, payable in advance: 
Sewer tap fees are as follows: 
Size of Service
4" sewer tap	$400.00
6" sewer tap	600.00
 
The tap fee shall include the cost of a tap and service connection from the main to the property line when the total length is 50 feet or less and when installation is not by boring, or tunneling under a street or street cutting. In such cases the cost of tap and service shall be the actual cost of furnishing and installing the tap and service line multiplied by a factor of 1.25 to cover overhead and administrative cost. Sewer taps six inches and larger will also require an approved manhole at the junction with the city main. The charge for six-inch and larger service connection will be the actual cost of construction including labor, equipment, materials, and street restoration, multiplied by a factor of 1.25 to cover overhead and administrative costs. By permission of the city utility director, sewer services six inches and larger may be constructed by an approved contractor. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to maintain the sewer service from the sewer main to and on his property, including the connection to the sewer main. 
(Ord. No. 2005-010, 10-11-2005; Ord. No. 2006-005, Exh. A(§ 3), 6-20-2006)  
Chapter 94 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; traffic and vehicles, ch. 86  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 94-1—94-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS 
 
Secs. 94-31—94-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - WRECKER SERVICES 
 
Sec. 94-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accident means an occurrence in the operation of a motor vehicle which results in injury/damage to any person or property. 
Chief of police means the police chief for the city or his designee. 
Disabled means any vehicle which has been rendered unsafe to be driven upon the streets as the result of some occurrence other than a wreck, reasonably requiring that such vehicle be removed by a wrecker. 
Heavy-duty wrecker means a wrecker not less than two tons in size. 
Light-duty wrecker means a wrecker not less than one ton in size. 
Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is self-propelled. 
Owner's request means when the operator or owner of a wrecked or disabled vehicle has selected a wrecker company to remove his vehicle and/or has authorized the police department to call that wrecker company. 
Police department means the City of Gilmer Police Department. 
Police pull means when the police department has called a wrecker company from the rotation list to remove a wrecker or disabled vehicle or to remove a vehicle in a safe driving condition, when the driver is absent, in custody or otherwise incapable of making authorization. 
Private property commonly used by the public includes supermarkets or shopping center parking lots, parking areas provided by business establishments for the convenience of their customers, clients or patrons or parking areas owned and operated for the convenience of and commonly used by the public. 
Public property means any property owned by a governmental entity. 
Rotation means when the operator of a wrecked or disabled vehicle fails to designate a specific wrecker operator to remove his vehicle and he has authorized the police department to call a wrecker from the rotation list. 
Street means any street, alley, avenue, lane, public place or highway within the corporate limits of the city. 
Tow truck means a vehicle equipped with a lifting device and which is designed, made or adopted to tow or carry other vehicles but which does not meet the minimum requirements for a wrecker. Vehicles which are commonly referred to as two-car haulers or three-car haulers are included in this definition. 
Vehicle means any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
Wrecked means the status of any vehicle that has been damaged as the result of an accident so as to reasonably require that such vehicle be removed by a wrecker. 
Wrecker business means any wrecker company that hauls, tows or in any way moves vehicles by the use of a wrecker or tow truck. 
Wrecker company means any individual, corporation, partnership or association engaged in the business of towing disabled and/or wrecked vehicles on public streets or highways for compensation or with the expectation of compensation for the towing, storage or repair of vehicles. The term "wrecker company" includes the owner, operator employee or agent of a towing company, but does not include cities, counties or other political subdivisions of the state. 
Wrecker rotation list means the list of wrecker companies as described in section 94-68. 
Wrecker selection means the selection process provided for in section 94-72. 
(Ord. No. 1987-005, art. I, § I, 4-9-1987)
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2  
Sec. 94-62. - Vehicle disabilities and accidents covered. 
The prohibitions and requirements of this article shall apply to all vehicle disabilities occurring on public property or private property commonly used by the public, regardless of whether or not the final resting place of a vehicle is upon these areas immediately after the accident or disability, and to police pulls for vehicles improperly or illegally parked. 
(Ord. No. 1987-005, art. I, § 2, 4-9-1987) 
Sec. 94-63. - Certain emergencies excepted. 
The prohibitions and requirements of this article shall not apply to any person who necessarily must act immediately to prevent death or bodily injury to any person involved in an accident. 
(Ord. No. 1987-005, art. I, § 3, 4-9-1987) 
Sec. 94-64. - Pushing or towing. 
A vehicle may be pushed or towed by another vehicle only when it does not reasonably require removal by a wrecker or tow truck and only when it may be done in a safe manner. Tow trucks may not be used to remove a wrecked vehicle from the scene of an accident. 
(Ord. No. 1987-005, art. I, § 4, 4-9-1987) 
Sec. 94-65. - City employees shall not attempt to influence owners of vehicles. 
No employee of the city shall recommend to any person in any manner the name of any repair, wrecker or towing business; nor shall any city employee influence or attempt to influence in any manner the decision of any person in choosing or selecting a repair or wrecker service or towing business. 
(Ord. No. 1987-005, art. I, § 5, 4-9-1987) 
Sec. 94-66. - Wrecker prohibited at scene unless called; solicitation prohibited. 
No person shall drive a wrecker or tow truck to or near the site of an accident for the purpose of solicitation of the business within the corporate limits of the city unless such person has been called to the site by the owner of the vehicle, his authorized representative or by the police department. Any wrecker company when called shall notify the police dispatcher before proceeding to the disabled vehicle. No person shall solicit in any manner, directly or indirectly, at or near the site of an accident involving motor vehicles in the city limits, any business regarding wrecked or disabled vehicles regardless of whether the solicitation is for the purpose of removing, repairing, wrecking, storing, trading or purchasing the vehicle. The presence of any person engaged in the wrecker business at the site of an accident shall be prima facie evidence of solicitation in violation of this section unless such person has been called to the location under the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1987-005, art. I, § 6, 4-9-1987) 
Sec. 94-67. - Inspection certificates required for wreckers and tow trucks. 
No person shall engage in any wrecker business or operate a wrecker or tow truck to move a vehicle within the city unless a wrecker or tow truck inspection certificate for such wrecker or tow truck has been issued by the chief of police. Such certificate shall be available for inspection by the police department at any time. 
(Ord. No. 1987-005, art. I, § 7, 4-9-1987) 
Sec. 94-68. - Procedure for acquiring inspection certificate; wrecker rotation list, fee. 
(a)	Any wrecker company desiring to engage in the wrecker business in the city shall annually apply in writing to the chief of police for an inspection certificate for each wrecker or tow truck proposed to be operated. The application shall contain the name, address and telephone number of the wrecker company; the number and types of wreckers and tow trucks to be operated; the true owner of the company concerned; and a statement that the applicant does or does not desire to appear on the wrecker rotation list. 
(b)	Every application, when filed, shall be sworn to by the applicant and accompanied by payment of an annual inspection fee of $10.00 per wrecker or $5.00 per tow truck. No fee or payment shall be returnable. 
(Ord. No. 1987-005, art. I, § 8, 4-9-1987) 
Sec. 94-69. - Qualifications; equipment; insurance. 
(a)	The chief of police shall issue an inspection certificate for each qualified wrecker or tow truck which shall be valid until December 31 of the year in which it was issued. No inspection certificate authorizing the operation of a wrecker or tow truck shall be issued in the city unless the following minimum requirements are met: 
(1)	Each wrecker shall be not less than one ton in size or equivalent and shall have a gross vehicle weight of not less than 10,000 pounds. 
(2)	Each wrecker shall be equipped with a lifting device, wench-line and boom, with a rated lifting capacity of not less than 8,000 pounds, single line capacity, with dual rear wheels. 
(3)	Each wrecker or tow truck shall carry as standard equipment towing mechanisms, safety chains, a fire extinguisher and emergency lighting as approved by the police department. Standard equipment for wreckers shall also include a broom, shovel, bucket and a dolly. 
(4)	Wreckers which are qualified for the rotation list shall be equipped with permanent or rotating beacons of red, blue or amber color. Police radio communication of a type approved by the chief of police is optional. 
(5)	Each tow truck which is designed to carry two or more vehicles shall be built and designed in accordance with good engineering principles. 
(b)	Each owner of a wrecker must provide evidence of following minimum insurance coverages at the time of application: 
(1)	Comprehensive general automobile liability insurance covering the operation of the applicant's own business equipment or vehicles providing coverage for bodily injuries in the minimum amount of $100,000.00 for property damages. 
(2)	Each wrecker less than two tons in size must have a minimum of $20,000.00 cargo insurance. Wreckers three tons in size or larger must have a minimum of $400,000.00 cargo insurance. 
(3)	Each policy mentioned in subsection (b)(1), (2) of this section must contain an endorsement providing for ten days' notice to the city in the event of any material change or cancellation of each policy and shall name the city as an additional insured while the wrecker company is performing a wrecker job in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1987-005, art. I, § 9, 4-9-1987) 
Sec. 94-70. - Requirements for wrecker rotation list. 
In order to qualify for the wrecker rotation list, the following requirements must be met: 
(1)	All person and real ad valorem taxes due to the city by a wrecker company must be paid in full to maintain its status on the wrecker rotation list. 
(2)	The applicant shall have a minimum of one wrecker available for service at all times.
(3)	The applicant shall file a sworn statement that he has no financial interest in any other wrecker service which is on the city's wrecker rotation list. 
(Ord. No. 1987-005, art. I, § 10, 4-9-1987) 
Sec. 94-71. - Grounds for suspension or removal from rotation list. 
(a)	After an administrative hearing, the chief of police may suspend or remove any wrecker company from the rotation list on any of the following grounds: 
(1)	If the place on the wrecker rotation list was procured by fraudulent conduct, concealment of, or false statement of a material fact concerning applicant at the time of making his application. 
(2)	If the wrecker company violates the provisions of this article or any other city ordinance or any state law regulating vehicular traffic. 
(3)	If the wrecker company fails to comply with the provisions of this article regarding the provision of a storage area for wrecked or disabled vehicles. 
(4)	If the wrecker company fails to protect vehicles in its care as a result of a wrecker and/or tow truck pull and fails to prevent parts, accessories and personal belongings from being removed from the vehicle except as may be necessary to protect such items from theft. 
(5)	If the wrecker company fails to deliver a vehicle directly to the location within the limits of the city as designated by the owner or the police department, provided such vehicle can be legally delivered to such location; however, this subsection shall not apply when it is necessary to remove a vehicle to its ultimate destination by two separate tows because of emergency or breakdown of a wrecker or tow truck and no charge is levied which is greater than the amount provided in section 94-74 for a single tow from one point on a street to another location within the limits of the city. 
(6)	If a wrecker company is repeatedly tardy in arriving after being called to the scene of an accident by the police department for a rotation pull, the chief of police shall give ten days' notice of the time and place for an administrative hearing concerning suspension, cancellation or removal as provided in this section and is empowered to administer oaths to witnesses and to conduct the hearing as otherwise provided by law. 
(7)	Fails to maintain wrecker and equipment in a reasonably workmanlike manner.
(b)	Findings of the chief of police and his written order of suspension or removal from the rotation list shall terminate all authority and permission theretofore granted. The period of suspension or removal from the rotation list shall not exceed one year. Any order of the chief of police may be appealed to the city council in writing within ten days from the date of suspension or removal. The city council shall have authority to reverse, affirm or modify the order of the chief of police; provided, in the event of affirmance of the order the suspension shall commence upon the date of action of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1987-005, art. I, § 11, 4-9-1987) 
Sec. 94-72. - Procedure used in wrecker selection. 
When a police officer investigating an accident determines that any vehicle which has been involved in an accident should be removed by a wrecker, the officer shall first determine whether or not the owner has already made arrangements with an authorized wrecker service for the removal of his vehicle. If not, the officer shall request the owner to either designate an authorized company or allow a wrecker rotation list as follows: 
(1)	Request for wrecker. If the owner or operator selects a wrecker company, the investigating officer shall notify the police dispatcher to call the wrecker company. If the requested wrecker company is unable to promptly respond, a rotation wrecker will be called. 
(2)	Rotation wrecker. 
a.	If the owner does not designate a wrecker company to be called, the investigating officer shall notify the dispatcher to call the wrecker company next in line on the wrecker rotation list and furnish its name to the investigating officer. A wrecker company called from the wrecker rotation list may hereafter be referred to as a rotation pull. In such event, the investigating officer shall notify the police dispatcher, who shall call the wrecker company next up from the wrecker rotation list and dispatch it to the scene. The vehicle to be removed shall be taken to the place designated by the owner, or by the investigating police officer, or to the wrecker company's own place of storage if no designation is made. If the responding wrecker is unable to immediately provide a wrecker for each wrecked vehicle at the scene, the wrecker service next on the rotation list will be called to respond. 
b.	To effect the wrecker rotation list procedure, the police department shall keep a master list of all wrecker companies which meet all the requirements of this article and have qualified to be on the wrecker rotation list. 
(3)	Copy of list. All qualified wrecker companies shall be given a copy of the wrecker rotation list. 
(Ord. No. 1987-005, art. I, § 12, 4-9-1987) 
Sec. 94-73. - Storage; wrecker company responsibility. 
It shall be the responsibility of each wrecker company to provide a storage area adjacent to its place of business within the city or extra territorial jurisdiction which is a one-mile radius of the city-incorporated boundaries for wrecked or disabled vehicles which are moved or towed as a result of a police or rotation pull. The storage area shall be inspected annually to determine whether it complies with the provisions of this section. A wrecker company shall not qualify for the rotation list unless: 
(1)	The wrecker company has a storage area of adequate size that will accommodate vehicles in a safe manner. 
(2)	Outside storage area shall be completely enclosed by a fence at least six feet in height, with a gate which is locked at all times when the license, agent or employee is not at the storage lot. 
(3)	Each storage area must be adequately lighted for nighttime release of vehicles.
(4)	Outside storage area must be located within the city or extra territorial jurisdiction which is a one-mile radius of the city-incorporated boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 1987-005, art. I, § 13, 4-9-1987; Ord. No. 2001-006, 4-26-2001) 
Sec. 94-74. - Fees for services, towing and storage. 
(a)	Towing. A maximum charge on file in the city secretary's office shall be allowed for towing a vehicle from one point on a street to another location within the corporate limits of the city as designated by the owner, his authorized representative or the police department. For extraordinary conditions, where vehicles are so badly damaged that ordinary towing is impossible, a higher charge per tow shall be allowed when fully explained in an itemized statement. Charges shall not exceed usual and customary charges for the wrecker industry. Fractions of an hour may be considered a full hour, but one-quarter of an hour shall be permitted as the smallest fraction. 
(b)	Storage. Storage charges shall not exceed an amount on file in the city secretary's office per day per vehicle commencing with the time the vehicle is placed inside the storage area. All storage charges shall cease at the time the owner or his representative (with proper identification and proof of ownership) requests the vehicle from the storage yard of the wrecker company provided the request is made during regular business hours. No charge for storage shall be assessed if the vehicle is removed or requested from the wrecker company within two hours of the time it is placed into storage, during regular business hours. 
(c)	Other charges. The maximum charge for use of a dolly shall be on file in the city secretary's office. 
(Ord. No. 1987-005, art. I, § 14, 4-9-1987) 
Sec. 94-75. - Fee regulations on police pull not involving accidents. 
On a police pull for a vehicle that is in safe driving condition and for any reason has no owner or licensed operator present to drive the vehicle from the site, the wrecker company called from the rotation list shall observe and maintain the same maximum fees provided for in this article. If a police pull is made for a tow-away zone or traffic law violator, the vehicle shall not be released to the owner or any other person until authorization is granted by the police department. 
(Ord. No. 1987-005, art. I, § 15, 4-9-1987) 
Sec. 94-76. - Rules for extraordinary conditions; large vehicles. 
(a)	If a large or heavy vehicle is wrecked or disabled and a wrecker of ordinary lifting capacity cannot move the vehicle, the following rules shall govern, notwithstanding other provisions of this article: 
(1)	The rotation wrecker company which has been dispatched to the scene shall call any wrecker company who meets the insurance and safety requirements of this article and which has wreckers of extraordinary lifting capacity to the scene of the accident or disability for assistance and without regard to the rotation list. 
(2)	The charges rendered for services of wreckers of extraordinary lifting capacity shall not exceed the usual and customary charges for like services provided in the wrecker industry. 
(b)	If in the opinion of the city or fire or police officials a wrecked or disabled vehicle or its cargo constitutes a hazard to the public, any wrecker company called shall act at the direction of that city official. 
(Ord. No. 1987-005, art. I, § 16, 4-9-1987) 
Sec. 94-77. - Cleanup responsibility. 
Each wrecker company called to the site of an accident shall completely remove all broken glass and debris, excluding truck or vehicle cargoes, before leaving the site. 
(Ord. No. 1987-005, art. I, § 17, 4-9-1987) 
Sec. 94-78. - Nonresident wrecker companies. 
The provisions of this article shall not be construed to prohibit the transportation by a nonresident wrecker company of a wrecked or disabled vehicle from some point in the city other than the site of an original accident to some point outside the city, nor shall it be construed to prohibit the transportation within the city by a nonresident wrecker company of a wrecked or disabled vehicle from a point outside the city limits to a destination inside or outside the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 1987-005, art. I, § 18, 4-9-1987) 
Sec. 94-79. - Violation; penalty. 
Violation of any term of this article by any person is declared to be a misdemeanor and upon adjudication of guilt a fine as provided in section 1-14 shall be assessed against such violator. 
(Ord. No. 1987-005, art. II, 4-9-1987)  
APPENDIX A - ZONING 
ZONING ORDINANCE 
AN ORDINANCE TO REGULATE AND RESTRICT THE HEIGHT, NUMBER OF STORIES, AND SIZE OF BUILDINGS, AND OTHER STRUCTURES, THE PERCENTAGE OF LOT THAT MAY BE OCCUPIED, THE SIZE OF THE YARDS, COURTS, AND OTHER OPEN SPACES, THE DENSITY OF POPULATION, AND THE LOCATION AND USE OF BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND THE LAND FOR TRADE, INDUSTRY, RESIDENCE OF OTHER PURPOSES; AND FOR SAID PURPOSES TO DIVIDE THE MUNICIPALITY INTO DISTRICTS OF SUCH NUMBER, SHAPE, AND AREA AS ARE BEST SUITED TO CARRY OUT THE PURPOSES OF THIS ORDINANCE; AND WITHIN SUCH DISTRICTS TO REGULATE AND RESTRICT THE ERECTION, CONSTRUCTION, RECONSTRUCTION, ALTERATION, REPAIR, AND USE OF BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND LAND; TO PROVIDE FOR THE ADMINISTRATION AND INTERPRETATION OF SAID REGULATIONS, TO PROVIDE FOR APPEALS; TO PROVIDE FOR AMENDMENTS, AND TO PROVIDE FOR ITS ENFORCEMENT. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GILMER, TEXAS AS FOLLOWS: 
FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note—Printed herein are the zoning regulations of the city, as adopted by ordinance on October 6, 1978, and as amended through October 1999. Amendments to the amended ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original amended ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.
Cross reference— Any zoning or rezoning ordinance or amendment to the zoning map saved from repeal, § 1-10(a)(9); any ordinance regarding development, zoning or land use saved from repeal, § 1-10(a)(19); buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; sales of alcoholic beverages near school, church or hospital, § 18-81 et seq.; restriction as to location of junkyards, § 18-224; compliance with zoning requirements for peddlers and solicitors, § 18-317; environment, ch. 34; flood prevention and protection, ch. 42; signs, ch. 70; signs within R-1, R-2, MF-1, MF-2, RM-1 and RM-2 districts, § 70-162; signs within B-1, B-2, L-1 and G-1 districts, § 70-163; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; subdivisions, ch. 78; roller skates, coasters, skateboards, bicycles and similar vehicles prohibited in central business district, § 86-1  
ARTICLE 1. - SHORT TITLE 
 
Section 1-1. - Title. 
This ordinance shall be known as the "Zoning Ordinance for the City of Gilmer, Texas". The map herein referred to is identified by the title, "Zoning Map of the City of Gilmer, Texas," and all explanatory matter thereon is hereby adopted and made a part of this ordinance.  
ARTICLE 2. - PURPOSE 
 
Section 2-1. - State. 
I.	Basic goal. It is the intent of this ordinance to encourage and promote, in accordance with present and future needs, the safety, morals, health, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Gilmer. 
II.	Objectives. To achieve this end, these regulations are prepared in accordance with and for the promotion of the goals and objectives of the comprehensive development plan, and are designed to (a) conserve the value of land, buildings, and resources; (b) protect the character and maintain the stability of residential, commercial, and industrial areas; and (c) provide for the efficiency and economy in the process of development through the: 
A.	Appropriate use of land;
B.	Regulating of the use and occupancy of buildings and land;
C.	Healthful and convenient distribution of population;
D.	Convenience of traffic and circulation of people and goods;
E.	Adequacy of public utilities and facilities;
F.	Promotion of the civic amenities of beauty, and visual interest;
G.	Protection, enhancement, and perpetuation of specific community areas with special character, interest, or value which represent and reflect elements of the city's cultural, social, economic and political heritage; 
H.	Establishment of zoning districts which will regulate the location and use of buildings and other structures, land for trade, industry, residence and other purposes by regulating and limiting or determining the height, bulk, and access to light and air of buildings and structures, the area of yards and other spaces, and the density of use. 
III.	Accomplishment of objectives. To accomplish these objectives, the regulations and districts and accompanying maps have been designed with reasonable consideration, among other things, to the character of the districts and their peculiar suitability for particular uses.  
ARTICLE 3. - DEFINITION OF WORDS 
 
Section 3-1. - Rules for construction of language. 
For the purpose of the administration and enforcement of this ordinance, and unless otherwise stated in this ordinance, the following rules of construction shall apply: 
I.	The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive.
II.	Words used in the present tense shall include the future, and words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
III.	The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "maintained for," "provided for," or "occupied for." 
IV.	The word "person" include[s] an individual, a corporation, a partnership, or any other similar entity. 
V.	Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events, connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either…or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
A.	"And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply. 
B.	"Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events, may apply singly or in any combination. 
C.	"Either…Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly but not in combination. 
VI.	The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specified examples, but is intended to extend its meaning to all instances or circumstances of like kind or character.  
Section 3-2. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this ordinance, the following terms or words shall be used in interpreting of the purpose and intent: 
Access: The primary means of ingress and egress to abutting property from a dedicated right-of-way. 
Apartment: See "Dwelling, multiple family." 
Automotive repair facilities: Establishments used for mechanical engine overhaul which includes the removal of engine, chassis, or body components for repair or replacement; and wherein the dispensing of gasoline may be included but not gasoline service stations. Automotive repair facilities shall also include body, paint, brake, transmission and tire service shops. 
Boardinghouse: An establishment with lodging for four or more persons, where meals with compensation are regularly prepared and served to such lodgers, without service or ordering of individual portions from a menu. 
Buildable area: That portion of a lot remaining after the required yard setbacks have been provided. 
Building: Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof, and used or built for the enclosure or shelter of persons, animals, vehicles, goods, merchandise, equipment, materials, or property of any kind. This definition shall include tents, dining cars, trailers, mobile homes, sheds, garages, carports, animal kennels, storerooms, or vehicles serving in any way the function of a building as described herein. 
Accessory building: A subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to that of the principal building on the same lot. 
Principal building: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. In a residential district, any dwelling shall be deemed to be the principal building on the lot on which the same is situated. An attached carport, shed, garage, or any other structure with one or more walls or a part of the principal building and structurally dependent, totally or in part, on the principal building, shall comprise a part of the principal building and be subject to all regulations applicable to the principal building. A detached and structurally independent carport, garage, or other structure shall conform to the requirements of any accessory building. 
Building height: The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the building except that the distance shall be measured to the average height between the eaves and ridge for gable, hip or gambrel roofs and to the deck line of a mansard roof. 
Building line: The line established by yard or setback requirements outside of which no principal building may be erected. 
Business service establishments: Establishments providing supplies and services to business and professions and telephone answering service, office supply and stationery stores, delivery and messenger services, advertising agencies, direct mail service, detective agencies, employment agencies, collection agencies, and any other establishments offering goods or services of a similar nature, but not including establishments of research or light industrial nature. 
Centerline: The line midway between the street right-of-way lines or the surveyed and prescribed centerline established by the city which may not be the line midway between the existing or proposed street right-of-way lines. 
Child day care center: A place, home, building, or location where care is provided for four or more children under the age of 18 years. Such term specifically includes nursery schools, kindergartens or any other facility caring for children during the day or night. 
Clinics: A medical office or group of offices, used for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick, injured persons, and those in need of medical or surgical attention, but not involving overnight care on the premises. Clinics may include accessory facilities for retail sales of pharmaceuticals, and medical, optical, or dental supplies. 
Contractor shops and yards: Stores, fabrication, and repair shops and yards for cabinet makers and carpenters, electrical contractors, electric sign contractors, glaziers, heating and sheet metal contractors, linoleum and carpet contractors, painters, plumbers, roofers, tent and awning contractors, upholsterers, and any other concern of a similar nature, but not including concrete mixing or asphalt plants. 
Court, general: An open space, other than a yard, on the same lot with a building or structure, which is bounded on two or more sides by the walls of such building or structure. 
Inner court: A court which is completely surrounded by a building or buildings. 
Outer court: A court enclosed on three sides by exterior walls of a building or structure, or by exterior walls and lot lines on which walls are allowable, with one side or end open to a street, driveway, alley, or yard. 
Density: An existing or projected relationship between the allowable lot area per dwelling unit for a district and the land area zoned in each zoning district. The number of dwelling units is found by dividing the total land area zoned in each zoning district by the allowable lot area for that district. 
Dry good stores: Establishments selling clothing, linens, blankets, yardage and notions and shall include shoe repair stores, gift stores, notions stores, luggage stores, tailor shops, yardage stores, shoe stores, clothing stores, and other stores of a similar nature, but excluding variety stores and department stores. 
Dwelling unit: A "dwelling unit" consists of one or more rooms which are arranged, designed, or used as living quarters, including permanently installed individual bathrooms and complete kitchen facilities. 
Dwelling, multiple family: A structure designed with more than one dwelling unit with accommodations for each dwelling unit independent of each other and intended to be occupied by more than one family. 
Dwelling, single family attached: A structure designed as one dwelling unit at ground space and intended to be occupied exclusively by one family and structurally connected by common walls or with separation of not more than one inch from at least one or more other dwelling units. 
Dwelling, single family detached: A structure designed as one dwelling unit and intended to be occupied exclusively by one family and structurally connected to no other dwelling unit. 
Eating establishments: Establishments where meals or prepared food, including beverages and confections, are served to customers for consumption on or off the premises and shall include restaurants, cafes, coffee shops, donut shops, ice cream parlors, soda fountains, hamburger and hot dog stands, sandwich shops, delicatessens, cafeterias, and other stores of similar nature. 
Family: One or more persons related by blood, marriage, or legal adoption, or a group of not more than three unrelated persons occupying a dwelling unit. A group of persons occupying a boardinghouse, lodginghouse, fraternity house, sorority house, hotel, motel, or similar accommodation shall not be construed as a family. 
Financial institutions: Establishments and offices offering financial services or counsel and shall include full service banks, saving and loan institutions, stock brokers offices, banking companies, finance company offices, credit union offices and any other institutions of a similar nature. 
Food stores: Establishments selling food and/or drink products for consumption off the premises and shall include convenience grocery stores, fruit and vegetable stores, bakeries, retail (limited preparation of products for on-premises sales) meat and fish stores, dairy product stores, butcher shops, candy stores, liquor and/or wine stores and other stores of a similar nature. 
Front: That property line which abuts on a public street, or in the event the property abuts on two or more streets it shall mean that property line abutting on a street which has been so designated by the owner at the time of his application for a building permit. 
Frontage: Distance measured along an abutting public street right-of-way. 
Furniture and appliance stores: Establishments selling new or used furniture or appliances and providing incidental service and maintenance and shall include new and used furniture stores, appliance stores, antique dealers, carpet and linoleum dealers, and other establishments of a similar nature. 
Gasoline service station: Establishments for servicing of automotive vehicles which includes activities such as oil changes, lubrication, dispensing of gasoline, tune up, tire replacement and repair, and wheel alignment and balancing, but no overhaul, body or paint shops. Brake and transmission shops shall also be considered minor automotive repair facilities. 
Home occupation: Any occupation or profession engaged in by the occupants of a dwelling not involving the conduct of a retail business and not including any occupation conducted in any building on the premises excepting the building which is used by the occupant as his or her private dwelling. Home occupations shall include, in general, personal or professional services such as furnished by an architect, lawyer, physician, dentist, musician, artist, barber, and seamstress when performed by the person occupying the building as his or her private dwelling and not including a partnership or the employment of more than one assistant in the performance of such services. 
Hotel: A building in which lodging or board and lodging are provided and offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms is made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. As such, it is open to the public in contrast to a boardinghouse, a lodginghouse, or a multiple family dwelling which are herein defined. 
Household and family service establishments: Establishments providing for the sale, repair, and/or maintenance of articles of normal home or family use and shall include cleaning and drying establishments, coin-operated laundries, lawn mower and saw sharpening, fix-it shops, smaller home appliance stores and repair shops, sewing machine stores, hardware stores, camera and photo supply stores, pet stores excluding veterinarian services, art stores, music stores, pawnshops, florists and any other shops of a similar nature; provided, however, that establishments for the selling, repairing, and/or maintenance of vehicles or tires shall not be deemed to be household and family service establishments. 
Junkyard: An open area where waste, used or secondhand materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled including but not limited to scrap iron and other metals, cloths, paper, rags, plumbing fixtures, rubber tires, bottles and vehicles. 
Living unit: See "Dwelling unit". 
Lodginghouse: A building or place where lodging is provided (or which is equipped to provide lodging regularly) by prearrangement for definite periods, for compensation, for three or more persons in contrast to hotel open to transients. 
Lot: A piece, parcel, tract, or plot of land. 
Lot area: The total horizontal area included within lot lines. 
Lot, corner: Lot bounded by more than one intersecting street. 
Lot coverage: The ration of enclosed ground floor area of all buildings on a lot to the horizontally projected area of the lot, expressed as a percentage. 
Lot depth: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
Lot lines: The boundary line of a lot. 
Lot of record: A lot whose existence, location and dimensions have been legally recorded or registered in a deed or on a plat prior to the effective date of this ordinance. 
Lot width: The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at the required front property line. 
Mobile home: A movable or portable dwelling constructed to be towed by a motor vehicle on its own chassis over Texas roads and highways under special permit. A mobile home is designed without permanent foundation for permanent or semipermanent living quarters. 
Mobile home park: A parcel of land designed, constructed, equipped, operated, managed and maintained for the purposes of providing spaces for rent or lease on which are placed mobile homes which are rented, leased, or owned. 
Mobile home subdivision: The division of a parcel of land into contiguous lots or parcels, designated by reference to the number or symbol of the lot or parcel contained in the plat of such subdivisions, for the purpose of transfer of ownership and the subsequent placement of a mobile home on said lot or parcel for the establishment of a permanent residence. 
Motel: A group of attached, semidetached, or detached buildings containing individual sleeping or living units, designed for or used temporarily by automobile tourists, or transients, with garage attached or parking space conveniently located to each unit and offering to the public daily as well as other longer term rental rates and maintaining a register of guests and/or their vehicles. 
Nonconforming building or structure: A building or structure existing at the time of passage or amendment of this ordinance which does not conform to the property development and regulations of area, height, lot coverage, yard setbacks, or other like requirements of the district in which it is located. 
Nonconforming lot: Any single lot, tract, or parcel of land in existence at the time of passage or amendment of this ordinance which does not meet the minimum dimensions, area or other regulations of the district in which it is located. 
Nonconforming use: Any land use existing at the time of passage or amendment of this ordinance which does not conform to the provisions, requirements, and regulations of the district in which it is located. 
Parking space, off-street: An area of not less than 162 square feet, surfaced with a suitable, dust-free surface, enclosed or unenclosed, exclusive of driveways and alleys, and adjacent to a driveway or alley, with the minimum dimensions of nine feet by 18 feet, designed so as to be used for parking of a motor vehicle. 
Personal service establishments: Establishments and offices offering services for the health and welfare of the individual and shall include barbershops, beauty shops, reducing or slenderizing studios, tanning salons, and any other establishments of a similar nature, but not including any professional services. 
Professional services: Services offered by doctors, lawyers, accountants, real estate brokers, insurance agents, land developers, engineers, architects, planners, computer systems analysts and any other individuals or groups offering professional services of a similar nature. 
Property line: See "Lot line." 
Public body: Any government or governmental agency, board, commission or authority of the City of Gilmer, Upshur County, State or [of] Texas or other U.S. Government or any legally constituted district. 
Public use: The use of any land, water or buildings by a public body for a public service or purpose. 
Rear: That boundary of a lot which is most distance from and is, or is most nearly, parallel to the front lot line. 
Recreational and sports stores: Establishments selling sporting goods, bicycles, and other sports and recreation equipment and shall include sporting goods stores, gun shops, bicycle shops including bicycle repair, toy stores, and any other stores selling goods of a similar nature, but excluding motorized recreation vehicle sales and services including cycle sales and services. 
Recreation vehicles: Any vehicle designed and intended for recreational purposes, and shall include trailers, travel trailers, camp-cars, pick-up campers, buses, tent trailers, or any other similar vehicles with or without motive power, designed and constructed to travel on public thoroughfares. 
Residence: See "Dwelling unit." 
Right-of-way: A strip of land dedicated or deeded to the perpetual use of the public. 
Salvage yard: See "Junkyard." 
Semipublic body: Churches and organizations operating as a nonprofit activity serving a public purpose of service and includes such organizations as noncommercial clubs and lodges, theater groups, recreational and neighborhood associations, and cultural activities. 
Semipublic use: The use of any land or building by a semipublic body. 
Side: Any property line not a front lot line or a rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is an exterior side lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line. 
Special exemption: A use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout a zoning district but which, if controlled as to number, area, location, or relation to the neighborhood, and approved through a public hearing of the board of adjustment would promote the public health, safety, welfare, morals, order, comfort, convenience, appearance, or prosperity. Such uses may be permitted in such zoning district as special exceptions and as outlined in the applicable zoning district. 
Story: That portion of a building, other than the basement, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it; or if there is no floor above it then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
Story, half: A partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plat of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than four feet above the floor of such story, except that any partial story used for residence purposes, other than by a family occupying the floor immediately below it, shall be deemed a full story. 
Street: A public or private right-of-way which affords a primary means of vehicular access to abutting properties, whether designated as a street, avenue, highway, road, boulevard, lane, place or however otherwise designated but does not include driveways to buildings. 
Alley: A public or private right-of-way, not more than 30 feet in width, which affords a secondary means of public or private access to property abutting thereon. 
Street right-of-way: The property line which bounds the right-of-way set aside for use as a street. Where sidewalks exist and the exact location of the right-of-way is unknown, the side of the sidewalk farthest from the centerline of the traveled street shall be considered as the right-of-way line. 
Structural alteration: Any change except for repair or replacement in the supporting members of a structure such as bearing wall or partitions, columns, beams, or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls of a structure. 
Structure: Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground, and having a height of four inches or more except for patios, parking and loading facilities, walls, or fences. 
Accessory structure: A structure incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the property and located on the same lot as the principal use. 
Trailer house: See "Mobile home." 
Usable open space: That part of the ground area (improved or unimproved) roof, balcony, or porch which is designed or intended for outdoor living, recreation, or utility space and may include recreational buildings or structures, but shall not include streets, driveways, parking and loading areas or any other paved vehicular ways and facilities as well as all required minimum front yard areas. 
Use: Any activity, functions, or purpose, to which a parcel of land or building is put and shall include the words used, arranged, or occupied, for any purpose, including all residential, commercial, business, industrial, public or any other use. 
Accessory use: A use which is wholly incidental to and supportive of the principal use on the same lot. 
Principal use: The primary purpose for which land or building issued as permitted by the applicable zoning district. 
Variance: A relaxation of the terms of this ordinance where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
Vehicle: Any self-propelled conveyance designed and used for the purpose of transporting or moving persons, animals, freight, merchandise, or any substance, and shall include passenger cars, trucks, buses, motorcycles, scooters, but shall not include tractors, construction equipment, or machinery, or any device used in performing a job as stated above. 
Yard: The open space existing on the same lot with a principal building, unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings from the ground upward, between the lot line and building line. 
Front yard: A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the principal building. 
Rear yard: A yard extending across the rear of a lot between the side lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the principal building. On both corner and interior lots the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the front yard. 
Side yard: A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard and being the minimum horizontal distance from the side lot line to the principal building. 
Side yard, street: A yard adjacent to a street between the front and the rear lot line and being the minimum horizontal distance from the side lot line to the principal building. 
Zoning district: A portion of the territory of the City of Gilmer, Texas, including the zoning map and all amendments of such zoning ordinance and zoning map.  
ARTICLE 4. - ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
Section 4-1. - Establishment of districts. 
In order to classify, regulate, and restrict the use of land, buildings and structures; to regulate and restrict the height and bulk of buildings; to regulate the area of yards and other open spaces about buildings; to regulate the intensity of land use, and to promote the orderly urban growth within the corporate area of the City of Gilmer, Texas, the following zones are established: 
I.	Single-family detached residential (R-1).
II.	Single-family detached residential (R-2).
III.	Multiple family residential (MF-1).
IV.	Multiple family residential (MF-2).
V.	Mobile home subdivision districts (RM-1).
VI.	Mobile home park districts (RM-2).
VII.	Local business districts (B-1).
VIII.	General business districts (B-2).
IX.	Light Industrial districts (LI).
X.	General industrial districts (GI). 
Section 4-2. - Designation of district boundaries. 
The boundaries of each district are designed and established as shown on the zoning map of the City of Gilmer, Texas. The regulation of this ordinance governing the use of land and buildings, the height of buildings, lot areas, setbacks, lot coverage, parking and loading requirements are hereby included within the boundaries of each and every district shown upon the zoning map.  
Section 4-3. - Rules for interpretation of district boundaries. 
When uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of the various districts on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
I.	Location of district boundary lines. 
A.	Centerlines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, avenues, and alleys shall be construed to follow such lines. 
B.	Lot lines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
C.	Corporate boundaries. Boundaries indicated as approximately following corporate boundaries shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
D.	Railroad lines. Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be the centerline of the railroad right-of-way. 
E.	Water lines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streams, canals, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
F.	Parallel lines. Boundaries that are approximately parallel to the centerlines or street line of streets, the centerlines or alley lines of alleys, or the centerlines or right-of-way lines of highways, shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated by the scale shown on the zoning map. 
II.	Uncertainties. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the zoning map, or in case any other uncertainty exists, the board of adjustment shall interpret the intent of the zoning map as to the location of district boundaries. 
III.	Street abandonments. Where a public road, street, avenue, or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to the property to which it reverted shall apply to such vacated or abandoned road, street, avenue, or alley. 
IV.	Annexed areas. All territory hereafter annexed to the City of Gilmer shall be temporarily classified as "R-1," Single-Family Detached Residential District, until permanent zoning is established by the city council of the City of Gilmer. The procedure for establishing permanent zoning or annexed territory shall conform to the procedure established by law. 
V.	Special provisions for lots divided by district boundaries. Where any lot, existing at the effective date of this ordinance is located in two or more districts in which different uses are permitted, or in which different use, area, bulk, accessory off-street parking and loading, or other regulations apply, the provisions of this subsection shall apply. 
A.	Use regulations. 
1.	If more than 50 percent of the lot area is located in one of two or more districts, the use regulations applicable to the district containing the majority lot area shall apply to the entire lot. 
2.	If the lot is divided so that 50 percent of the lot area lies within each of two or more districts, the applicable use regulations of the more restrictive district shall apply to the entire lot. 
B.	Dimensional requirement regulations. 
1.	If more than 50 percent of the lot area is located in one of two or more districts, the dimensional requirement regulations applicable to the district containing the majority lot area shall apply to the entire lot. 
2.	In cases where the lot is divided so that 50 percent of the lot area lies within two or more districts, the lot area, yard setback, height, lot coverage, and off-street parking and loading regulations and requirements for the district with the more restrictive regulations shall apply to the entire lot.  
Section 4-4. - Application of districts. 
I.	Existing uses. In all districts after the effective date of this ordinance: 
A.	The use of any existing building or other structure may be continued.
B.	The use of any existing tract of land may be continued.
C.	The enlargement, alteration, conversion, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or relocation of any existing building or other structure shall be in accordance with the dimensional requirement regulations of the district within which the property is located and other applicable requirements of this ordinance. 
II.	New uses. In all districts after the effective date of this ordinance any new building or parcel of land shall be used, constructed, or developed only in accordance with the use and dimensional requirement regulations of the district within which the property is located and other applicable requirements of this ordinance. 
III.	Uses not expressly provided for. In districts, where an application is made for a use not expressly permitted or prohibited, the enforcing official shall determine that use which is expressly prohibited or permitted most closely similar or allied to that use requested. In the event any applicant or citizen objects to a determination made by the enforcing official such person or persons may appeal his case to the board of adjustment.  
ARTICLE 5. - SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENTIAL (R-1) 
 
Section 5-1. - Purpose. 
The intent of this district is to provide for low-density, single-family, residential development of a moderately spacious character together with such public and semipublic buildings and facilities and accessory structures as may be necessary and are compatible with residential development of this nature. The provisions of this district are intended to protect and stabilize the essential characteristics of such existing development; to encourage such future development to occur on vacant land where the natural characteristics of such land are suitable for this type of development; to provide policies which will encourage low-density development to occur where public facilities and services and other factors are available which are conducive to residential development of such densities; and to encourage low-density development to occur where public facilities and services and other factors are available which are conducive to residential development of such densities; and to discourage any activities not compatible with such residential development.  
Section 5-2. - Permitted uses. 
I.	Uses permitted by right. 
A.	Single-family detached dwelling;
B.	Leasing or renting of rooms, however, the number of tenants in each dwelling shall not exceed two; 
C.	Public schools or private schools offering curricula comparable to that of the public schools; 
D.	Churches and other houses of worship (See Section 15-5). 
II.	Accessory structures permitted. Garages, carports, storage rooms, swimming pools, and other structures which are customarily incidental to the principal structures. 
III.	Uses permitted by special exception. 
A.	Cemeteries and mausoleums (See Section 15-3); 
B.	Child day care centers (See Section 15-4); 
C.	Public and private utility services, excluding sanitary landfills, incinerators, refuse and trash dumps (See Section 15-12); 
D.	Governmental buildings and services;
E.	Semipublic recreational facilities and buildings. 
Section 5-3. - Dimensional requirements. 
All principal and accessory structures shall be located and constructed in accordance with Section 5-4 where it applies, as well as to the following requirements: 
I.	Residential uses. 
A.	Minimum lot area	7,500 square feet
B.	Minimum lot width at building line	75 feet
C.	Minimum lot depth	90 feet
D.	Minimum yard setbacks:	
	1.	Front	25 feet
	2.	Side, interior	7.5 feet
	3.	Side, street	10 feet
	4.	Rear	20 feet
E.	Maximum building height of principal structures	35 feet
F.	Maximum percent of lot coverage	30 percent
 
II.	Accessory structures. 
A.	No accessory structure, excluding fences or walls, shall be closer to any property line than the required yard setbacks; however, an accessory structure to a residential dwelling may be as close as 7½ feet to any rear property line. 
B.	An accessory structure shall not exceed two stories of 25 feet in height. 
Section 5-4. - Special regulations. 
In addition to Section 5-3, dimensional requirements, the following requisitions shall apply where required: 
I.	Access (See Section 16-2); 
II.	Nonconforming uses (See Section 16-10); 
III.	Off-street parking and loading facilities (See Section 16-11); 
IV.	Parking, storing, keeping of commercial and recreational vehicles (See Section 16-12); 
V.	Flood hazard areas (See Section 16-6); 
VI.	Home occupations (See Section 16-7).  
ARTICLE 6. - SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENTIAL (R-2) 
 
Section 6-1. - Purpose. 
The intent of this district is to provide for medium-density, single-family, residential development on smaller lots together with such public and semipublic buildings and facilities and accessory structures as may be necessary and are compatible with residential development of this nature. The provisions of this district are intended to protect and stabilize the essential characteristics of such existing development; to permit population densities which are low enough to be compatible with neighboring single-family development; to encourage such future development to occur on vacant land where the natural characteristics of such land are suitable for this type of development; to provide policies which will encourage such medium-density residential development to occur where public facilities and services and other factors are available which are conducive to development of such densities; and to discourage any activities not compatible with such residential development.  
Section 6-2. - Permitted uses. 
I.	Uses permitted by right. 
A.	Single-family detached dwelling;
B.	Leasing or renting of rooms, however, the number of tenants in each dwelling shall not exceed two; 
C.	Public schools or private schools offering curricula comparable to that of the public schools; 
D.	Public recreational facilities and buildings;
E.	Churches and other houses of worship (See Section 15-5). 
II.	Accessory structures permitted. Garages, carports, storage rooms, swimming pools, and other structures which are customarily incidental to the principal structure. 
III.	Uses permitted by special exception. 
A.	Child day care centers (See Section 15-4); 
B.	Public and private utility services, excluding sanitary landfills, incinerators, refuse and trash dumps (See Section 15-12); 
C.	Governmental buildings and services;
D.	Semipublic recreational facilities and buildings. 
Section 6-3. - Dimensional requirements. 
All principal and accessory structures shall be located and constructed in accordance with Section 6-4 where it applies, as well as to the following requirements: 
I.	Residential uses. 
A.	Minimum lot area	6,000 square feet
B.	Minimum lot width at building line	60 feet
C.	Minimum lot depth	90 feet
D.	Minimum yard setbacks:	
	1.	Front	25 feet
	2.	Side, interior	7.5 feet
	3.	Side, street	10 feet
	4.	Rear	20 feet
E.	Maximum building height of principal structures	35 feet
F.	Maximum percent of lot coverage	30 percent
 
II.	Accessory structures. 
A.	No accessory structure, excluding fences or walls, shall be closer to any property line than the required yard setbacks; however, an accessory structure to a residential dwelling may be as close as 7½ feet to the rear of the property line. 
B.	An accessory structure shall not exceed two stories or 25 feet in height. 
Section 6-4. - Special regulations. 
In addition to Section 6-3, dimensional requirements, the following regulations shall apply where required: 
I.	Access (See Section 16-2); 
II.	Nonconforming uses (See Section 16-10); 
III.	Off-street parking and loading facilities (See Section 16-11); 
IV.	Parking, storing, keeping of commercial and recreational vehicles (See Section 16-12); 
V.	Home occupations (See Section 16-7); 
VI.	Flood hazard areas (See Section 16-6).  
ARTICLE 7. - MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (MF-1) 
 
Section 7-1. - Purpose. 
The intent of this district is to provide for an efficient and economic use of land through a mixture of medium-density, multiple family housing types together with such public and semipublic buildings and facilities and accessory structures as may be necessary and are compatible with such residential developments. The provisions of this district are intended to provide for the development of such projects with population densities and building heights that are low enough to be generally compatible with medium intensity, single-family areas or in transitional areas on land where the clustering of units would permit the most effective utilization of such land while preserving open space and other natural features; to encourage such development projects to locate within close proximity to activity centers; to avoid undue traffic congestion on minor streets by directing such new development to abut upon or have relatively close access to major transportation arteries; to locate in those areas of the community where such existing development is of a compatible density; to encourage privacy, internal stability, attractiveness, order and efficiency in these areas by providing for adequate light, air, and usable open space for dwellings and related facilities through the careful design and consideration of the proper functional relationship among uses permitted; and to provide policies which will encourage such residential development to occur where public facilities and services are existing or within plans for improvement.  
Section 7-2. - Permitted uses. 
I.	Uses permitted by right. 
A.	Multiple family dwellings, including apartments, townhouses, rowhouses, duplexes and other single-family attached dwellings; 
B.	Single-family, detached dwellings, including the leasing or renting of rooms in such dwellings; however, the number of tenants in each dwelling shall not exceed two; 
C.	Public schools or private schools offering curricula comparable to that of public schools; 
D.	Churches and other houses of worship (See Section 15-5); 
E.	Public recreational facilities and buildings.
II.	Accessory structures permitted. 
A.	Garages, carports, storage rooms, swimming pools, and other structures which are customarily incidental to the principal structure; 
B.	Administrative/management offices, club or game rooms, recreational facilities and uses, and laundry facilities intended for use solely by the residents of [a] family dwelling and their guests, however, leasing or renting of same on a commercial basis is strictly prohibited. 
III.	Uses permitted by special exception. 
A.	Child day care centers (See Section 15-4); 
B.	Governmental buildings and services;
C.	Public and private utility services, excluding sanitary landfills, incinerators, refuse and trash dumps (See Section 15-12); 
D.	Nursing and convalescent homes (See Section 15-11); 
E.	Semipublic recreational facilities and buildings;
F.	Clinics (See Section 15-8).  
Section 7-3. - Dimensional requirements. 
All principal and accessory structures shall be located and constructed in accordance with Section 7-4 where it applies, as well as to the following requirements: 
I.	Multiple family and single-family attached dwellings. 
A.	Minimum lot area	10,000 square feet
	1.	Per one bedroom unit	1,500 square feet
	2.	Per two or more bedroom unit	1,900 square feet
B.	Minimum lot width at building line	100 feet
C.	Minimum yard setbacks for one building per lot:	
	1.	Front	25 feet
	2.	Side, interior	10 feet
	3.	Side, street	15 feet
	4.	Rear	15 feet
D.	Maximum building height of principal structures	60 feet
E.	Maximum percent of lot coverage	30 percent
 
II.	Single-family, detached dwellings. 
A.	Minimum lot area	6,000 square feet
B.	Minimum lot width at building line	60 feet
C.	Minimum lot depth	90 feet
D.	Minimum yard setbacks:	
	1.	Front	25 feet
	2.	Side, interior	7.5 feet
	3.	Side, street	10 feet
	4.	Rear	20 feet
E.	Maximum building height of principal structures	35 feet
F.	Maximum percent of lot coverage	30 percent
 
III.	Accessory structures permitted. 
A.	No accessory structure, excluding fences or walls, shall be closer to any property line than the required yard setback; however, an accessory structure to a single-family, detached dwelling may be as close as 7½ feet to any rear property line; 
B.	An accessory structure shall not exceed two stories or 25 feet in height. 
Section 7-4. - Special regulation. 
In addition to Section 7-3, dimensional requirements, the following regulations shall apply where required: 
I.	Access (See Section 16-2); 
II.	Nonconforming uses (See Section 16-10); 
III.	Off-street parking and loading facilities (See Section 16-11); 
IV.	Parking, storing, keeping of commercial and recreational vehicles (See Section 16-12); 
V.	Home occupations (See Section 16-7); 
VI.	Flood hazard areas (See Section 16-6); 
VII.	Site plan approval process (See Article 17).  
ARTICLE 8. - MULTIPLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (MF-2) 
 
Section 8-1. - Purpose. 
The intent of this district is to provide for an efficient and economic use of land through a mixture of high-density, multiple family housing types together with such public and semipublic buildings and facilities and accessory structures as may be necessary and are compatible with such residential developments. The provisions of this district are intended to provide for the development of such projects with high population densities and building heights that are compatible with development in areas of similar intensity or in transitional areas on land where the clustering of units would permit the most effective utilization of such land while preserving open space and other natural features; to encourage such high-density residential developments to locate near concentrations of nonresidential activities and facilities such as employment centers; to avoid undue traffic congestion on minor streets by directing such development to abut upon or have relatively close access to major transportation arteries; to encourage privacy, internal stability, attractiveness, order and efficiency in these areas by providing for adequate light, air, and usable open space for dwellings and related facilities through the careful design and consideration of the proper functional relationship among uses permitted; and to provide policies which will encourage such residential development to occur where public facilities and services are existing or within plans for improvement.  
Section 8-2. - Permitted uses. 
I.	Uses permitted by right. 
A.	Multiple family dwellings, including apartments, townhouses, rowhouses, duplexes, and other single-family attached dwellings. 
B.	Single-family detached dwellings, including the leasing or renting of rooms in such dwellings; however the number of tenants in each dwelling shall not exceed two; 
C.	Public schools or private schools offering curricula comparable to that of the public schools; 
D.	Churches and other houses of worship (See Section 15-5); 
E.	Public recreational facilities and buildings;
F.	Clinics (See Section 15-8). 
II.	Accessory structures permitted. 
A.	Garages, carports, storage rooms, swimming pools, and other structures which are customarily incidental to the principal structure; 
B.	Administrative/management offices, club or game rooms, recreational facilities and uses, and laundry facilities intended for use solely by the residents of the development and their guests; however, leasing or renting of same on a commercial basis is strictly prohibited. 
III.	Uses permitted by special exception. 
A.	Children day care centers (See Section 15-4); 
B.	Governmental buildings and services;
C.	Public and private utility services, excluding sanitary landfills, incinerators, refuse and trash dumps (See Section 15-12); 
D.	Nursing and convalescent homes (See Section 15-11); 
E.	Semipublic recreational facilities and buildings;
F.	Hospital (See Section 15-8).  
Section 8-3. - Dimensional requirements. 
All principal and accessory structures shall be located and constructed in accordance with Section 8-4 where it applies, as well as to the following requirements: 
I.	Multiple family and single-family attached dwellings. 
A.	Minimum lot area	12,000 square feet
	1.	Per one bedroom unit	1,300 square feet
	2.	Per two bedroom unit	1,600 square feet
B.	Minimum lot width at building line	100 feet
C.	Minimum yard setbacks for one building per lot:	
	1.	Front	25 feet
	2.	Side, interior	10 feet
	3.	Side, street	15 feet
	4.	Rear	15 feet
D.	Maximum building height of principal structures	60 feet
E.	Maximum percent of lot coverage	30 percent
 
II.	Single-family detached dwellings. 
A.	Minimum lot area	6,000 square feet
B.	Minimum lot width at building line	60 feet
C.	Minimum lot depth	90 feet
D.	Minimum yard setback:	
	1.	Front	25 feet
	2.	Side, interior	7.5 feet
	3.	Side, street	10 feet
	4.	Rear	20 feet
E.	Maximum building height of principal structures	35 feet
F.	Maximum percent of lot coverage	30 percent
 
I.[III.]	Accessory structures. 
A.	No accessory structure, excluding fences or walls, shall be closer to any property line than the required yard setbacks, however an accessory structure to a single-family, detached dwelling may be as close as 7½ feet to any rear property line. 
B.	An accessory structure shall not exceed two stories or 25 feet in height. 
Section 8-4. - Special regulations. 
In addition to Section 8-3, dimensional requirements, the following regulations shall apply where required: 
I.	Access (See Section 16-2); 
II.	Nonconforming uses (See Section 16-10); 
III.	Off-street parking and loading facilities (See Section 16-11); 
IV.	Parking, storing, keeping of commercial and recreational vehicles (See Section 16-12); 
V.	Home occupations (See Section 16-7); 
VI.	Flood hazard areas (See Section 16-6); 
VII.	Site plan approval process (See Article 17).  
ARTICLE 9. - MOBILE HOME SUBDIVISION DISTRICT (RM-1) 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Subdivisions, ch. 78  
Section 9-1. - Purpose. 
The intent of this district is to provide for mobile home subdivision development on small lots together with such public and semipublic buildings and facilities and accessory structures or uses as may be necessary and are compatible with residential development of this nature. The district is specifically designed to permit the platting and selling of subdivided lots upon which mobile homes affixed to the land may be placed; to encourage such future development to occur on vacant land where the natural characteristics of such land are suitable for this type of development; to permit population densities which are low enough to be compatible with neighboring single-family development; to provide policies which will encourage such residential development to occur where public facilities and services are existing or within plans for improvement; and to discourage any activities not compatible with residential development.  
Section 9-2. - Permitted uses. 
I.	Uses permitted by right. 
A.	Mobile homes;
B.	Modular homes;
C.	Public schools or private schools offering curricula compatible to that of the public schools; 
D.	Public recreational facilities and buildings;
E.	Single family detached dwellings (See Section  9.2.IE added by amendment on 8-13-1981)
II.	Accessory structures permitted. Garages, carports, storage rooms, swimming pools, and other structures which are customarily incidental to the principal structure. 
III.	Uses permitted by special exception. 
A.	Children day care centers (See Section 15-4); 
B.	Churches and other houses of worship (See Section 15-5); 
C.	Public and private utility services, excluding sanitary landfills, incinerators, refuse and trash dumps (See Section 15-12); 
D.	Governmental buildings and services;
E.	Golf courses;
F.	Semipublic recreational facilities and buildings. 
Section 9-3. - Dimensional requirements. 
All principal and accessory structures shall be located and constructed in accordance with Section 9-4 where it applies, as well as to the following requirements: 
I.	Residential uses. 
A.	Minimum lot area	6,000 square feet
B.	Minimum lot width at building line	60 feet
C.	Minimum yard setbacks:	
	1.	Front	20 feet
	2.	Side, each	15 feet
	3.	Rear	15 feet
D.	Maximum percent of lot coverage	30 percent
 
II.	Accessory structures. 
A.	No accessory structure, excluding fences or walls, shall be closer to any property line than the required yard setbacks, however, an accessory structure to a residential dwelling may be as close as 7½ feet to any rear property line; 
B.	An accessory structure shall not exceed two stories or 25 feet in height.
III.	Additional requirements. Each mobile home shall be located or placed on a lot containing a permanent foundation. A skirt or apron which is continually and properly maintained shall also be required to surround each mobile home between the bottom of the unit and the ground.  
Section 9-4. - Special regulations. 
In addition to Section 9-3, dimensional requirements, the following regulations shall apply where required: 
I.	Access (See Section 16-2); 
II.	Nonconforming uses (See Section 16-10); 
III.	Off-street parking and loading facilities (See Section 16-11); 
IV.	Parking, storing, keeping of commercial and recreational vehicles (See Section 16-12); 
V.	Home occupations (See Section 16-7); 
VI.	Flood hazard areas (See Section 16-6).  
ARTICLE 10. - MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT (RM-2) 
 
Section 10-1. - Purpose. 
The intent of this district is to provide for mobile home park developments together with such public and semipublic buildings and facilities and accessory structures as may be necessary and are compatible with residential surroundings of this nature. The district is specifically designed to accommodate in such development mobile homes on rented parcels at acceptable densities; to accommodate the housing needs of those residents who prefer mobile home living and of those who desire an economic alternative to conventional dwellings; to encourage such future development to occur on vacant land where the natural characteristics of such land are suitable for this type of development; to avoid undue traffic congestion on minor streets by directing such developments to abut upon or have relative close access to major transportation arteries; to provide policies which will encourage such residential development to occur where public facilities and services are existing or within plans for improvement; and to protect mobile home parks from encroachment by incompatible uses.  
Section 10-2. - Permitted uses. 
I.	Uses permitted by right. 
A.	Mobile homes;
B.	Public schools or private schools offering curricula comparable to that of the public schools; 
C.	Public recreational facilities and buildings;
D.	Single-family residential detached dwellings.
II.	Accessory structures permitted. 
A.	Garages, carports, storage rooms, and other structures which are customarily incidental to the principal structure; 
B.	Administrative and management office, clubs, or game rooms, recreational facilities and uses and laundry facilities intended for use solely by the residents of the development and their guests, however, leasing or renting of same on a commercial basis is strictly prohibited. 
III.	Uses permitted by special exceptions. 
A.	Child day care centers (See Section 15-4); 
B.	Public and private utility services, excluding sanitary landfills, incinerators, refuse and trash dumps (See Section 15-12); 
C.	Governmental buildings and services;
D.	Golf courses;
E.	Semipublic recreational facilities and buildings;
F.	The sale of new and used mobile homes shall be permitted within the boundaries of an approved mobile home park when clearly incidental to the operation of said park, subject to the following conditions which are intended to protect the residential character of the park: 
1.	Allowable number. The number of mobile homes for sale shall not exceed ten percent of the total number of approved mobile spaces in the mobile home park. 
2.	Location. Mobile homes for sale shall be located only on approved mobile home spaces in the mobile home park, and subject to the same setbacks and yard requirements as occupied mobile homes. 
3.	Maintenance. There shall be no renovating, overhaul, or repair to mobile homes offered for sale within the mobile home park. However, customary maintenance shall be permitted such as would be allowed for an occupant while living in a mobile home.  
Section 10-3. - Dimensional requirements. 
All principal and accessory structures shall be located and constructed in accordance with Section 10-4 where it applies, as well as to the following requirements: 
I.	Residential uses. 
A.	Minimum park size	10 acres
	a.[1.] Maximum density	6 units/gross acre
B.	Minimum setback from park boundaries	35 feet
C.	Minimum lot area	5,000 square feet
D.	Minimum horizontal distance between mobile homes:	
	1.	Side of side	25 feet
	2.	End to end	15 feet
	3.	Side to end	15 feet
E.	Minimum horizontal distance between the corners of adjacent mobile homes that do not face each other or overlap 	15 feet
F.	Minimum horizontal distance between a mobile home and a mobile home and mobile home park access or circulation drive 	25 feet
 
II.	Accessory structures. An accessory structure shall not exceed two stories or 25 feet in height. 
III.	Additional requirements. 
A.	Mobile home space. 
1.	Space. Each mobile home shall be located on a space which will permit each unit to be sufficiently supported and anchored in accordance with the Texas Department of Labor and Standards, Texas Mobile Home Tie-Down Standards. 
2.	Boundaries. Each approved mobile home shall be clearly defined by stakes or such other type markers that physically delineate as to the location of each said space within a park development. 
B.	Skirting. A skirt or apron which is continually and properly maintained shall be required to surround each mobile home between the bottom of the unit and the ground. 
C.	Street or driveway improvements. All streets or driveways shall be paved, oiled, or graveled in such a manner as to clearly distinguish the road from playgrounds and parks. 
D.	Streetlighting. All streets or driveways within the park shall be lighted at night with electric lights providing a minimum illumination of 0.2 footcandles. 
E.	Usable open space. A minimum of 20 percent of the gross usable land area within the mobile home park boundaries shall be designed for use as an active and/or passive recreational area(s). 
F.	Parking. No parking shall be allowed on any mobile home park paved access or circulation drives. 
G.	Existing homes. All mobile homes existing in mobile home parks at the time of the passage of this ordinance shall comply with the requirements concerning tie-downs and skirting previously set out in this ordinance.  
Section 10-4. - Special regulations. 
In addition to Section 10-3, dimensional requirements, the following regulations shall apply where required: 
I.	Access (See Section 16-2); 
II.	Nonconforming uses (See Section 16-10); 
III.	Off-street parking and loading facilities (See Section 16-11); 
IV.	Parking, storing, keeping of commercial and residential vehicles (See Section 16-12); 
V.	Home occupations (See Section 16-7); 
VI.	Flood hazard areas (See Section 16-6); 
VII.	Site plan approval process (See Article 17).  
ARTICLE 11. - LOCAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (B-1) 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18  
Section 11-1. - Purpose. 
The intent of this district is to provide for a limited number of existing or potential low-intensity office, business, and commercial facilities. The provisions of this district are intended to permit the continuance of existing and compatible business and commercial developments which benefit from being in close proximity to each other, to avoid the development of any large general strip commercial or business developments; to encourage such future low-intensity development to occur on vacant land where the natural characteristics of such land are suitable for this type of development; to avoid undue traffic congestion on minor streets by directing such developments to abut upon or have relative close access to major transportation arteries; and to discourage any encroachment by industrial, residential, or other uses considered capable of adversely affecting the localized commercial and business characteristics of the district.  
Section 11-2. - Permitted uses. 
I.	Uses permitted by right. 
A.	Retail-commercial sales and service:
1.	Food stores;
2.	Dry good stores;
3.	Household and family service establishments;
4.	Recreation and sport stores;
5.	Drugstores and pharmacies;
6.	Business service establishments.
B.	Professional and personal services:
1.	Personal service establishments;
2.	Professional services.
C.	Churches and other houses of worship (See Section 15-5); 
D.	Governmental buildings and facilities;
E.	Public and private utilities, excluding sanitary landfills, incinerators, refuse and trash dumps (See Section 15-12). 
II.	Accessory structures permitted. Garages, storage rooms, and other structures which are customarily incidental to the principal structure. 
III.	Uses permitted by special exceptions. 
A.	Eating establishments;
B.	Financial institutions;
C.	Gasoline service stations and car washes (See Section 15-7); 
D.	Child day care centers (See Section 15-4); 
E.	Single-family detached dwellings. 
Section 11-3. - Dimensional requirements. 
All principal and accessory structures shall be located and constructed in accordance with Section 12-4 where it applies, as well as to the following requirements: 
I.	Retail-commercial sales and service, professional and personal services; eating establishments; and financial institutions. 
A.	Minimum lot area	No limitations
B.	Minimum yard setbacks:	
	1.	Front	25 feet
	2.	Side, interior	0 feet
		A.	Except where the side yard abuts a residentialdistrict	25 feet
	3.	Side, street	15 feet
	4.	Rear	0 feet
		A.	Except where the rear yard abuts a residential district	25 feet
C.	Maximum building height of principal structure	60 feet
D.	Maximum lot coverage	No limitations
 
II.	Accessory structures. An accessory structure shall not exceed two stories or 25 feet in height. 
III.	Additional requirements. 
A.	No parking, storage, or similar use shall be permitted in the required front yards of this district, except that automobile parking is permitted in such yards if separated by at least 100 feet from any single-family residential district. 
B.	No parking, storage, or similar use shall be permitted in any required side yard (interior or street) of this district adjoining a single-family residential district.  
Section 11-4. - Special regulations. 
In addition to Section 11-3, dimensional requirements, the following regulations shall apply where required: 
I.	Access (See Section 16-2); 
II.	Nonconforming uses (See Section 16-10); 
III.	Off-street parking and loading facilities (See Section 16-11); 
IV.	Flood hazard areas (See Section 16-6); 
V.	Site plan approval process (See Article 17).  
ARTICLE 12. - GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (B-2) 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18  
Section 12-1. - Purpose. 
The intent of this district is to provide for areas that are designed for the commercial needs that appeal to a wider community interest than those found in the local business district. The provisions of this district are intended to encourage general commercial development to locate along major arteries where sites are adequate for an integrated design of commercial and business establishments particularly adjacent to major intersections where such development could most adequately serve the needs of the community's residents and those of the traveling public without resorting to excessive quantities of strip development; and to discourage any encroachment by industrial, residential or other uses considered capable of adversely affecting the general business characteristics of this district.  
Section 12-2. - Permitted uses. 
I.	Uses permitted by right. 
A.	Retail-commercial sales and services:
1.	Food stores;
2.	Dry good stores;
3.	Household and family service establishments;
4.	Recreation and sport stores;
5.	Drugstores and pharmacies;
6.	Business service establishments;
7.	Eating establishments;
8.	Vehicular and equipment sales and services;
9.	Lumber and building materials;
10.	Vehicular and equipment rentals;
11.	Contractor shops and yards;
12.	Furniture and appliance stores;
B.	Professional and personal services:
1.	Personal service establishments;
2.	Professional services;
3.	Financial institutions;
C.	Hotels, motels, motor lodges;
D.	Gasoline service stations and car washes (See Section 15-7); 
E.	Hospitals and clinics (See Section 15-8); 
F.	Major automotive repair facilities;
G.	Funeral homes and mortuaries (See Section 15-6); 
H.	Churches and other houses of worship (See Section 15-5); 
I.	Governmental buildings and facilities;
J.	Public and private utilities, excluding sanitary landfills, incinerators, refuse and trash dumps (See Section 15-12). 
II.	Accessory structures permitted. Garages, storage rooms, and other structures which are customarily incidental to the principal structure. 
III.	Uses permitted by special exception. 
A.	Veterinary hospitals or clinics (See Section 15-14); 
B.	Child day care centers (See Section 15-4); 
C.	Wholesale establishments and warehouses;
D.	Light industrial uses;
E.	Single-family detached dwellings. 
Section 12-3. - Dimensional requirements. 
All principal and accessory structures shall be located and constructed in accordance with Section 12-4 where it applies, as well as to the following requirements: 
I.	Retail-commercial sales and services; professional and personal services; hotels, motels, or motor lodges; major automotive repair facilities; and wholesale establishments and warehouses. 
A.	Minimum lot area	No limitations
B.	Minimum yard setbacks:	
	1.	Front	25 feet
	2.	Side, interior	0 feet
		a.	Except where the side yard abuts a residentialdistrict	25 feet
	3.	Side, street	15 feet
	4.	Rear	0 feet
		a.	Except where the rear yard abuts a residential district	25 feet
C.	Maximum building height of principal structure	35 feet
D.	Maximum lot coverage	No limitations
 
II.	Accessory structures. An accessory structure shall not exceed two stories or 25 feet in height.  
Section 12-4. - Special regulations. 
In addition to Section 12-3, dimensional requirements, the following regulations shall apply where required: 
I.	Access (See Section 16-2); 
II.	Nonconforming uses (See Section 16-10); 
III.	Off-street parking and loading facilities (See Section 16-11); 
IV.	Flood hazard areas (See section 16-6); 
V.	Site plan approval process (See Article 17).  
ARTICLE 13. - LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (LI) 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18  
Section 13-1. - Purpose. 
The intent of this district is to provide sufficient space in appropriate locations physically suitable for the development of certain types of retail-commercial sales and services, research operations, and wholesale and storage distribution concerns and enterprises engaged in light manufacturing, processing, and/or fabrication of products and machinery not likely to cause undesirable effects upon nearby or adjacent residential or commercial property. The provisions of this district are intended to accommodate enterprises with functions requiring access to transportation services by providing them with locations that are in close proximity to major transportation facilities for the reception and eventual distribution of their goods and/or services; to require appropriate buffering around such development either through natural features or landscaping in an attempt to maintain its compatibility with surrounding land uses; to provide for the most efficient and economic use of land through the careful design and consideration of the proper functional relationship among uses permitted; and to provide policies which will require such development to occur where public facilities and services are existing or within plans for improvement.  
Section 13-2. - Permitted uses. 
I.	Uses permitted by right. 
A.	Research activities:
1.	Industrial research laboratories;
2.	Medical research laboratories;
3.	General scientific research laboratories.
B.	Retail-commercial sales and services:
1.	Lumber and building materials;
2.	Contractor shops and yards;
3.	Vehicular and equipment sales and services;
4.	Vehicular and equipment rentals and/or storage services;
5.	Gasoline service stations and car washes (See Section 15-7). 
C.	Primary light industrial activities:
1.	Bus, cab, truck and railroad terminals, including the storage and maintenance of such vehicles; 
2.	Pipeline and petroleum transporting enterprises, excluding refining and storage of petroleum; 
3.	Warehousing and wholesaling concerns;
4.	Manufacturing and repairing of electronic or neon signs, light sheet metal products, including heating, ventilating, and air conditioning equipment, cornices, eaves, and the like; 
5.	Light manufacturing, assembling, processing, and packaging plants.
D.	Secondary industrial service activities:
1.	Photographic processing or blueprinting;
2.	Dry cleaning, dyeing, and laundry plants;
3.	Printing, book binding, lithograph, and publishing plants;
4.	Moving and storage, enclosed;
5.	Business offices, accessory to the private industrial activity;
6.	Food storage lockers, including cold storage.
E.	Governmental buildings and services;
F.	Veterinary hospitals or clinics (See Section 15-14); 
G.	Funeral homes and mortuaries (See Section 15-6). 
II.	Accessory structures permitted. 
A.	Storage facilities for goods used in or produced by permitted retail-commercial and industrial uses or related activities; 
B.	Caretakers residence, accessory to a primary industrial activity.
III.	Uses permitted by special exception. 
A.	Radio and television transmitting towers (See Section 15-13); 
B.	Public and private utility services (See Section 15-12);
C.	Junkyards and salvage yards (See Section 15-7).  
Section 13-3. - Dimensional requirements. 
All principal and accessory structures shall be located and constructed in accordance with Section 13-4 where it applies, as well as to the following requirements: 
I.	Research activities; retail-commercial sales and services; primary industrial activities; secondary industrial activities. 
A.	Minimum lot area	No limitations
B.	Minimum yard setbacks:	
	1.	Front	25 feet
	2.	Side, interior	20 feet
		a.	Except where the side yard abuts and is used for access to a railroad siding	0 feet
		b.	Except where the rear yard abuts a residentialdistrict	50 feet
	3.	Side, street	25 feet
	4.	Rear:	
		a.	Except where the rear yard abuts and is used for access to a railroad siding	0 feet
		b.	Except where the rear yard abuts a residential district	50 feet
C.	Maximum building height of principal structure	35 feet
D.	Maximum lot coverage	No limitations
 
II.	Accessory structures. No accessory structure, excluding fences or walls, shall be closer to any property line than the required setbacks or exceed the maximum building height of the principal structure. 
III.	Additional requirements. 
A.	Enclosed operations. All manufacturing, assembling, or processing located within 100 feet of any residential district of any kind, except for storage and off-street parking and loading, shall be conducted within completely enclosed structures. 
B.	Outdoor storage. No outdoor storage of materials or products shall be permitted in any of the required yard setback areas.  
Section 13-4. - Special regulations. 
In addition to Section 13-3, dimensional requirements, the following regulations shall apply where required: 
I.	Access (See Section 16-2); 
II.	Flood hazard areas (See Section 16-6); 
III.	Nonconforming uses (See Section 16-10); 
IV.	Off-street parking and loading facilities (See Section 16-11); 
V.	Site plan approval process (See Article 17).  
ARTICLE 14. - GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT (GI) 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18  
Section 14-1. - Purpose. 
The intent of this district is to provide areas in appropriate locations where various heavy and extensive industrial operations can be conducted without creating hazards or property devaluation to surrounding land uses. The provisions of this district are intended to accommodate enterprises with functions requiring access to transportation services by providing them with locations that are in close proximity to necessary transportation facilities for the reception and eventual distribution of their goods and/or services; to require appropriate buffering around such development either through natural features or landscaping in an attempt to maintain its compatibility with surrounding land uses; to encourage such future development to occur on vacant land where the natural characteristics of such land are suitable for this type of development; to provide for the most efficient and economic use of land through the careful design and consideration of the proper functional relationship among uses permitted; and to provide policies which will require such development to occur where public facilities and services are existing or within plans for improvement.  
Section 14-2. - Permitted uses. 
I.	Uses permitted by right. 
A.	Research activities:
1.	Industrial research laboratories;
2.	Medical research laboratories;
3.	General science research laboratories;
B.	Retail-commercial sales and services:
1.	Lumber and buildings materials;
2.	Contractor shops and yards;
3.	Vehicular and equipment sales and services;
4.	Vehicular and equipment rentals and/or storage services;
5.	Gasoline service stations and car washes (See Section 15-7). 
C.	Primary industrial activities:
1.	Bus, cab, truck, and railroad terminals, including the storage and maintenance of such vehicles; 
2.	Pipeline and petroleum transporting enterprises;
3.	Warehousing and wholesaling concerns;
4.	Manufacturing and repairing of electronic or neon signs, light sheet metal products, including heating, ventilating, and air conditioning equipment, cornices, eaves and the like; 
5.	Light manufacturing, assembling, processing and packaging plants;
6.	Asphalt and concrete products or central mixing and proportioning plants;
7.	Flour, feed, and grain packaging, blending or storage;
8.	Fertilizer, organic or nonorganic;
9.	Petroleum storage, combined total capacity of all tanks not exceeding 150,000 gallons;
10.	Glass manufacturing and products.
D.	Secondary industrial service activities:
1.	Photographic processing or blueprinting;
2.	Dry cleaning, dyeing and laundry plants;
3.	Printing, book binding, lithograph and publishing plants;
4.	Moving and storage, enclosed;
5.	Business offices, accessory to the primary industrial activity;
6.	Food storage lockers, including cold storage;
7.	Well drilling agencies and soil survey agencies;
8.	Construction operations and storage yard;
9.	Brick, firebrick, and clay products;
10.	Wallboard and plaster, building, insulation, and composition flooring operations.
E.	Agricultural and forestry activities;
F.	Governmental buildings and services;
G.	Veterinary hospitals and clinics (See Section 15-14). 
II.	Accessory structures permitted. 
A.	Storage facilities for goods used in or produced by permitted retail-commercial and industrial uses or related activities; 
B.	Caretakers residence, accessory to a primary industrial activity.
III.	Uses permitted by special exception. 
A.	Radio and television transmitting towers (See Section 15-13); 
B.	Public and private utility services (See Section 15-12);
C.	Junkyards and salvage yards (See Section 15-9).  
Section 14-3. - Dimensional requirements. 
All principal and accessory structures shall be located and constructed in accordance with Section 14-4 where it applies, as well as to the following requirements: 
I.	Research activities; retail-commercial sales and services; primary industrial activities; secondary industrial activities. 
A.	Minimum lot area	No limitations
B.	Minimum yard setbacks:	
	1.	Front	25 feet
	2.	Side, interior	20 feet
		a.	Except where the side yard abuts and is used for access to a railroad siding	0 feet
		b.	Except where the rear yard abuts a residentialdistrict	50 feet
	3.	Side, street	25 feet 
	4.	Rear:	
		a.	Except where the rear yard abuts and is used for access to a railroad siding	0 feet
		b.	Except where the rear yard abuts a residential district	50 feet
C.	Maximum building height of principal structure	35 feet
D.	Maximum lot coverage	No limitations
 
II.	Accessory structures. No accessory structure, excluding fences or walls, shall be closer to any property line than the required setbacks or exceed the maximum building height of the principal structure. 
III.	Additional requirements. 
A.	Enclosed operations. All manufacturing, assembling or processing located within 100 feet of any residential district of any kind except for storage and off-street parking and loading shall be conducted within completely enclosed structures. 
B.	Outdoor storage. No outdoor storage of materials or products shall be permitted in any of the required yard setback areas.  
Section 14-4. - Special regulations. 
In addition to Section 14-3, dimensional requirements, the following regulations shall apply where required: 
I.	Access (See Section 16-2); 
II.	Flood hazard areas (See Section 16-6); 
III.	Nonconforming uses (See Section 16-10). 
IV.	Off-street parking and loading facilities (See Section 16-11); 
V.	Site plan approval process (See Article 17).  
ARTICLE 15. - SPECIAL PROVISIONS 
 
Section 15-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish standards and considerations in order to achieve the maximum compatibility of the following listed uses with their immediate and general settings.  
Section 15-2. - Accessory structures. 
Detached accessory structures shall be at least five feet from any principal structure on the same lot within residential districts, and shall be considered in the calculating of the total coverage.  
Section 15-3. - Cemeteries and mausoleums. 
In addition to the requirements applicable to cemeteries and other such similar uses within the districts where such are permitted, the following requirements and regulations shall be complied with: 
I.	Dimensional requirements. 
A.	Minimum parcel size. The minimum parcel size for cemeteries and/or mausoleums shall not be less than ten acres. 
B.	Minimum yard setbacks. No part of any crypt, mausoleum, or other building, other than a subterranean grave, shall be less than 50 feet from the nearest lot line. 
C.	Parcel coverage. Crypts, mausoleums or other structures, other than monuments, shall together not occupy more than ten percent of the total area. 
II.	Buffering and screening. A continuous screening device shall be provided and maintained along all boundary lines separating cemeteries from any contiguous land.  
Section 15-4. - Child day care centers. 
In addition to the requirements applicable to day care centers within districts where such are permitted, the following requirements and regulations shall be complied with: 
I.	Dimensional requirements. 
A.	Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall not be less than 10,000 square feet and/or in compliance with state law. 
B.	Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width at the property line shall not be less than 100 feet. 
C.	Minimum yard setbacks.	
	1.	Front	25 feet
	2.	Side, interior	10 feet
	3.	Side, street	15 feet
	4.	Rear	20 feet
D.	Maximum building height of principal structure	35 feet
E.	Maximum lot coverage	30 percent
 
F.	Minimum outdoor play area. There shall be provided a minimum of not less than 60 square feet of outdoor play area per child. Said play area shall be provided on the same lot as the principal use, and shall not be located in the required front yard. 
II.	Buffering and screening. 
A.	There shall be a fence six feet in height surrounding all play areas. Such fencing shall be continuous with latching gates at exit and entrance points. The fencing may be of masonry construction, chainlink or wood. 
B.	In the case of special exceptions, the board of adjustments may require that plantings be placed on the outside of the above required fencing and may also require that such fencing areas be setbacks from any property line.  
Section 15-5. - Churches and other houses of worship. 
In addition to the requirements applicable to churches and other houses of worship within the districts where such are permitted, the following requirements and regulations shall be complied with: 
I.	Dimensional requirements. 
A.	Minimum lot area	1 acre
B.	Minimum lot width	100 feet
C.	Minimum yard setbacks	35 feet
D.	Maximum building height of principal structure, excluding church spire	35 feet
E.	Maximum lot coverage	25 percent
 
II.	Access. All ingress and egress points shall be to or from arterials.  
Section 15-6. - Funeral homes and mortuaries. 
In addition to the requirements applicable to funeral homes and mortuaries within the districts where such are permitted, the following requirements and regulations shall be complied with: 
I.	Dimensional requirements. 
A.	Minimum lot area	1 acre
B.	Minimum lot width	100 feet
C.	Minimum yard setbacks	35 feet
D.	Maximum building height of principal structure	35 feet
E.	Maximum lot coverage	30 percent
 
II.	Access. All ingress and egress points shall be to or from arterials. 
III.	Buffering and screening. All such operations including the loading and unloading facilities shall be screened from abutting properties.  
Section 15-7. - Gasoline service stations and car washes. 
In addition to the requirements applicable to gasoline service stations and car washes within the districts where such are permitted, the following requirements and regulations shall be complied with: 
I.	Gasoline service stations. 
A.	Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area to be occupied by a gasoline service station shall not be less than 12,000 square feet with a lot frontage of not less than 100 feet. 
B.	Minimum pump setback. All fuel pumps and pump islands shall be set back a minimum distance of at least 15 feet from any street right-of-way line, property line or buffer strip. 
C.	Permitted uses. 
1.	Automobiles, trucks, luggage carriers, boats, trailers, but not including wrecks thereof, may be parked on the premises, only within a totally enclosed building. 
2.	Minor adjustments or repairs to automobiles, trucks, trailers, or other vehicles which do not require body work, painting, or removal of engines from frames or dismantling of differentials shall be permitted. Major adjustments or repairs at service stations shall only be permitted within zoning districts where such is so specified. 
3.	Retail sale of:
a.	Minor automobile parts and accessories, gasoline, diesel fuel, kerosene, lubricating oils and greases; 
b.	Articles dispensed by vending machines providing such vending machines are located under the roof of the principal structure. 
D.	Outdoor storage. No permanent outdoor storage of materials or products shall be permitted. 
E.	Repair facilities. No lift or repair facilities shall be located outside of the principal structure. 
III.[II.]	Car washes. 
A.	Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area to be occupied by a car wash containing either one conveyor belt washing stall or four or less self-service and/or automatic washing stalls shall not be less than 15,000 square feet with a lot frontage of not less than 100 feet. For each additional washing stall over one or four, as the case may be, an additional 2,000 square feet shall be added to the minimum lot requirement. 
B.	Compliance with other regulations. Except as provided for in the above paragraph, all car washes shall comply with the regulations of Section 15-7I. above.  
Section 15-8. - Hospitals and clinics. 
In addition to the requirements applicable to hospitals and clinics within districts where such are permitted, the following requirements and regulations shall be complied with: 
I.	Hospitals. 
A.	Dimensional requirements. 
1.	Minimum lot area	2 acres
2.	Minimum lot width	200 feet
3.	Minimum yard setbacks	100 feet
4.	Maximum building height of principal structure	60 feet
5.	Maximum lot coverage	40 percent
 
B.	Access. All ingress and egress points shall be to and from arterials. 
II.	Clinics. 
A.	Dimensional Requirements. 
1.	Minimum lot area	10,000 square feet
2.	Minimum lot width	100 feet
3.	Minimum yard setback	
	a.	Front	25 feet
	b.	Side, interior	10 feet
		(1) except where the side yard abuts a residential district	25 feet
	c.	Side, street	15 feet
	d.	Rear	25 feet
4.	Maximum building height of principal structure	35 feet
5.	Maximum lot coverage	20 percent
 
B.	Access. All ingress and egress points shall be to or from arterials. 
C.	Parking. In addition to the required off-street parking requirements for such uses, automobile parking will be permitted in front yard setbacks if separated by at least 100 feet from any residential dwelling.  
Section 15-9. - Junkyards and salvage yards. 
In addition to the requirements within the "LI" and "GI" districts where such uses are permitted, the following requirements and regulations shall be complied with: 
I.	Dimensional requirements. 
A.	Minimum lot area	2 acres
B.	Minimum lot location:	
	1.	Distance from any residentially zoned district	300 feet
	2.	Distance from any street right-of-way line	25 feet
	3.	Distance from any other property line	20 feet
C.	Maximum building height of principal structure	35 feet
 
II.	Buffering and screening. The entire area occupied by a junkyard or salvage yard shall be surrounded by a continuous solid masonry wall or wood fence eight feet in height without openings except for entrance and exits, which shall be equipped with unpierced gates. 
III.	Site plan approval. All such uses shall be required to have site plan approval in accordance with Article 17  
Section 15-10. - Mobile home. 
In addition to the requirements within the districts where such uses are permitted, the following requirements and regulations shall be complied with: 
I.	Location. No person shall park, store or use a mobile home on any lot other than in a licensed mobile home park or a mobile home subdivision district within the corporate limits of the City of Gilmer, except that a mobile home may be used as a temporary office or shelter incidental to construction or development of premises on which the mobile home is located, only during the time construction on [or] development is actively underway. Mobile home sales establishments, excluding the use of mobile homes as living units, shall be permitted in the "B-2," "LI," or "GI" districts only. 
II.	Additional requirements. Mobile homes that now exist in single-family or multiple family residential districts shall be required to meet the Texas Department of Labor and Standards' Texas Mobile Home Tie-down Standards. A skirt or apron which is continually and properly maintained shall also be required to surround each mobile home between the bottom of the unit and the ground. The time period for meeting these standards will be one year from the enactment date of this ordinance.  
Section 15-11. - Nursing and convalescent homes. 
In addition to the requirements within the "MF-1" and "MF-2" districts where such uses are permitted, the following requirements and regulations shall be complied with: 
I.	Dimensional requirements. All such requirements for such facilities shall be in accordance with the principal dimensional requirements of the district in which such facilities are permitted. 
II.	Buffering and screening. 
A.	Equipment storage. Any unhoused equipment shall be enclosed by a chainlink fence of not less than six feet in height without openings except for entrances and exits, which shall be equipped with unpierced gates or other screening as approved by the planning and zoning commission; however, when the equipment is totally enclosed within a building, no fence or other screening device shall be required. 
B.	Residential districts. In residential districts, such facilities shall not include the storage of vehicles or equipment used in the maintenance of any utility or create hazardous effects; however, such other equipment may be stored in residential districts provided it is enclosed within a building or properly screened.  
Section 15-13. - Radio and television transmission towers. 
In addition to the requirements applicable to such uses within the districts where such are permitted, the following requirements and regulations shall be complied with: 
I.	Dimensional requirements. 
A.	Tower location. Towers shall be centrally located on the site so as to provide a minimum distance equal to 1½ times the height of the tower from all property lines. 
B.	Anchor location. All tower supports and peripheral anchors shall be located entirely within the boundaries of the property and in no case less than ten feet from the property lines. 
C.	Minimum yard setback - accessory structures. All accessory structures shall conform to the setback requirements for the district in which the use is located. 
II.	Buffering and screening. A chainlink fence of not less than eight feet in height from finished grade shall be provided around each tower, however, no such fencing shall be required when a tower is affixed to the roof of a building. 
III.	Equipment storage. No equipment, mobile or unmobile, not used in direct support of the transmission or relay facility, shall be stored or parked on the site unless repairs to the facility are being made. 
IV.	Aircraft hazard. No tower shall be permitted to encroach into or through an established airport approach plan.  
Section 15-14. - Veterinary hospitals and clinics. 
In addition to the requirements applicable to such uses within the districts where such are permitted, the following requirements and regulations shall be complied with: 
I.	Dimensional requirements. 
A.	Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area shall not be less than 10,000 square feet. 
B.	Minimum lot width. The minimum lot width at the building line shall not be less than 100 feet. 
C.	Minimum yard setback. All buildings and structures excluding fences or walls shall be set back a minimum distance of 25 feet from any residential district boundary. All other setbacks shall conform to the requirements of the district in which such uses are located. 
D.	Additional requirements. Veterinary hospitals or clinics shall not be required to meet any minimum lot coverage or building height except for the maximum building height regulations of the district in which such facilities are permitted. 
II.	Additional regulations. 
A.	No such facilities shall be permitted to have outside cages or runs except those permitted in industrial districts. 
B.	All such facilities shall be soundproof so as to prevent any noise from being heard outside any building or structure. Outside cage structures permitted in industrial districts shall not be required to be soundproof.  
ARTICLE 16. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Section 16-1. - Scope. 
Provisions set forth in this article apply to the entire corporate area of the City of Gilmer, Texas, and all zoning districts therein.  
Section 16-2. - Access. 
I.	Use of residentially zoned property for access. No residentially zoned land shall be used for driveway, walkway, or access purposes to any land which is nonresidentially zoned or used for any purpose not permitted in a residential district except for ingress and egress to a use existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance which does not abut a public street. 
II.	Access to commercial uses. Where a parcel of property zoned for commercial use abuts more than one street, access from either street to such property will be permitted only if no residentially zoned property lies immediately across such street from such commercially zoned property; provided, however, access may be permitted from any major collector or major thoroughfare and provided further, that one point of access shall be permitted in any case, not withstanding other provisions of this ordinance. 
III.	Facing of commercial uses. Commercial uses shall face other commercial or industrial districts across a street if within a commercial or industrial zone, and shall not face residential zones which may front on an intersecting or rear street adjacent to such commercial or industrial zone, except where property has been previously zoned commercial or industrial.  
Section 16-3. - Authority to enter upon private property. 
The enforcing official may in the performance of his functions and duties under the provisions of this ordinance, enter upon any land and make examinations and surveys as deemed necessary in the administration and enforcement of this ordinance.  
Section 16-4. - Boundaries when public property abandoned. 
I.	For any public street or alley which is hereafter officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to each parcel of abutting property shall apply to the centerline of the property which is abandoned. In the event abandoned property is not divided at the centerline for abutting properties, the zoning districts applicable shall apply to such ownership lines as determined by virtue of such abandonment. 
II.	For any public property other than streets or alleys, the regulations applicable to the zoning classification which abut the abandoned property for the greatest number of linear feet shall apply to the entire property. For purposes of this subsection, property separated by an intersecting street shall be deemed to abut said abandoned property along the centerline of such street right-of-way.  
Section 16-5. - Exception to height limits. 
Church spires, chimneys, water, fire, radio, and television towers, smoke stacks, flag poles, monuments, and similar structures and their necessary mechanical appurtenance may be erected above the height limits herein established; however, the heights of these structures or appurtenance thereto shall not exceed the height limitations within any flight approach zone.  
Section 16-6. - Flood hazard areas. 
I.	Flood hazard areas shall include all areas subject to inundation by floodwaters of the 100 year frequency as delineated by the most recent flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map, as the case may be, issued by or on behalf of the Federal Insurance Administration, and approved by the planning and zoning commission and city council. 
II.	Development and/or use of any areas subject to inundation according to I. above shall comply with the regulations and requirements of the zoning district where such is located and the Flood Hazard Prevention Ordinance of the City of Gilmer.  
Section 16-7. - Home occupations. 
I.	Home occupations shall include any professional and personal services meeting the standards and criteria stated below, but shall not include activities at the premises involving retail and wholesale sales and services, automotive or similar repair businesses, automotive body repair businesses, or other such similar businesses. 
II.	Persons desiring a permit for a home occupation shall make application for the same to the building inspector. The building inspector shall determine whether the home occupation is clearly incidental and subordinate to the dwelling unit, to obtain the exact nature of the home occupation. If such is the case, the applicant shall take the permit form and obtain signatures from at least 51 percent of the property owners living within 200 feet of the proposed home occupation. The building inspector shall determine the authenticity and percentage of signatures. 
The building inspector shall determine whether the home occupation is clearly incidental and subordinate to the dwelling unit. If such is the case, a permit for same shall be issued by the building inspector. Once said home occupation permit is issued to an applicant, it cannot be transferred to a second applicant through the sale, leasing, or rental of the premises on which said home occupation is located or in any other manner. Such application for a permit shall contain such information as the building inspector may require, but, in any event, shall include the following: 
1.	Name of applicant;
2.	Location of residence where the home occupation will be conducted;
3.	Total floor area of the residence;
4.	Area of room or rooms to be utilized in the conduct of the home occupation;
5.	A sketch with dimension showing the floor plan and the area to be utilized for the conduct of the home occupation; and 
6.	The exact nature of the home occupation.
III.	Any person may seek revocation of a home occupation permit by making application to the building inspector, who shall cause an investigation to be made to determine whether the permit holder is conducting said home occupation in a lawful manner as prescribed by this section. In the event that the building inspector determines that the permit holder is in violation of the provisions of this section, said permit shall be immediately revoked by the building inspector. The decision of the building inspector shall be subject to appeal to the board of adjustment. 
IV.	All home occupations shall comply with the following standards and criteria before permits can be issued: 
A.	The home occupation shall be conducted only within the principal building;
B.	No more than one additional person other than the residents residing on the premises shall be employed or engaged in said home occupation at the premises; 
C.	There shall be no alteration or change to the outside appearance, character, or use of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation, other than one sign not exceeding one square foot in area, nonilluminated, mounted flat against the wall of the principal building; 
D.	No home occupation shall occupy more space than 20 percent of the total floor area of a residence, exclusive of any open porch, attached garage, or similar space not suited for or intended to be occupied as living quarters, provided, however, that in no event shall such home occupation occupy more than 500 square feet; 
E.	No commodities or goods of any kind shall be sold on the premises, nor displayed on the premises [in] an area larger than 500 square feet; 
F.	No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, vibrations, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses outside the dwelling unit, nor shall there be any combustible materials located anywhere on the premises which are in violation of the city's fire prevention code. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in live voltage off the premises; 
G.	No articles or materials used in connection with such home occupation shall be stored on the premises other than in the principal building so used; 
H.	No more than one automobile or truck, whose size shall not be larger than a stock one ton panel or pick-up truck used in conjunction with such home occupation shall be permitted to park on the premises in question or off the premises in question and within view from surrounding properties. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18  
Section 16-8. - Living units in zones other than residential. 
Dwelling units shall not be permitted in any commercial or industrial district except as otherwise provided for in this ordinance.  
Section 16-9. - Minimum property frontage. 
In all districts, no building or structure except as hereinafter provided shall be erected on a lot or parcel of land which does not abut a public street for the required minimum lot width of the district where such is located. However, a residential dwelling may be erected on a lot or parcel of land which abuts at least one public or private street for at least 50 feet, except that a minimum street abutment distance of at least 25 feet, may apply to properties or an irregular shape bordering curving streets or cul-de-sacs provided that a minimum building line width of 50 feet is met at the required front yard setback line. 
Any building or structure existing on lot or parcel of land in violation of the preceding paragraph prior to the effective date of this section may be modified, enlarged, or extended; provided said modification, enlargement, or extension shall not be closer to any property line than the required side yard area applicable to the district within which such building or structure is located.  
Section 16-10. - Nonconforming uses. 
I.	General. Any lawful use of land or a building existing at the date of passage of this ordinance and located in a district in which it is not permitted under this ordinance, is hereby declared a nonconforming use, and not in violation of these regulations provided. However, such nonconforming use shall be subject to the regulations in this article. 
II.	Certificate of occupancy. 
A.	The owner of a nonconforming building or use shall certify by affidavit to the planning and zoning commission that his building or use was made nonconforming by the passage of this ordinance. 
B.	On acceptance of the affidavit the building inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy for the nonconforming use or building. Such certificate shall designate the location, nature, and extent of such nonconforming use and any additional date necessary for issuance of said certificate. 
C.	If, upon review of the affidavit, any legally established violation of previous or existing ordinances or codes is found, the building inspector shall not issue any said certificate of occupancy and shall declare such use to be in violation of this ordinance and shall act accordingly. 
D.	Any use not in conformance with this ordinance and on which no certificate of occupancy has been issued shall be presumed to be in violation of these zoning regulations and shall be treated accordingly. 
III.	Continuation of nonconforming use of land. Any use of land in actual use prior to the passage of this ordinance may continue as to its specific use at the time of passage. In addition, any nonconforming use in existence prior to the passage of this ordinance shall not be hindered as to growth, expansion, or sale for same purpose use on properties owned prior to the passage of this ordinance. Additionally, any nonconforming use destroyed by fire, explosion, or act of God, may rebuild to its prior function and continue. Expansion of any nonconforming use must comply, starting with construction, with restrictions as set up by this ordinance. 
IV.	Change of nonconforming use. 
A.	A nonconforming use may be changed to another similar nonconforming use where in the opinion of the board of adjustment such new use: 
1.	Will reduce traffic, sound, odor, smoke, or number of employees.
2.	Will improve the character and value of surrounding property.
Such change in use may be permitted only following formal application for change with the board of adjustment. Where proper findings are made, the board of adjustment may direct the building inspector to issue the necessary permits. 
B.	Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming use, it shall not revert to a nonconforming use. 
C.	In lieu of such reconstruction, the nonconforming use shall be considered abandoned, and such building shall be permitted to be reconstructed as a permitted use only. 
V.	Discontinuance or abandonment of nonconforming use. Any nonconforming use of land or building which has ceased by discontinuance or abandonment for a period of two years shall thereafter conform to the provisions of this ordinance.  
Section 16-11. - Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
I.	Rules for computing number of parking spaces. In computing the number of parking spaces required for each of the uses herein described, the following rules shall govern: 
A.	"Floor area" shall mean the gross floor area of the specific use.
B.	Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be construed to be the nearest whole number. 
C.	The parking space requirement for a use not specifically mentioned herein shall be the same as required for a use of similar nature. 
D.	Whenever a building or use constructed or established after the effective date of this ordinance is changed or enlarged in floor area, number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise, to create a need for an increase of ten percent or more in the number of existing parking spaces, such spaces shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change. Whenever a building or use existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance is enlarged to the extent of 50 percent or more in floor area or in the area used, said building or use shall then and thereafter comply with the parking requirements set forth herein. 
E.	In the case of mixed uses, the parking spaces required shall equal the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately. 
II.	Parking requirements based on use. In all districts there shall be provided at the time any building or structure is erected or structurally altered (except as provided in subsection I), off-street parking spaces in accordance with the following requirements: 
A.	Residential use requirements: 
1.	Single-family dwellings: Two parking spaces per dwelling unit.
2.	Multiple family dwellings: Two parking spaces per dwelling unit.
3.	Mobile homes: Two parking spaces per dwelling unit.
B.	Nonresidential use requirements: 
1.	Barber and beauty shops: Two parking spaces per barber or beauty chair.
2.	Bowling alley: Five parking spaces for each alley.
3.	Business or professional office, studio, or bank: Three parking spaces plus one additional parking space for 200 square feet of floor area over 500. 
4.	Child day care center: One storage space for loading and unloading children per every three children based on the center's child capacity plus one parking space for every employee. 
5.	Church or other place of worship. One parking space for each four seats in the main auditorium. 
6.	Community center, library, museum or art gallery: Ten parking spaces plus one additional space for each 300 square feet of floor area in excess of 2,000 square feet. If an auditorium is included as a part of the building, its floor area shall be deducted from the total and additional parking provided on the basis of one space for each four seats that it contains. 
7.	Dance hall, assembly or exhibition hall without fixed seats: One parking space for each 100 square feet of floor area therefore. 
8.	Drive-in banks: Eight storage spaces per every teller window designed to serve drive-in patrons to be provided in the approach land to each drive-in window or in a common reservoir storage area; provided it does not interfere with other required off-street parking plus one parking space per every three employees. 
9.	Drive-in cleaners and other similar drive-in facilities not herein specified: Three storage spaces for every drive-in window designed to serve drive-in patrons to be provided in the approach lane to each service window or in a common reservoir storage area; provided it does not interfere with other off-street parking plus one parking space per every three employees. 
10.	Furniture and appliance store, hardware store, wholesale establishments, machinery or equipment sales and service, clothing or shoe repair or service shop: Two parking spaces plus one additional parking space for each 300 square feet of floor area over 1,000 square feet. 
11.	Gasoline service station: Two parking spaces per each service stall, (a service stall being an area for vehicle maintenance not including washing stalls or areas for pumping gasoline) plus two spaces for employees. 
12.	Hospital: Four parking spaces plus one additional parking space for each four beds.
13.	Hotel: One parking space for each two sleeping rooms or suite plus one space for each 200 square feet of commercial floor area contained therein. 
14.	Laundromats and self-service dry cleaning establishments: One parking space per every two washing and/or dry cleaning machines. 
15.	Manufacturing or industrial establishment, research or testing laboratory, creamery, bottling plant, warehouse, printing or plumbing shop, or similar establishment: One parking space for each two employees on the maximum working shift plus space to accommodate all trucks and other vehicles used in connection therewith, but not less than one parking space for each 600 square feet of floor area. 
16.	Medical professional services (medical or dental clinics and offices): One parking space per every 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
17.	Mortuary or funeral home: One parking space for each 50 square feet of floor space in slumber rooms, parlors, or individual funeral service rooms. 
18.	Motor-vehicle salesrooms and used car lots: One parking space for each 800 square feet of sales floor or lot area. 
19.	Offices of nonmedical professional services and financial institutions (financial and business offices, banks, offices of lawyers, architects, engineers, etc.): One parking space per every 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
20.	Private club, lodge, country club, or golf club: One parking space for each 150 square feet of floor area or for every five members, whichever is greater. 
21.	Restaurant, night club, cafe, or similar recreation or amusement establishment: One parking space for each 100 square feet of floor area. 
22.	Retail store or personal service establishment, except as otherwise specified herein: One parking space for each 200 square feet of floor area. 
23.	Rooming[house] or boardinghouse: One parking space for each two sleeping rooms.
24.	Sanitarium, convalescent home, home for the aged or similar institution: One parking space for each six beds. 
25.	School, elementary: One parking space for each ten seats in the auditorium or main assembly room or one space for each classroom, whichever is greater. 
26.	School, secondary: One parking space for each eight seats in the main auditorium or three spaces for each classroom, whichever is greater. 
27.	Supermarkets, convenience grocery stores, or self-service food stores containing over 2,500 square feet of gross floor area: One parking space per every 150 square feet of gross floor area. 
28.	Theater, auditorium (except school), sports arena, stadium or gymnasium: One parking space for each four seats or bench seating spaces. 
29.	Tourist home, cabin, or motel: One parking space for each sleeping room or suite.
30.	Vehicular washing facilities: Three storage spaces per every washing stall to be provided in the approach lane to each washing stall. 
31.	Warehousing, manufacturing and industrial concerns with retail business on premises: One parking space per every 300 square feet of gross floor area. 
III.	Location of parking spaces. All parking spaces required herein shall be located on the same lot with the building or use served, except as follows: 
A.	Where an increase in the number of spaces is required by a change or enlargement of use or where such spaces are provided collectively or used jointly by two or more buildings or establishments, the required spaces may be located not to exceed 300 feet from an institutional building served and not to exceed 500 feet from any other nonresidential building served. 
B.	Not more than 50 percent of the parking spaces required for (1) theater(s), bowling alley(s), dance hall(s), night club(s) or cafe(s), and not more than 80 percent of the parking spaces required for a church or school auditorium may be provided and used by (2) banks, offices, retail stores, repair shops, service establishments and similar uses not normally open, used or operated during the same hours as those listed in (1); provided, however, that written agreement thereto is properly executed and filed as specified below. 
In any case, where the required parking spaces are not located on the same lot with the building or use served, or where such spaces are collectively or jointly provided and used, a written agreement thereby ensuring their retention for such purposes shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form by the city attorney and shall be filed with the application for a building permit. 
IV.	Minimum dimension for off-street parking. 
A.	Ninety degree angle parking. Each parking space shall be not less than nine feet wide nor less than 19 feet in length. Maneuvering space shall be in addition to parking space and shall be not less than 24 feet perpendicular to the building or parking line. 
B.	Sixty degree angle parking. Each parking space shall be not less than ten feet wide perpendicular to the parking angle nor less than 19 feet in length when measured at right angles to the building or parking line. Maneuvering space shall be in addition to parking space and shall be not less than 22 feet perpendicular to the building or parking line. 
C.	Forty-five degree angle parking. Each parking space shall be not less than ten feet wide perpendicular to the parking angle nor less than 19 feet in length when measured at right angles to the building or parking line. Maneuvering space shall be in addition to parking space and shall be not less than 20 feet perpendicular to the building or parking line. 
D.	Alley parking. When off-street parking facilities are located adjacent to a public alley, the width of said alley may be assumed to be a portion of the maneuvering space requirement. 
E.	Additional parking space. Where off-street parking facilities are provided in excess of the minimum amounts herein specified, or when off-street parking facilities are provided but not required, they shall comply with the minimum requirements for parking and maneuvering space herein specified. 
V.	Off-street loading space. Every building or part thereof erected or occupied for retail business, service, manufacturing, storage, warehousing, hotel, mortuary, or any other use similarly involving the receipt or distribution by vehicles of materials or merchandise, shall provide and maintain on the same premises loading space in accordance with the following requirements: 
A.	In Districts "LI" and "GI," one loading space for each 10,000 feet or fraction thereof, of floor area in the building. 
B.	In District "B-2," one loading space for the first 5,000 to 15,000 square feet of floor area in the building and one additional loading space for each 15,000 square feet, or fraction thereof, of floor area in excess of 15,000 square feet. 
C.	Each required loading space shall have a minimum area of at least 50 feet in depth, 12 feet in width and with an overhead clearance of not less than 14 feet, exclusive of access, platform, or maneuvering area to be used exclusively for loading or unloading of merchandise. 
Cross reference— Stopping, standing, parking, § 86-161 et seq.  
Section 16-12. - Parking, storing, keeping of commercial and recreational vehicles. 
The following regulations shall apply to all residential districts established within this ordinance and designated upon the zoning map of the City of Gilmer, Texas: 
I.	Motor vehicles prohibited or restricted in residential districts. 
A.	It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent, operator, or person in charge of any vehicle including school buses, pole trailer, semitrailer, trailer, trailer coach (trailer house), truck over one ton rated capacity, and/or truck tractor, to park, store, or keep such motor vehicles on any public street, avenue, alley, or other thoroughfare or any right-of-way therewith within any residential district in the City of Gilmer. (See parking ordinance) 
B.	It shall be unlawful for any owner of property in any residential district in the City of Gilmer to park on, cause to be parked on, or allow to be parked on his residential property or in the public streets, alleys, or parkways abutting his property, any vehicle including school buses, pole trailer, semitrailer, trailer, trailer coach (trailer house) truck over one ton rated capacity, and/or truck tractor. (See parking ordinance) 
II.	Delivery; moving and construction vehicles; emergency repairs. The restriction of three hours in [a] residential district shall not apply to routine deliveries and service calls by tradesmen, to disabled vehicles, or to the temporary parking of vehicles on private property whereon construction is underway for which a current and valid building permit has been issued. 
III.	Permitted parking. 
A.	Boats or other recreation vehicles as defined in this ordinance may be parked on a plot in a residential district subject to the restrictions and conditions set forth below: 
1.	One boat including its trailer; and one other recreation vehicle, but not more than one of each; 
2.	Boats or other recreation vehicles described in paragraph (1) above shall not be permitted to park within the area lying between a public or private street and a line drawn past the front of the structure, extending the width of the lot, however, such vehicles may be permitted to locate within the side or rear yard area, provided that it is effectively screened against direct view from abutting properties. 
3.	No boat or other recreational vehicle described in paragraph (1) above, parked in a residential district shall be occupied or used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes. 
Cross reference— Stopping, standing, parking, § 86-161 et seq.  
Section 16-13. - Permitted buildable area. 
The principal structure on any lot or parcel of land shall be erected within the area bounded by the building lines established by setback or yard requirements. Accessory structures may be erected within any building line established for the principal structure and in required rear yards as may be otherwise provided in these regulations.  
Section 16-14. - Validity of previously issued permits in conflict with these regulations. 
Permits for either the construction of buildings or for the use of land or buildings which have been issued prior to the adoption of this ordinance and which are in violation with the regulations of this ordinance shall be declared void unless evidence is shown to establish that substantial expenditures have been made either for the preparation of plans for construction or for preliminary planning. Investment in real property shall not be construed as an expenditure towards construction. Unless actual construction work, including grading and excavation, is underway within six months after the adoption of this ordinance, such permit shall become void.  
ARTICLE 17. - SITE PLAN APPROVAL PROCESS 
 
Section 17-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of these provisions is to promote harmonious functional relationships among the various elements within any development such as the location of activities, vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems and visual form, to ensure physical, social and economic compatibility with neighboring developments and conditions, as well as the community at large and to prevent detrimental impact to the natural environment on and off the site by providing for review and evaluation by the planning and zoning commission of minimum standards set forth in this article, such review will permit maximum flexibility in evaluating each plan on its merits and encourage variety and innovation while ensuring privacy and safety on all levels.  
Section 17-2. - Site plan review required. 
All site plans involving any new development or construction shall be required to have site plan approval from the planning and zoning commission. Final planning and zoning commission approval of site plans must be achieved prior to issuance of any building permit.  
Section 17-3. - Uses requiring site plan review. 
The site plan approval provisions contained herein shall apply to the following uses: 
I.	All multiple family dwellings in excess of ten units.
II.	All mobile home parks.
III.	All commercial and industrial development of one acre or more. 
Section 17-4. - Consideration of planning and zoning commission in site plan review. 
The planning and zoning commission shall consider the following when reviewing site plans: 
I.	General character and compatibility. The planning and zoning commission shall determine that the proposed development is compatible or in agreement (internally or with surrounding areas) in terms of housing types, yard depths, ground coverage, tree cover, surface drainage, density (in residential developments) and will result in the least possible detrimental impact to the site and surrounding areas and will be designed so as not to cause substantial depreciation of property values, or reduce the safety, light, or general convenience of neighboring developments. 
II.	Ingress to and egress from property and internal circulation, including access of service and emergency vehicles and design of off-street parking and loading areas. 
III.	The location and arrangement of all buildings and structures with regard to setback requirements and special consideration given to aspects such as visual form, sociability, and personal safety with regard to police and fire protection. 
IV.	Environmental aspects with regard to sedimentation, drainage, and flood control and preservation of natural greenery on the site. 
V.	Utilities, with regard to availability and suitability for the use intended, and consideration of hook-in and service locations, including fire hydrants. 
VI.	Screening, buffering, and landscaping with regard to the type and dimensions, to preserve the character of surrounding areas and to provide privacy for the site in question. 
VIII.[VII.]	Recreation and open space with attention to the location, size, and development of the areas with regard to their usability, adequacy, and their relationship to community-wide open spaces and recreation facilities (for residential developments).  
Section 17-5. - Site plan review procedures. 
The following process shall be utilized to obtain approval of site plans: 
I.	Pre-site plan review conference. The applicant for site plan review shall meet with the building inspector to discuss basic site plan procedures and requirements to consider the elements of the site in question and to proposed development. 
II.	Administrative processing. 
A.	Building inspector review. Following the pre-site plan review conference, a site plan may be filed with the building inspector. The applicant shall submit five copies of the material as indicated in section 17-6. The material will be distributed to various departments or offices for review and comment relative to their specialty or concern. The comments and recommendations from the various departments and offices will be collected and compiled by the building inspector and the site plan with all comments and recommendations will be presented to the planning and zoning commission for their consideration. 
B.	Planning and zoning commission review. The planning and zoning commission shall consider the site plan and determine whether it meets the intent of this article. The planning and zoning commission shall have 45 days after receiving the plan in which to review and act thereon. If, at the end of the 45 days, the planning and zoning commission shall be unable to give approval to the plan, the petitioner may request in writing that the city council review the site plan for which approval has not been granted. Said written request shall also contain the commission's reasons for not granting approval. The city council shall then review the decision of the planning and zoning commission and either approve or disapprove the site plan as submitted to them. 
III.	Building permit procedures. Site plan approval, as granted by the planning and zoning commission, shall be effective for a period of six months unless otherwise specified at the time of approval. A building permit must be applied for within this period or the site plan may be deemed null and void. At the end of the six months, an extension for additional time not to exceed six months may be granted upon for formal request to the planning and zoning commission at their discretion. A building permit may be issued for construction of the development as exactly [as] shown on the final approved site plan. No changes, alterations, or modifications to the approved site plan shall occur unless a final site plan amendment is approved.  
Section 17-6. - Site plan requirements. 
The applicant must submit five copies of the following required materials and information for site plan review. 
I.	A legal description of the property under review for site plan approval;
II.	Site conditions information, including:
A.	A topographic map of the site at a scale not smaller than one inch = 100 feet showing two-foot contours; 
B.	Soil type and evaluation for entire site, including consistency, texture, percolation capacity, bearing strength, shrink/swell potential, etc.; 
C.	Means or methods of controlling sedimentation.
III.	A site conditions map at a scale not smaller than one inch = 100 feet showing:
A.	A location map showing the relationship of the site to such external facilities as streets, residential areas, commercial facilities, and recreation/open space areas; 
  
B.	The exact location of all existing public streets, rights-of-way, easements, and other reservations of the land in the area of the property in question and adjacent properties in the same frontage, indicating the locations of buildings and structures on such adjacent properties, means of ingress and egress to such properties, off-street parking, loading and service areas, if any, for or on such properties, and any screening or buffering on such properties and the nature and type thereof; 
  
C.	The exact location, size, and capacity of all existing utilities, including existing fire hydrant locations; 
  
D.	The exact location of all water holding or carrying facilities, natural or manmade, including creeks, ponds, sinkholes, ditches, culverts, and storm sewers. 
IV.	A site development plan at a scale not smaller than one inch = 60 feet, showing:
  
A.	The name of the planner, architect, or designer who prepared the plans, the name of the developer (whether it be an individual, group or corporation), the name of the proposed project or development, a north arrow, and a date; 
  
B.	The exact location of all proposed streets, driveways, or other facilities designed to accommodate vehicular movement in the development, points of ingress and egress, parking areas, including the exact number of spaces, and loading and service areas, including the location of dumpsters, and a traffic impact analysis of projected trip generation for the development; 
  
C.	The exact locations of all proposed buildings and structures to be included in the development: 
  
1.	For commercial or industrial development, an indication of gross floor area of all buildings. 
2.	For residential development, an indication of the exact number of dwelling units broken down into sizes by bedrooms (number of one-bedroom units, number of two-bedroom units, etc.); 
D.	The manner of drainage of the property, showing the manner of drainage of all impervious surfaces (including roofs of buildings) and all green areas, including all control devices such as storm sewers and retention or detention facilities; 
E.	The percentage of the site that will be covered by building and structures and the percentage that will be covered by streets, drives, parking and loading areas. 
V.	A development timetable if project is to be constructed in phases. 
Section 17-7. - Final site plan amendments. 
Changes, alterations, or modifications to any finally approved site that involves construction, removal, or relocation of a building or structure; redesign or modification of the vehicular or pedestrian circulation system (including all points of access, drives, parking areas, and walkways); modification of all the drainage system, or relocation of any landscaped area shall require approval of the planning and zoning commission in accordance with the procedures described above.  
ARTICLE 18. - ADMINISTRATIVE AND ENFORCEMENT REGULATIONS 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2  
Section 18-1. - Official zoning map. 
The official zoning map of the City of Gilmer shall be kept in the office of the city secretary and one copy shall be maintained in the office of the building inspector. It shall be maintained by the office of the building inspector. It shall be the duty of the city secretary to keep the official map current and the copies thereof, herein provided for, by entering on such maps any changes which the city council may from time to time order by amendments to the zoning ordinance. 
The city secretary, upon the adoption of this ordinance, shall affix a certificate identifying the map in his/her office as the official zoning map of the City of Gilmer. He/she shall likewise officially identify the copies directed to be kept in the office of the building inspector.  
Section 18-2. - Enforcement and application. 
I.	Administrative official. The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the building inspector of the City of Gilmer. 
The building inspector or any duly authorized person shall have the right to enter upon any premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this ordinance. 
Whenever any construction work is being done contrary to the provisions of this ordinance, the building inspector may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on the owner or contractor doing or causing such work to be done, and any such person shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the building inspector to proceed with the work. 
II.	Requirements for building permit. All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by accurate plot plans, submitted in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing: 
A.	The actual shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon;
B.	The exact sizes and locations on the lot of the buildings and accessory building then existing; 
C.	The lines within the proposed building and structure shall be erected or altered;
D.	The existing and intended use of each building or part of building;
E.	The number of families or housekeeping units the building is designed to accommodate;
F.	Such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots as may be necessary to determine and provide for the enforcement of this ordinance. 
One copy of such plot plans will be returned to the owner when such plans have been approved. 
All dimensions shown on these plans relating to the location and size of the lot to be built upon shall be based on an actual survey by a qualified registered surveyor and the lot shall be staked out on the ground before construction is started. 
III.	Existing permits and private agreements. This ordinance is not intended to abrogate or annul: 
A.	Any permits issued before the effective date of this ordinance;
B.	Any easement, covenant or any other private agreement.
IV.	Preserving rights in pending litigation and violations under existing ordinances. By the passage of this ordinance, no presently illegal use shall be deemed to have been legalized unless specifically such use falls within a use district where the actual use is a conforming use. Otherwise, such uses shall remain nonconforming uses where recognized or an illegal use, as the case may be. It is further the intent and declared purpose of this ordinance that no offense committed, and no liability, penalty, or forfeiture, either civil or criminal, shall be discharged or affected by the adoption of this ordinance; but prosecutions and suits for such offenses, liabilities, penalties, or forfeitures may be instituted or causes presently pending be proceeded within all respects. 
V.	Completion of authorized buildings. Nothing in these regulations nor in any amendments hereto which change district boundaries shall require any change in the plans, construction or designated use of a building which shall be completed in its entirety within two years from the date of the passage of this ordinance, provided such building was authorized by building permit before the passage of this ordinance, and further provided construction shall have been started within 90 days of the passage of this ordinance. Commitments with reference to construction of public utility buildings for proposed expansion of the city made prior to the passage of this ordinance shall be observed.  
Section 18-3. - Board of adjustment. 
The word "board" when used in this ordinance shall be constructed to mean the board of adjustment. 
I.	Organization and procedure. 
A.	Establishment. A board of adjustment is hereby established in accordance with the provisions of Article 1011(g), Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, regarding the zoning of cities and with the powers and duties as provided in said statutes. 
B.	Membership. The board shall consist of five citizens of Gilmer, each to be appointed or reappointed by the city council, for staggered terms of two years respectively. Each member of the board shall be removable for just cause by the city council upon written charges and after public hearings. Vacancies shall be filled by the city council for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. The board shall elect its own chairman, who shall serve for a period of one year or until his successor is selected. 
C.	Meetings. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. 
D.	Hearings. The hearings of the board of adjustment shall be public. However, the board of adjustment may go into executive session, in accordance with state law, for discussion but not for vote on any case before it. The board shall hear the intervention of any owner of adjacent property to, in the rear of, or across the street from a lot as to which the granting of any building permit is pending, and shall also hear any other parties in interest. 
E.	Rules and regulations. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be a public record. 
The board of adjustment shall act by resolution in which three members must concur. The board shall adopt from time to time such additional rules and regulations as it may deem necessary to carry into effect the provisions of this ordinance, and shall furnish a copy of the same to the building inspector, all of which rules and regulations shall operate uniformly in all cases. All of its resolutions and order shall be in accordance therewith. 
II.	Appeals. 
A.	Procedure. Appeals may be taken to and before the board of adjustment by any persons aggrieved, or by any officer, or department of the city. Such appeal shall be made by filing with the building inspector a notice of appeal and specifying the grounds thereof. The office or department from which the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
B.	Stay of proceedings. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the building inspector shall certify to the board of adjustment that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril, to life or property, in which case proceeding shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of equity, after notice of the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
C.	Notice of hearing on appeal. The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal or other matter referred to it, and shall mail notice of such hearing to the petitioner and to the owners of property lying within 200 feet of any point of the lot or portion thereof on which a variation is desired, and to all other persons deemed by the board to be affected thereby, such owners and persons being determined according to the current tax rolls of the City of Gilmer. Depositing of such written notice in the mail shall be deemed sufficient compliance therewith. 
D.	Decision by board. The board shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decision, or determination appealed from and shall make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as in its opinion ought to be made in the premises, and to that end, shall have all powers of the officer or department from whom the appeal is taken. 
III.	Powers and duties of board. 
A.	Subpoena witnesses, etc. The board shall have the power to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and punish for contempt, and may require the production of documents, under such regulations as it may establish. 
B.	Appeal based on error. The board shall have the power to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error of law in any order, requirements, decision, or determination made by the building inspector in the enforcement of this ordinance. 
C.	Special exceptions. The board shall have the power to hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this ordinance upon which the board is required to pass as follows or elsewhere in this ordinance: 
1.	Permit the erection and use of buildings.
2.	To permit a public utility or public service use or structure in any district, or a public utility or public service building of a ground area and of a height at variance with those provided for in the district in which such public utility or public service building is permitted to be located, when found reasonably necessary for the public health, convenience, safety, or general welfare. 
3.	To permit a transitional use between a business or industrial and residential district where the side of a lot in a single family or multiple family district abuts upon a lot zoned for business or industrial purposes as follows: 
a.	On a lot in a single-family district which sides upon a lot zoned for business or industrial purposes, the board may permit a two-family dwelling on a lot with an area of not less than 6,000 square feet. 
b.	Provided, however, that in no case shall any transitional use have a width of more than 100 feet. 
4.	To grant a permit for the extension of a use, height, or area regulation into an adjoining district, where the boundary line of the district divides a lot in a single ownership on the effective date of this ordinance. 
5.	Waive or reduce the parking and loading requirements in any of the districts whenever the character or use of the building is such as to make necessary the full provision of parking or loading facilities, or where such regulations would impose an unreasonable hardship upon the use of the lot, as contrasted with merely granting an advantage or a convenience. 
6.	Permit land within 300 feet of a multifamily dwelling to be improved for the parking spaces required in connection with a multifamily dwelling, but only when there is positive assurance that such land will be used for such purpose during the existence of the multifamily dwelling. 
7.	To determine whether an industry should be permitted within district L-I, because of the methods by which it would be operated and because of its effect upon uses within surrounding zoning districts. 
8.	To determine in cases of uncertainty the classification of any use not specifically named in this ordinance. 
9.	All applications for special exceptions shall be in writing by the owner and filed with the city. Hearing shall be set not less than 15 days after filing and notice shall be given to all property owners within 200 feet of the property on which the exception is requested stating the name of the person seeking the exception, the property involved, when the application will be heard, and advising that those receiving notice may contest the application. 
D.	Variances. The board shall have the power to authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest, where owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice done, owing to and including the following special conditions: 
1.	Permit a variance in the yard requirements of any district where there are unusual and practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the carrying out of these provisions due to an irregular shape of the lot, topographical or other conditions, provided such variance will not seriously affect any adjoining property or the general welfare. 
2.	Authorize upon appeal, whenever a property owner can show that a strict application of the terms of this ordinance relating to the use, construction, or alterations of buildings or structures or the use of land will impose upon him unusual and practical difficulties or particular hardship, such variances from the strict application of the terms of this ordinance as are in harmony with its general purpose and intent, but only when the board is satisfied that a granting of such variation will alleviate some demonstrable and unusual hardship or difficulty so great as to warrant a variance from the community plan as established by this ordinance, and at the same time, the surrounding property will be properly protected. 
3.	Application for variance shall be in writing on a form provided by the city and it will be filed with the city and a fee of $25.00 paid by [the] applicant. Hearing shall be given to all property owners within 200 feet of the property on which the variance is sought, stating the name of the person seeking the variance, when the application will be heard and advising those receiving a notice that they may contest the application. 
E.	Changes. The board shall have no authority to change any provisions of this ordinance, and its jurisdiction is limited to hardship and borderline cases which may arise from time to time. 
Cross reference— Board, committees, commissions, § 2-31 et seq.  
Section 18-4. - Certificates of occupancy. 
I.	Required for. Certificates of occupancy shall be required for any of the following: 
A.	Occupancy and use of a building hereafter erected or structurally altered.
B.	Change in use of an existing building to a use of a different classification.
C.	Occupancy and use of vacant land, except agricultural use.
D.	Any change in the use of a nonconforming use.
No such occupancy, use, or change of use, shall take place until a certificate of occupancy therefore shall have been issued by the building inspector. 
II.	Procedures for new or altered buildings. Written application for a certificate of occupancy for a new building or for an existing building which is to be altered shall be made at the same time as the application for the building permit for such building. Said certificate shall be issued within three days after a written request for the same has been made to said building inspector after the erection or alteration of such building or part thereof has been completed in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
III.	Procedures for vacant land or a change in use. Written application for a certificate of occupancy for the use of vacant land, or for a change in the use of land or a building, or for a change in a nonconforming use, as herein provided, shall be made to said building inspector. If the proposed use is in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, the certificate of occupancy therefore shall be issued within three days after the application for same has been made. 
IV.	Contents and filing of certificate of occupancy. Every certificate of occupancy shall state that the building or the proposed use of a building or land complies with all provisions of law. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the building inspector and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having proprietary or tenancy interests in the building or land affected. 
V.	Temporary certificate. Pending the issuance of a regular certificate, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the building inspector for a period not exceeding six months, during the completion of alterations or during partial occupancy of a building pending its completion. Such temporary certificates shall not be construed as in any way altering the respective rights, duties, or obligations of the owners to the city relating to the use of occupancy of the premises or any other matter covered by this ordinance.  
Section 18-5. - Amendments. 
I.	Petition. Any person or corporation having a proprietary interest in any property may petition the city council for a change, supplement or amendment to the provisions of this ordinance or the planning and zoning commission may on its own motion or on request from the city council institute a study and proposal for changes, supplements and amendments in the public interest. 
II.	Procedures. 
A.	The city council may, from time to time, amend, supplement, or change by ordinance the districts or the regulations herein established. 
B.	Before taking action on any proposed amendment, supplement, or change, the city council shall submit the proposed revisions to the planning and zoning commission for its recommendations and report. 
C.	The planning and zoning commission shall hold a public hearing on any request for any amendment, supplement or change prior to making its recommendation and report to the city council. Written notice of all public hearings before the planning and zoning commission on any proposed amendment, supplement, or change shall be sent to all owners of real property lying within 200 feet of the property on which the change is requested. Such notice shall be given not less than ten days before the date set for hearing by posting such notice properly addressed and postage paid to each taxpayer as the ownership appears on the last approved city tax roll. 
D.	A public hearing shall be held by the city council before adopting any proposed amendment, supplement, or change. Notice of such hearing shall be given by publication one time in a paper of general circulation in the City of Gilmer, stating the time and place of such hearing, which time shall not be earlier than 15 days from the first date of publication. 
E.	Unless a proposed amendment, supplement, or change has been approved by the planning and zoning commission, or if a protest against such proposed amendment, supplement, or change has been filed with the city secretary, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of 20 percent or more of the area of the lots included in such proposed change, or of those immediately adjacent in the rear thereof extending 200 feet therefrom, or of those directly opposite thereto extending 200 feet from the street frontage of such opposite lots, or of those adjacent on either side of the area of said lots extending 200 feet therefrom, such change shall not become effective except by favorable vote of three-fourths of all the members of the city council. 
F.	There shall be a fee of $100.00 charged for any request for a zoning change.
III.	Limitation of resubmission of petition. No amendment, supplement, or change or repeal of any section of this ordinance which has been legally rejected by both the city council and the planning and zoning commission shall be again considered by either the city council or the planning and zoning commission on an appeal or petition by an appellant or request before the expiration of one year from the date of the original action.  
Section 18-6. - Interpretation, purpose, and conflict. 
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, prosperity, or general welfare. It is not intended by this ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties provided, however, that where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the building or premises or upon height of building, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by other ordinances, rules, regulations, or by easements, covenants, or agreements, the provision of this ordinance shall govern.  
Section 18-7. - Repealing clause. 
Upon the passage of this ordinance, all ordinances then in existence which conflict or change anything heretofore provided by this ordinance are hereby repealed.  
Section 18-8. - Severability clause. 
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase, or provision of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole or any part or provision thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid or unconstitutional.  
Section 18-9. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this ordinance or fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall build or alter any building or use in violation of any detailed statement or plan submitted and approved hereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable to a fine of not more than $100.00 and each day such violation shall be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. The owner or owners of any building or premises or part thereof, where anything in violation of this ordinance shall be placed, or shall exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, person, or corporation employed in connection therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense, and upon conviction, shall be fined as herein provided.  
ARTICLE 19. - AR AGRICULTURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

FOOTNOTE(S):
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 6  
Section 19-1. - Purpose. 
The AR agricultural/residential district is intended to retain the open character of the land. This district is primarily designed for those areas on the periphery and within the city which have soils most suitable for agricultural production. Agricultural activities are frequently associated with noise, odors, dust, aerial chemical spraying, and other activities generally incompatible with urban life. However, agriculture forms a vital segment of both the Texas and local economy. Therefore, it is the purpose of the AR district to provide areas of low-density development to accommodate land uses within a district which will have the least negative impacts on agriculture. Developmental standards within the AR district are designed to provide for a high quality of life while effectively reducing the need for extensive urban infrastructure and associated public facilities. The regulatory provisions of this district are aimed at achieving the goals, objectives and policies associated with the city's comprehensive planning program.  
Section 19-2. - Permitted uses. 
I.	Uses permitted by right. 
A.	Veterinarians and animal hospitals.
B.	Stables.
C.	Single-family detached residence.
D.	Plant scales.
E.	Monastery or convent.
F.	Greenhouse, nurseries or florist.
G.	Florists without greenhouse; florists with greenhouses.
H.	Golf course/country club.
I.	Greenhouse.
J.	Farm.
K.	Church, monastery, convent or place of worship.
II.	Accessory structures permitted. Garages, carports, storage rooms, swimming pools, and other structures which are customarily incidental to the principal structure. 
III.	Uses permitted by special exception. 
A.	Public use (governmental).
B.	Radio communications equipment, retail.
C.	Domestic animal grooming.
D.	Domestic animal training schools.
E.	Cemetery or mausoleum.
F.	Kennels.
G.	Satellite receiving antenna (commercial). 
Section 19-3. - Dimensional requirements. 
All principal and accessory structures shall be located and constructed in accordance with section 19-4 where it applies, as well as to the following requirements: 
1.	AR Agricultural/Residential. 
A.	Minimum lot size	2 acres
B.	Minimum lot width	200 feet
C.	Minimum lot depth	200 feet
D.	Maximum density	1 dwelling per lot
E.	Minimum yard set backs:	
	1.	Front yard	50 feet
	2.	Rear yard	50 feet
	3.	Side yard	25 feet
F.	Maximum lot coverage	30%
G.	Maximum structure height	45 feet
  
Section 19-4. - Special regulations. 
In addition to Section 19-3, dimensional requirements, the following regulations shall apply where required: 
I.	Access (See Section 16-2); 
II.	Nonconforming uses (See Section 16-10); 
III.	Off-street parking and loading facilities (See Section 16-11); 
IV.	Parking, storing, keeping of commercial and recreational vehicles (See Section 16-12); 
V.	Home occupations (See Section 16-7); 
VI.	Flood hazard areas (See Section 16-6); 
VII.	Site plan approval process (See Article 17). 
