7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/414
City of Gonzales
Code of Ordinances
Including Web Update 16.1
This Code of Ordinances contains all ordinances deemed advisable to be included as enacted through Ordinance 2018-39 adopted
11/8/18.
HOME RULE
CHARTER*
PREAMBLE
We, the citizens of Gonzales, Texas, in order to establish a home rule municipal government, provide for the future progress of
our city and obtain more fully the benefits of local self-government; do hereby adopt this home rule charter in accordance with
the statutes of the State of Texas; and do hereby declare the residents of the City of Gonzales in Gonzales County, Texas, living
within the legally established boundaries of the said city, to be a political subdivision of the State of Texas incorporated forever
under the name and style of the “City of Gonzales” with such powers, rights and duties as are herein provided.
ARTICLE I. FORM OF GOVERNMENT AND BOUNDARIES
Section 1.01 Form of Government
The municipal government provided by this charter shall be known as the “council - manager government.” Pursuant to its
provisions and subject only to the limitations imposed by the state constitution, the statutes of this state and by this charter, all
powers of the city shall be vested in an elective council, hereinafter referred to as the “city council,” which shall enact local
legislation, adopt budgets, determine policies and appoint the city manager, who in turn shall be responsible to the city council for
the execution of the laws and the administration of the government of the city. All powers of the city shall be exercised in the
manner prescribed by this charter, or if the manner be not prescribed, then in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance, the
state constitution or the statutes of the state.
Section 1.02 The Boundaries
The boundaries of the City of Gonzales shall be the same as have heretofore been established, which boundaries are more fully
set out and described by metes and bounds on the official map filed in the office of the City Secretary.
Section 1.03 Extension of Boundaries
The boundaries of the City of Gonzales may be enlarged and extended by the annexation of additional territory designated in the
manner and in conformity with the procedures set forth in TEX. LOC. GOV'T. CODE CHAPTER 43, as now or hereafter
amended.
Section 1.04 Contraction of Boundaries
Whenever there exists within the corporate limits of the City of Gonzales any territory not suitable or necessary for city purposes,
the city council may, upon a petition signed by a majority of the qualified voters residing in such territory if the same be
inhabited, or without any such petition if the same be uninhabited, by ordinance duly passed, discontinue said territory as a part of
said city; said petition and ordinance shall specify accurately the metes and bounds of the territory sought to be eliminated from
the city and shall contain a plat designating such territory so that the same can be definitely ascertained; and when said ordinance
has been duly passed the same shall be entered upon the minutes and records of said city, and from and after the entry of such
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/414
ordinance said territory shall cease to be a part of said city, but said territory shall still be liable for its pro rata share of any debts
incurred while said area was a part of said city, and the city shall continue to levy, assess and collect taxes on the property within
said territory to pay the indebtedness incurred while said area was a part of the city as though the same had not been excluded
from the boundaries of the city.
ARTICLE II. POWERS OF THE CITY
Section 2.01 General
The City of Gonzales may use a corporate seal; may sue and be sued; may contract and be contracted with; may implead and be
impleaded in all courts in all matters whatsoever; may cooperate with the government of the State of Texas or any agency thereof,
the federal government or any agency thereof, or any political subdivision of the State of Texas; and shall have all the powers
granted to cities by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, together with all the implied powers necessary to carry into
execution all the powers granted. The city may own or acquire property within or without its boundaries for any municipal
purpose in fee simple or in any lesser interest or estate, by purchase, gift, devise, lease or condemnation and may sell, lease, hold,
manage, control and police any property now owned by it or which it may hereafter acquire, and shall have the right to lease or let
its property whether inside or outside of the city limits, subject to the limitations hereinafter set out; and may construct, own,
lease, operate and regulate public utilities, may assess, levy and collect taxes for general and special purposes on all lawful
subjects of taxation; may borrow money on the faith and credit of the city by the issuance and sale of bonds, warrants or notes of
the city; may appropriate the money of the city for all lawful purposes; may regulate and control the use, for whatever purpose, of
the streets and other public places; may make and enforce all police, health, sanitary and other regulations; and may pass such
ordinances as may be expedient for the protection and maintenance of good government; peace and welfare of the city, for the
performance of the functions thereof, for the order and security of its residents; and may provide suitable penalties for the
violations of any ordinance enacted by the City of Gonzales; and, except as prohibited by the constitution and laws of this state or
restricted by this charter, the city may exercise all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of every name
and nature whatsoever. The public squares and avenues of said city shall not be sold. The City of Gonzales is authorized and shall
have the power to allow festivals, concerts and other commercial activities on the public squares, avenues and streets or any part
thereof upon such terms as the council determines is in the best interest of the City of Gonzales. The City of Gonzales is
authorized and shall have the power to lease such streets and avenues or any part thereof upon such terms as the council may
deem best for the purpose of prospecting for, mining, drilling, and producing oil, gas and other minerals therefrom, and the city
council is further authorized to lease for grazing and farming purposes the portions of the avenues of the city not deemed needed
at the time for municipal purposes and the streets belonging to said city which have never been opened or used for street purposes
by the public and except further, that the city is authorized to sell or exchange for other property more suitable for street purposes
a part or parts of the public streets of said city.
Section 2.02 General Powers Adopted
The enumeration of the particular powers in this charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive but in addition to the powers
enumerated herein or implied hereby or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, the city shall have and may exercise all power
of local self-government and all other powers which, under the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, it would be competent
for this charter specifically to enumerate. The City of Gonzales shall have and may exercise all the powers enumerated in TEX.
LOC. GOVT. CODE Chapter 51 as now or hereafter amended.
Section 2.03 Eminent Domain
The city shall have the full power and right to exercise the power of eminent domain when necessary or desirable to carry out any
of the powers conferred upon it by this charter or by the constitution and laws of the State of Texas. The city may exercise the
power of eminent domain in any manner authorized or permitted by the constitution and laws of this state. The power of eminent
domain hereby conferred shall include the right of the city to take the fee in land so condemned and such power and authority
shall include the right to condemn public property for such purposes. The city shall have and possess the power of condemnation
for any municipal or public purposes even though not specifically enumerated in this charter.
ARTICLE III. THE CITY COUNCIL
Section 3.01 Number, Selection and Term
The legislative and governing body of the city shall consist of a mayor and four councilmembers and shall be known as the
“Council of the City of Gonzales.”
(a) The mayor shall be elected from the city at large.
(b) The City Council shall be elected by council districts.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/414
(c) The mayor and each councilmember shall hold office for a period of three years, or until a successor is duly
elected and qualified. The mayoral election shall be held in 2016, the election for councilmembers districts three (3)
and four (4) shall be held the following year and the election for councilmembers one (1) and two (2) shall be held the
following year. No person elected to the council, including the mayor in 2016 or thereafter shall serve more than three
consecutive regular terms of office as a councilmember or mayor. All elections shall be held in the manner provided in
Article V of this charter.
(d) The mayor shall be the presiding officer of the city council and shall be recognized as the head of the city
government for all ceremonial purposes and by the governor for purposes of military law, but shall have no regular
administrative duties. The mayor shall be entitled to vote on all matters under consideration by the city council.
Section 3.02 Qualifications
Each member of the city council shall be a resident citizen of the City of Gonzales, shall be a qualified voter of the State of Texas,
shall have been a resident within his/her district for a period of not less than six (6) months immediately preceding his/her
election; provided, however, that any person with the above qualifications, except as to residence, who shall have been a resident,
for a period of not less than six (6) months immediately preceding his/her election, of any of the territory not formerly within the
corporate limits of said city, but which is annexed under the provisions of Section 1.03 of this charter, shall be eligible for said
office. If the mayor or any councilmember fails to maintain the foregoing qualifications, or shall be absent from three consecutive
regularly scheduled meetings, special meetings or council workshop meetings without valid excuse, the city council must at its
next regular meeting declare a vacancy to exist and shall fill said vacancy as set forth in Section 3.06 of this charter.
Section 3.03 Council to be Judge of Election Qualification
The city council shall be the judge of the election and qualification of its own members and other elected officials of the city.
Section 3.04 Compensation
The city council shall fix the compensation to be received by its members for attendance at its meetings. Any change to the mayor
or councilmembers compensation shall require public notice as prescribed by law and a public hearing.
Section 3.05 Mayor Pro Tem
The city council, at its first meeting after election of councilmembers, shall elect one of its members, mayor pro tem, who shall
perform all the duties of the mayor in the absence or disability of the mayor.
Section 3.06 Vacancies
When a vacancy occurs in the city council, the remaining members of the council shall within ten days appoint a qualified person
to fill the unexpired term. However, the city council shall not appoint more than one councilmember in any twelve-month period,
and in case a vacancy has been filled by the city council within twelve months prior to the subsequent vacancy, or if more than
one vacancy occurs at the same time or before a prior vacancy has been filled, the city council shall call a special election within
ten days from the date the last vacancy occurred, to be held within forty-five days thereafter, for the purpose of electing the
successor or successors to the office or offices vacated.
Section 3.07 Powers of the City Council
All powers of the city and the determination of all matters of policy shall be vested in the city council. Without limitation of the
foregoing and among the other powers that may be exercised by the city council, the following are hereby enumerated for greater
certainty:
(a) Remove from office any officer or member of any board or commission and inquire into the conduct of any
office, department or municipal affairs.
(b) Establish, consolidate or abolish administrative departments and distribute the work of divisions.
(c) Adopt the budget of the city.
(d) Authorize the issuance of bonds by a bond ordinance.
(e) Provide for such additional boards and commissions, not otherwise provided for in this charter, as may be
deemed necessary, and appoint the members of all such boards and commissions. Such boards and commissions shall
have all powers and duties now or hereafter conferred and created by this charter, by city ordinance or by law.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/414
(f) Adopt and modify the zoning plan and the building code of the city.
(g) Adopt and modify the official map of the city.
(h) Adopt, modify and carry out plans proposed by the planning commission for the clearance of slum districts and
rehabilitation of blighted areas.
(i) Adopt, modify and carry out plans proposed by the planning commission for the replanning, improvement and
redevelopment of any area or district which may have been destroyed in whole or in part by disaster.
(j) Regulate, license and fix the charges or fares made by any person, firm or corporation owning, operating or
controlling any vehicle of any character used for the carrying of passengers for hire or the transportation of freight for
hire on the public streets and alleys of the city.
(k) Adopt and modify the fire code of the city. Provide for the establishment and designation of fire limits and
prescribe the kind and character of buildings or structures or improvements to be erected therein, and provide for the
erection of fireproof buildings within said limits, and provide for the condemnation of dangerous structures or
buildings or dilapidated buildings, or buildings calculated to increase the fire hazard and prescribe the manner of their
removal or destruction within said limits.
(l) Fix the salaries and compensation of the city officers and employees.
(m) Provide for a sanitary sewer and water system, and require property owners to connect their premises with
sewer system, and provide for penalties for failure to make sanitary sewer connections.
(n) Provide for sanitary garbage disposal, set fees and charges therefor, and provide penalties for failure to pay such
fees and charges.
(o) Provide for an electrical system, set fees and charges therefor, and provide penalties for misuses of same.
(p) Exercise exclusive dominion, control and jurisdiction including the right to close and abandon streets and alleys
in, upon, over and under the public streets, avenues, sidewalks, alleys, highways, boulevards and public grounds of the
city and provide for the improvement of same as provided in TEX. TRANS. CODE, Chapter 313 as now or hereafter
amended.
(q) Compromise and settle any and all claims and lawsuits of every kind and character in favor of or against the City
of Gonzales.
Section 3.08 City Council Not to Interfere in Appointments
Neither the city council nor any of its members shall direct the appointment of any person to office by the city manager or by any
of his/her subordinates. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the city council and its members shall deal with the administrative
services solely through the city manager and neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinate
of the city manager, either publicly or privately.
Section 3.09 Meetings of the City Council
The city council shall hold at least one regular meeting in each month at a time to be fixed by it for such regular meetings, and
may hold as many additional meetings during the month as may be necessary for the transaction of the business of the city and its
citizens. All meetings of the city council shall be public, shall be held in accordance with state laws, and shall be held at the city
hall, except that the city council may designate another place for such meetings after publishing due notice as required by state
law. The mayor or any two members of the city council may call special meetings of the city council at any time.
Section 3.10 Rules of Procedure
The city council shall determine its own rules of procedure. The affirmative vote of a majority of those present shall be necessary
to adopt any ordinance or resolution. Minutes of the proceedings of all meetings of the city council shall be kept. The vote upon
passage of all ordinances and resolutions shall be taken by “ayes” and “nays” and entered upon the minutes, and every ordinance
or resolution, upon its final passage, shall become permanent records kept for that purpose under full caption, and shall be
authenticated by the signature of the presiding officer and the person performing the duties of the city secretary. Three qualified
members of the city council, including the Mayor shall constitute a quorum to do business. In the absence of the mayor any three
councilmembers shall constitute a quorum.
Section 3.11 Procedure for Passage of Ordinances
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/414
Every ordinance shall be introduced in written or printed form and, upon passage, shall take effect at the time indicated therein;
provided that any ordinance imposing a penalty, fine or forfeiture for a violation of its provisions shall become effective not less
than ten days from the date of its passage; subject to the provisions of Article VII of this charter. The city secretary shall give
notice of the passage of every ordinance imposing a penalty, fine or forfeiture for a violation of the provisions thereof, by causing
the caption or title, including the penalty, of any such ordinance to be published as required by state law at least twice within ten
days after the passage of said ordinance. The city secretary shall note on every ordinance, the caption of which is hereby required
to be published, and on the record thereof, the fact that same has been published as required by the charter, and the date of such
publication, which shall be prima facie evidence of the legal publication and promulgation of such ordinance; provided, that the
provisions of this section shall not apply to the correction, amendment; revision and codification of the ordinances of the city for
publication in book or pamphlet form. Except as otherwise provided by Article VII of this charter, it shall not be necessary to the
validity of any ordinance that it shall be read more than one time or considered at more than one session of the city council. Every
ordinance shall be authenticated by the signature of the mayor and city secretary and shall be systematically recorded and indexed
in an ordinance book in a manner approved by the council. It shall only be necessary to record the caption or title of ordinances in
the minutes or journal of council meetings. The city council shall have power to cause the ordinances of the city to be corrected,
amended, revised, codified and printed in code form as often as the council deems advisable, and such printed code, when
adopted by the council, shall be in full force and effect without the necessity of publishing the same or any part thereof in a
newspaper. Such printed code shall be admitted in evidence in all courts and places without further proof.
Section 3.12 Official Bonds for City Employees
The city manager, finance director, city secretary and all employees with fiduciary responsibilities and such other city officers and
employees as the city council may require, shall, before entering upon the duties of their offices, enter into a good and sufficient
fidelity bond in a sum to be determined by the city council, payable to the City of Gonzales and conditioned upon the faithful
discharge of the duties of such persons and upon the faithful accounting for all movies [monies], credits, and things of value
coming into the hands of such persons, and such bonds shall be signed as surety by some company authorized to do business
under the laws of the State of Texas, and the premium on such bonds shall be paid by the City of Gonzales, and such bonds must
be acceptable to the city council.
Section 3.13 Investigation by the City Council
The city council shall have power to inquire into the conduct of any office, department, agency, officer or employee of the city
and to make investigations as to municipal affairs, and for that purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and compel the
production of books, papers, and other evidence. Failure to obey such subpoena or to produce books, papers or other evidence as
ordered under the provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by fine not to exceed two
hundred dollars ($200.00).
Section 3.14 Audit and Examination of City Books and Accounts
The city council shall cause an annual audit to be made of the books and accounts of each and every department of the city. At the
close of each fiscal year a complete audit shall be made by a certified public accountant. The council shall not select the same
auditor for more than six (6) consecutive years and the auditor selected shall not be, or have been within the immediate preceding
three (3) years, a business associate of the certified public accountant or firm that performed the audit prior to such selection.
Such audit shall include a recapitulation of all audits made during the course of each fiscal year, and all audit reports shall be filed
with the city council, shall be available for public inspection and shall be made a part of the archives of the city. Such accountant,
so selected, shall not maintain or keep any of the city's accounts or records.
Section 3.15 Employment by Mayor and Council
No member of the city council, including the mayor shall be eligible for employment with the city during the time they are in
office and for one year thereafter.
ARTICLE IV. ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES
Section 4.01 City Manager
(a) Appointment and Qualifications. The city council shall appoint a city manager who shall be the chief administrative and
executive officer of the city and shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all the affairs of the city. The city
manager shall be chosen by the city council solely on the basis of his/her executive and administrative training, experience and
ability. He/she need not, when appointed be a resident of the City of Gonzales. The city manager shall reside within the city limits
during his/her tenure of office.
(b) Term and Salary. The city manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term but may be removed at the will and pleasure of
the city council by a vote of the majority of the entire council. The action of the city council in suspending or removing the city
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/414
manager shall be final, it being the intention of this charter to vest all authority and fix all responsibility of such suspension or
removal with the city council. In case of the absence or disability of the city manager, the city council may designate some
qualified person to perform the duties of the office during such absence or disability. The city manager shall receive compensation
as may be fixed by the council.
(c) Duties of the City Manager.
(1) Appoint, and when necessary for the welfare of the city, remove any employee of the city, except as otherwise
provided by this charter.
(2) Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the city council, and be responsible for its administration after
adoption.
(3) Prepare and submit to the city council as of the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and
administrative activities of the city for the preceding year.
(4) Keep the city council advised of the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such
recommendations as may seem desirable.
(5) Perform such duties as may be prescribed by this charter or may be required of him/her by the city council, not
inconsistent with this charter.
Section 4.02 Department of Police
There shall be established and maintained a department of police to preserve order within the city and to secure the residents of
said city from violence and the property therein from injury or loss.
(a) Chief of Police. The chief of police shall be the chief administrative officer of the department of police. He/she
shall, with the approval of the city manager, appoint and remove the employees of said department and shall perform
such duties as may be required of him/her by the city council. The chief of police shall be appointed by the city
manager with the approval of the city council, for an indefinite term. The chief of police shall be responsible to the
city manager for the administration of his/her department and the carrying out of the directives of the city council.
He/she may be removed from office by the city manager with the approval of the city council.
(b) Special Police. No persons except as otherwise provided by general law or the charter or the ordinances passed
pursuant thereto shall act as special police or special detective.
Section 4.03 City Secretary
The city manager shall appoint the city secretary and such assistant city secretaries as the city council shall deem advisable. The
city secretary, or an assistant city secretary, shall give notice of council meetings, shall keep the minutes of the proceedings of
such meetings, shall authenticate by his/her signature all ordinances and resolutions and record all ordinances and resolutions as
required by law, and shall perform such other duties as the city manager shall assign to him/her, and those elsewhere provided for
in this charter.
Section 4.04 Municipal Court
(a) There shall be established and maintained a court designated as a “municipal court” for the trial of misdemeanor offenses,
with all such powers and duties as are now or hereafter may be prescribed by laws of the State of Texas relative to municipal
courts.
(b) The judge of said court shall be a qualified voter of the city, shall be appointed by the city council, shall hold his/her office
at the pleasure of the city council and shall receive such salary as may be fixed by ordinance of the city council.
(c) The city secretary or an assistant city secretary shall be ex officio clerk of said court.
(d) The clerk of said court and his/her deputies shall have the power to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix
the seal of said court thereto, and generally do and perform any and all acts usual and necessary by the clerk of courts in issuing
process of said courts and conducting the business thereof.
Section 4.05 City Attorney
The city council shall appoint a competent and duly licensed attorney practicing law in the City of Gonzales, Texas, who shall be
the city attorney. He/she shall receive for his/her services such compensation as may be fixed by the city council and shall hold
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/414
his/her office at the pleasure of the city council. The city attorney, or such other attorneys selected by him/her with the approval of
the city council, shall represent the city in all litigation. He/she shall be the legal advisor of and attorney and counsel for, the city
and all officers and departments thereof.
ARTICLE V. NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS
Section 5.01 Elections
The regular city election shall be held annually on a state authorized Election Day, at which time officers will be elected to fill
those offices which become vacant that year. The city council shall fix the hour, place and date for holding such election. The city
council may, by ordinance or resolution, order a special election, fix the time and place for holding same and provide all means
for holding such special election. Notice of the election shall be published as prescribed by state law. In the ordinance or
resolution of the city council calling any election at which more than one councilman shall be elected, the city council shall in
calling such election, provide for a separate place on the ballot for each vacancy, and in case an unexpired term is to be filled at
such election, the place for the unexpired term shall be so designated.
Section 5.02 Regulations of Elections
The city council shall make all regulations which it considers needful or desirable, not inconsistent with this charter or the laws of
the State of Texas, for the conduct of municipal elections, for the prevention of fraud in such elections and for the recount of
ballots in case of doubt or fraud. Municipal elections shall be conducted by the appointed election authorities who shall also have
power to make regulations not inconsistent with this charter or with any regulations made by the council or the laws of the State
of Texas.
Section 5.03 Filing for Office
Any person having the qualifications set forth for councilmember under Section 3.02 of this charter shall have the right to file an
application to have his or her name placed on the official ballot as a candidate for any elective office, and such application in
writing signed by such candidate according to the general election laws of the State of Texas, shall entitle such applicant to a
place on the official ballot. Each person filing an application to have their name placed on the official ballot shall specify the
place for which he/she desires to become a candidate.
Section 5.04 The Official Ballot
The names of all candidates for office, except such as may have withdrawn, died or become ineligible, shall be printed on the
official ballots without party designations in the order determined in a drawing of lots conducted by the city secretary. All official
ballots shall be printed at least twenty days prior to the date of any general or special election, and absentee voting shall be
governed by the general election laws of the State of Texas.
Section 5.05 Election by Majority
At any regular or special municipal election the candidates in each place on the ballot, including the candidate for mayor,
receiving the majority of votes cast, shall be declared elected. In the absence of a majority of the votes cast for that position a runoff
election shall be held within thirty (30) days following the official canvassing of the preceding regular or special election.
Section 5.06 Laws Governing City Elections
All city elections shall be governed, except as otherwise provided by this charter, by the laws of the State of Texas governing
general and municipal elections.
Section 5.07 Conducting and Canvassing Elections
The election judges and other necessary election officials for conducting all such elections shall be appointed by the city council.
The election judges shall conduct the elections, determine, record and report the results as provided by the general election laws
of Texas. Within five days or as soon as practical after an election, the city council shall meet, open the returns, canvass and
officially declare the result of the election as to candidates and questions and issue certificates of election to candidates elected as
hereinbefore provided.
Section 5.08 Oath of Office
Every officer of the city shall, before entering upon the duties of his office, take and subscribe to the following oath or affirmation
to be filed and kept in the office of the city secretary:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/414
“I, _________, do solemnly swear (or affirm), that I will faithfully execute the duties of the office of _______, of the
City of Gonzales, State of Texas, and will to the best of my ability preserve, protect and defend the constitution and
laws of the United States and of this state, so help me God.”
ARTICLE VI. RECALL OF OFFICERS
Section 6.01 Scope of Recall
Any elected city official, whether elected to office by the qualified voters of the city or appointed by the city council to fill a
vacancy, shall be subject to recall and removal from office by the qualified voters of the city on grounds of incompetency,
misconduct or malfeasance in office.
Section 6.02 Petitions for Recall
Before the question of recall of a councilmember shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the city, a petition demanding such
question to be so submitted shall first be filed with the person performing the duties of city secretary; which said petition shall be
signed by qualified voters of the councilmember district equal in number to at least 35% of the number of votes cast in that
district at the last regular municipal election of the city, but in no event less than 80 such petitioners. In the recall of the mayor the
petition shall be signed by qualified voters of the city equal in number to at least 35% of the number of votes cast in each district
at the last regular municipal election of the city, but in no event less than 150 such petitioners. A recall petition shall meet the
requirements of Texas Election Code Chapter 277 or as amended.
Section 6.03 Form of Recall Petition
The recall petition mentioned above must be addressed to the city council of the City of Gonzales, must distinctly and specifically
point out the ground or grounds upon which such petition for removal is predicated, and, if there be more than one ground, such
as for incompetency, misconduct or malfeasance in office, shall specifically state each ground with such certainty as to give the
officer sought to be removed, notice of the matters and things with which he/she is charged.
Section 6.04 Various Papers Constituting Petition
The petition may consist of one or more copies, or subscription lists circulated separately, and the signatures thereto may be upon
the paper or papers containing the form of petition, or upon other papers attached. Several parts of copies of the petition may be
filed separately and by different persons; but no signatures to such petition shall remain effective or be counted which were
placed thereon more than forty-five days prior to the filing of such petition or petitions with the person performing the duties of
city secretary. All papers comprising a recall petition shall be filed with the person performing the duties of city secretary on the
same day, and the said secretary shall immediately notify, in writing, the officer so sought to be removed, by mailing such notice
by certified mail to his/her Gonzales address.
Section 6.05 Presentation of Petition to City Council
Within ten (10) days after the date of the filing of the papers constituting the recall petition, the person performing the duties of
city secretary shall present such petition to the city council of the City of Gonzales.
Section 6.06 Public Hearing to be Held
The officer whose removal is sought may, within five days after such recall petition has been presented to the city council, request
that a public hearing be held to permit him/her to present facts pertinent to the charges specified in the recall petition. In this
event, the city council shall order such public hearing to be held not less than five days nor more than fifteen days after receiving
such request for a public hearing.
Section 6.07 Election to be Called
If the officer whose removal is sought does not resign, then it shall become the duty of the city council to order an election and fix
a date for holding such recall election, the date of which election shall be not less than twenty-five (25) nor more than thirty-five
(35) days from the date such petition was presented to the city council, or from the date of the public hearing if one was held.
Section 6.08 Ballots in Recall Election
Ballots used at recall elections shall conform to the following requirements:
(a) With respect to each person whose removal is sought, the question shall be submitted:
“Shall (name of person) be removed from the office of (name of office) by recall?”
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/414
(b) Immediately below each such question there shall be printed the following words, one above the other, in the
order indicated:
“YES”
“NO”
Section 6.09 Results of Recall Election
If a majority of the votes cast at a recall election shall be “NO,” that is against the recall of the person named on the ballot, he/she
shall continue in office for the remainder of the unexpired term, subject to recall as before. If a majority of the votes cast at such
an election be “YES,” that is for the recall of the person named on the ballot, he/she shall, regardless of any technical defects in
the recall petition, be deemed removed from office and the vacancy be filled as vacancies in the city council are filled, as
provided in Section 3.06 of this Charter.
Section 6.10 Recall, Restrictions Thereon
No recall petition shall be filed against any officer of the City of Gonzales within three months after his /her election, or within
three months after an election for such officer's recall.
Section 6.11 Failure of City Council to Call an Election
In case all of the requirements of this charter shall have been met and the city council shall fail or refuse to receive the recall
petition, or order such recall election, or discharge any other duties imposed upon said city council by the provisions of this
charter with reference to such recall, then all recall documents shall be delivered to the county judge of Gonzales County, Texas,
who shall discharge any of such duties herein provided to be discharged by the person performing the duties of city secretary or
by the city council.
ARTICLE VII. LEGISLATION BY THE PEOPLE, INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
Section 7.01 General Power
The qualified voters of the City of Gonzales, in addition to the method of legislation hereinbefore provided, shall have the power
of direct legislation by the initiative and referendum.
Section 7.02 Initiative
Qualified voters of the City of Gonzales may initiate legislation by submitting a petition addressed to the city council, which
requests the submission of a proposed ordinance or resolution to a vote of the qualified voters of the city. Said petition must be
signed by qualified voters of the city equal in number to 20% of the number of votes cast at the last regular municipal election of
the city, or 150, whichever is greater, and each copy of the petition shall have attached to it a copy of the proposed legislation.
The petition shall be signed in the same manner as recall petitions are signed, as provided in Section 6.02 of this charter. The
petition may consist of one or more copies as permitted for recall petitions in Section 6.04 of this charter. Such petition shall be
filed with the person performing the duties of city secretary. Within ten (10) days after the filing of such petition, the person
performing the duties of city secretary shall present said petition and proposed ordinance or resolution to the city council. Upon
presentation of the petition and draft of the proposed ordinance or resolution, it shall become the duty of the city council, within
ten days after the receipt thereof, to pass and adopt such ordinance or resolution without alteration as to meaning or effect in the
opinion of the persons filing the petition, or to call a special election within thirty-five (35) days at which the qualified voters of
the City of Gonzales shall vote on the question of adopting or rejecting the proposed legislation. However, if any other municipal
election is to be held within sixty days after the filing of the petition, the question may be voted on at such election.
Section 7.03 Referendum
Qualified voters of the City of Gonzales may require that any ordinance or resolution, with the exception of ordinances or
resolutions levying taxes, passed by the city council, be submitted to the voters of the city for approval or disapproval, by
submitting a petition for this purpose within 30 days after final passage of said ordinance or resolution, or within 30 days after its
publication. Said petition shall be addressed, prepared and signed as required for petitions initiating legislation as provided in
Section 7.02 of this charter and shall be submitted to the person performing the duties of city secretary. Within ten (10) days upon
the filing of such petition, the person performing the duties of city secretary shall present said petition to the city council.
Thereupon the city council shall immediately reconsider such ordinance or resolution and, if it does not entirely repeal the same,
shall submit it to popular vote as provided in Section 7.02 of this charter. Pending the holding of such election, such ordinance or
resolution shall be suspended from taking effect and shall not later take effect unless a majority of the qualified voters voting at
such election shall vote in favor thereof.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/414
Section 7.04 Voluntary Submission of Legislation by the Council
The city council, upon its own motion and by a majority vote of its members, may submit to popular vote at any election for
adoption or rejection any proposed ordinance or resolution or measure, or may submit for repeal any existing ordinance,
resolution or measure, in the same manner and with the same force and effect as provided in this article for submission on
petition, and may in its discretion call a special election for this purpose.
Section 7.05 Form of Ballots
The ballots used when voting upon such proposed and referred ordinances, resolutions or measures, shall set forth their nature
sufficiently to identify them and shall also set forth upon separate lines the words:
“FOR the ORDINANCE;” and
“AGAINST the ORDINANCE,” or
“FOR the RESOLUTION,” and
“AGAINST the RESOLUTION.”
Section 7.06 Publication of Proposed and Referred Ordinances
The person performing the duties of the city secretary shall publish as required by state law the proposed or referred ordinance or
resolution within fifteen (15) days before the date of the election, and shall give such other notices and do such other things
relative to such election as are required in general municipal elections or by the ordinance or resolution calling said election.
Section 7.07 Adoption of Ordinances
If a majority of the qualified voters voting on any proposed ordinance or resolution or measure shall vote in favor thereof, it shall
thereupon, or at any time fixed therein, become effective as a law or as a mandatory order to the city council.
Section 7.08 Inconsistent Ordinances
If the provisions of two or more proposed ordinances or resolutions approved at the same election are inconsistent, the ordinance
or resolution receiving the highest number of votes shall prevail.
Section 7.09 Ordinances Passed by Popular Vote, Repeal or Amendment
No ordinance or resolution which may have been passed by the city council upon a petition or adopted by popular vote under the
provisions of this article shall be repealed or amended except by the city council, in response to a referendum petition or by
submission as provided in Section 7.04 of this charter.
Section 7.10 Further Regulations by City Council
The city council may pass ordinances or resolutions providing other and further regulations for carrying out the provisions of this
article consistent herewith.
Section 7.11 Franchise Ordinances
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to be in conflict with any of the provisions of Article X of this charter,
pertaining to ordinances granting franchises when valuable rights shall have accrued thereunder.
ARTICLE VIII. MUNICIPAL PLANNING AND ZONING
Section 8.01 Platting of Property
(a) Hereafter, every owner of any tract of land situated within the corporate limits of the City of Gonzales who may divide the
same in two or more parts for the purpose of laying out any subdivision or any addition to the city, shall comply with the
provisions of TEX LOC. GOV'T., Chapter 212, as now or hereafter amended, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein for all
purposes.
(b) The provisions of Section 8.01(a) above shall apply similarly to the owner of any tract of land situated within the
extraterritorial limits of the City of Gonzales.
Section 8.02 Development of Property
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/414
The city council shall cooperate in every manner possible with persons interested in the development of property within or
beyond the city limits. No expenditure of public funds, however, shall be authorized for the development of privately owned
subdivisions situated within or beyond the corporate limits of the city, except for the extension of utilities or services to such areas
and expenditure of public funds by the Economic Development Corporation as allowed by Local Government Code Chapter 501.
Section 8.03 Planning Commission
The city council shall have the authority to appoint a city planning commission in accordance with the general laws of the State of
Texas as provided for in TEX. LOC. GOV'T CODE, Chapter 211, as now or hereafter amended.
ARTICLE IX. MUNICIPAL FINANCE
Section 9.01 Fiscal Year
The fiscal year of the City of Gonzales shall hereafter be set by ordinance or resolution of the city council. Such fiscal year shall
also constitute the budget and accounting year.
Section 9.02 Preparation and Submission of Budget
The city manager, forty-five (45) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, shall submit to the council a proposed budget
which budget shall provide a complete financial plan for the fiscal year, and shall contain the following:
(a) A budget message, explanatory of the budget, which message shall contain an outline of the proposed financial
policies of the city for the fiscal year, shall set forth the reasons for salient changes from the previous fiscal year in
expenditure and revenue items, and shall explain any major changes in financial policy.
(b) A consolidated statement of anticipated receipts and proposed expenditures for all funds.
(c) An analysis of property valuations.
(d) An analysis of tax rate.
(e) Tax levies and tax collections by years for at least five years.
(f) General fund resources in detail.
(g) Special fund resources in detail.
(h) Summary of proposed expenditures by function, department and activity.
(i) Detailed estimates of expenditures shown separately for each activity to support summary (h) above.
(j) A revenue and expense statement for all types of bonds.
(k) A description of all bond issues outstanding, showing rate of interest, date of issue, maturity date, amount
authorized, amounts issued and amounts outstanding.
(l) A schedule of requirements for the principal and interest of each issue of bonds.
(m) The appropriation ordinance.
(n) The tax-levying ordinance.
(o) A five (5) year capital program as an attachment to the annual budget. The program as submitted must include:
(1) A clear summary of its contents;
(2) A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be undertaken during the five fiscal years
succeeding the budget year, with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for such improvements;
(3) Cost estimates, methods of financing, and recommended time schedules for each improvement; and
(4) The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired. The
above information may be revised and extended each year with regard to capital improvements still pending or in
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/414
the process of construction or acquisition.
Section 9.03 Anticipated Revenues Compared with Other Years in Budget
In preparing the budget, the city manager shall place in parallel columns opposite the several items of revenue: The actual amount
of each item for the last completed fiscal year, the estimated amount for the current fiscal year, and the proposed amount for the
ensuing fiscal year.
Section 9.04 Proposed Expenditures Compared with Other Years
The city manager in the preparation of the budget shall place in parallel columns opposite the various items of expenditures. The
actual amount of such items of expenditures for the last completed fiscal year, the estimated amount for the current fiscal year and
the proposed amount for the ensuing fiscal year.
Section 9.05 Budget a Public Record
The budget and all supporting schedules shall be filed with the person performing the duties of city secretary, submitted to the
city council and shall be a public record. The city manager shall provide copies for distribution to all interested persons.
Section 9.06 Notice of Public Hearing on Budget
At the meeting of the city council at which the budget is submitted, the city council shall fix the time and place of a public
hearing on the budget and shall cause to be published as prescribed by state law, notice of the hearing setting forth the time and
place hereof at least five days before the date of such hearing.
Section 9.07 Public Hearing on Budget
At the time and place set forth in the notice required by Section 9.06, or at any time and place to which such public hearing shall
from time to time be adjourned, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the budget submitted and all interested persons
shall be given an opportunity to be heard for or against any item or the amount of item therein contained.
Section 9.08 Proceedings on Budget After Public Hearing
After the conclusion of such public hearing, the city council may insert new items or may increase or decrease the items of the
budget, except items in proposed expenditures fixed by law, but where it shall increase the total proposed expenditures, it shall
also provide for an increase in the total anticipated revenue to at least equal such proposed expenditures.
Section 9.09 Adoption of Budget
After public hearing, the City Council must analyze the budget, making any additions or deletions which they deem appropriate,
and must, at least ten (10) days before the beginning of the next fiscal year, adopt the budget by the affirmative vote of a majority
of the full membership of the city council. Should the city council take no final action on or before such day, the current budget
will continue to be in force on a month-to-month basis until a new budget is adopted.
Section 9.10 Effective Date of Budget; Certification; Copies Made Available
Upon final adoption, the budget shall be in effect for the fiscal year. A copy of the budget, as adopted, shall be filed with the
person performing the duties of city secretary. The budget shall be reproduced and copies made available for the use of all offices,
departments and agencies and for the use of interested persons and civic organizations.
Section 9.11 Budget Establishes Appropriations
From the effective date of the budget, the several amounts staffed therein as proposed expenditures shall be and become
appropriated to the several objects and purposes therein named.
Section 9.12 Budget Establishes Amount to be Raised By Property Tax
From the effective date of the budget, the amount staffed therein as the amount to be raised by property tax shall constitute a
determination of the amount of the levy for the purposes of the city in the corresponding tax year; provided, however, that in no
event shall such levy exceed the legal limit provided by the laws and constitution of the State of Texas.
Section 9.13 Contingent Appropriation
Provision shall be made in the annual budget and in the appropriation ordinance for a contingent appropriation in an amount not
more than three per centum of the total budget to be used in case of unforeseen items of expenditure. Such contingent
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/414
appropriation shall be under the control of the city manager and distributed by him/her, after approval of the city council.
Expenditures from this appropriation shall be made only in case of established emergencies and a detailed account of such
expenditures shall be recorded and reported.
Section 9.14 Estimated Expenditures Shall Not Exceed Estimated Resources
The total estimated expenditures of the general fund and debt service fund shall not exceed the total estimated resources of each
fund (prospective income plus cash on hand). The classification of revenue and expenditure accounts shall conform as nearly as
local conditions will permit to the form classification as promulgated by the National Committee on Governmental Accounting or
some other nationally accepted classification.
Section 9.15 Other Necessary Appropriations
The city budget may be amended and appropriations altered in accordance therewith in cases of public necessity, the actual fact of
which shall have been declared by the city council.
Section 9.16 Appropriation of Funds
Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure, shall lapse at the close of the fiscal year to the extent that it
has not been expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall continue in force until the purpose for
which it was made has been accomplished or abandoned; the purpose of any such appropriation shall be deemed abandoned if
three (3) years pass without any disbursement from or encumbrance of the appropriation.
Section 9.17 Power to Tax
The city council shall have the power under the provisions of the state law to levy, assess and collect an annual tax upon real and
personal property within the city to the maximum provided by the constitution and general laws of the State of Texas. The city
council shall also have the power to levy occupation taxes on such occupations as consistent with the general laws of the State of
Texas.
Section 9.18 Property Subject to Tax; Method of Assessment
All real and personal property within the City of Gonzales not expressly exempted by law shall be subject to annual taxation.
Section 9.19 Tax Liens
The tax levied by the city is hereby declared to be a lien, charge or encumbrance upon the property as of January 1st upon which
the tax is due, which lien, charge or encumbrance the city is entitled to enforce and foreclose in any court having jurisdiction over
the same, and the lien, charge or encumbrance on the property is such as to give the state courts jurisdiction to enforce and
foreclose said lien on the property on which the tax is due, not only as against any resident of this state or person whose residence
is unknown, but also as against nonresidents. All taxes upon real estate shall especially be a lien and a charge upon the property of
which the taxes are due, which lien may be foreclosed in any court having jurisdiction. Such lien shall be prior to all other claims,
and no gift, sale, assignment or transfer of any kind, or judicial writ of any kind, can ever defeat such lien.
Section 9.20 Issuance of Bonds
The City of Gonzales shall have the power to issue bonds and levy a tax to support the issue for permanent improvements and all
other lawful purposes.
ARTICLE X. FRANCHISE AND PUBLIC UTILITIES
Section 10.01 Powers of the City
In addition to the city's power to buy, construct, lease, maintain, operate and regulate public utilities and to manufacture,
distribute and sell the output of such utility operations, the city shall have further powers as may now or hereafter be granted
under the constitution and laws of the State of Texas.
Section 10.02 Franchise; Power of City Council
The city council shall have power by ordinance to grant, amend, renew and extend all franchises of all public utilities of every
character operating within the City of Gonzales. All ordinances granting, amending, renewing, or extending franchises for public
utilities shall be read at two separate regular meetings of the city council, and shall not be finally passed until thirty days after the
first reading; and no such ordinance shall take effect until thirty days after its final passage; and pending such time, the full text of
such ordinance shall be published as prescribed by state law once each week for four consecutive weeks and the expense of such
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/414
publication shall be borne by the proponent of the franchise. No public utility franchise shall be granted for a term of more than
20 years nor be transferable except with the approval of the city council expressed by ordinance.
Section 10.03 Right of Regulation
All grants, removals, extensions, or amendments of public utility franchises, whether it be so provided in the ordinance or not,
shall be subject to the right of the city council of the City of Gonzales:
(a) To repeal the same ordinance at any time upon the failure of the grantee to comply with any provision of the
ordinance, the franchise, the charter of the City of Gonzales, any applicable statute of the State of Texas or the rule of
any applicable governmental body;
(b) To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service, and the maintenance of the plant and fixtures at
the highest reasonable standard of efficiency;
(c) To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent unjust discrimination in service
or rates;
(d) To examine and audit at any time the accounts and other records of any such utility and to require annual and
other reports, including reports on operations within the City of Gonzales;
(e) To impose such reasonable regulations and restrictions as may be deemed desirable or conducive to the safety,
welfare, and accommodation of the public;
(f) To require such compensation and rental as may be permitted by the laws of the State of Texas.
Section 10.04 Consent of Property Owners
The consent of abutting and adjacent property owners shall not be required for the construction, extension, maintenance or
operation of any public utility; but nothing in this charter or in any franchise granted thereunder shall ever be construed to deprive
any such property owner of any right of action for damage or injury to his property as now or hereafter provided by law.
Section 10.05 Extensions
All extensions of public utilities within the city limits shall become a part of the aggregate property of the public utility, shall be
operated as such, and shall be subject to all the obligations and reserved rights contained in this charter and in any original grant
hereafter made. The right to use and maintain any extension shall terminate with the original grant and shall be terminable as
provided in Section 10.03 of this charter. In case of an extension of a public utility operated under a franchise hereafter granted,
such right shall be terminable at the same time and under the same conditions as the original grant.
Section 10.06 Other Conditions
All franchises heretofore granted are recognized as contracts between the City of Gonzales and the grantee, and the contractual
rights as contained in any such franchise shall not be impaired by the provisions of this charter, except that the power of the City
of Gonzales to exercise the right to eminent domain in the acquisition of utility property is in all things reserved, and except the
general power of the city heretofore existing and herein provided for, to regulate the rates and services of a grantee which shall
include the right to require proper and adequate extension of plant and service and the maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the
highest reasonable standard of efficiency. Every public utility franchise hereafter granted shall be held subject to all the terms and
conditions contained in the various sections of this article whether or not such terms are specifically mentioned in the franchise.
Nothing in this charter shall operate to limit in any way, as specifically stated, the discretion of the city council or voters of the
city in imposing terms and conditions as may be reasonable in connection with any franchise grant.
Section 10.07 Accounts of Municipally Owned Utilities
Accounts shall be kept for each public utility owned or operated by the city, in such manner as to show the true and complete
financial results of such city ownership and operation, including all assets and all liabilities, appropriately subdivided by classes,
depreciation reserve, other reserves and surplus; also revenues, operating expenses including depreciation, interest payments,
rental, and other disposition of annual income. The accounts shall show actual capital cost to the city of each public utility owned;
also the cost of all extensions, additions, and improvements and the source of funds expended for such capital purposes. They
shall show as nearly as possible the cost of any service furnished to or rendered by any such utility to any city government
department. The city council shall cause an annual report to be made by a certified public accountant and shall publish such report
showing the financial results of such city ownership and operation, giving the information specified in this section and such other
data as the city council shall deem expedient.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/414
Section 10.08 Sales of Electricity, Water and Sewer Services
(a) The city council shall have the power and authority to sell and distribute electricity and water and to sell and provide for
sewer services and any other utilities to any person, firm or corporation outside the limits of the City of Gonzales, and to permit
them to connect with said system under contract with the city, under such terms and conditions as may appear to be for the best
interests of the city; provided the charges fixed for such services outside the city limits shall be reasonable when considered in the
light of all circumstances, to be determined by the city council.
(b) The city council shall have the power and authority to prescribe the kind of materials used within or beyond the limits of the
City of Gonzales where it furnishes the service, and to inspect the same and require them to be kept in good order and condition at
all times and to make such rules and regulations as shall be necessary and proper, and prescribe penalties for noncompliance with
same.
Section 10.09 Regulation of Rates and Service
The city council shall have the power, after due notice and hearing, to regulate by ordinance the rates and services of city utilities
operating in the City of Gonzales.
The sale of any utility of the City of Gonzales can only be done by election of registered city voters.
ARTICLE XI. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 11.01 Publicity of Records
All records and accounts of every office, department, or agency of the city shall be open to inspection by any citizen or by any
representative of the press at all reasonable times and under such reasonable regulations as may be established by the city council
or the mayor, except records and documents, the disclosure of which would tend to defeat the lawful purpose which they are
intended to accomplish.
Section 11.02 Personal Interest
No officer or employee of the city shall have a financial interest, direct or indirect, in any contract with the city, nor shall be
financially interested, directly or indirectly, in the sale to the city of any land, or rights or interest in any land, materials, supplies
or service. The above provision shall not apply where the interest is represented by ownership of stock in a corporation involved,
provided such stock ownership amounts to less than 1% of the corporation stock. Any violation of this section shall constitute
malfeasance in office, and any officer or employee of the city found guilty thereof shall thereby forfeit his/her office or position.
Any violation of this section with the knowledge, express or implied, of the person or corporation contracting with the city shall
render the contract voidable by the city manager or the city council.
Section 11.03 Nepotism
No person may be hired who is related within the second degree by affinity (marriage) or within the third degree by consanguinity
(blood) to any member of the city council, or city manager. Spouses of relatives within the first or second degree of consanguinity
(i.e., son-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, etc.) are also included in the prohibition. No person may continue in
city employment who is related in one of the prohibited degrees unless the employee has been employed continuously by the city
for a period of at least 30 days if the officer or member is appointed, at least six months if the officer or member is elected at an
election other than the general election for state and county officers, or at least one year if the officer or member is elected at the
general election for state and county officers. In addition, in the interest of effective management, no personnel action will be
taken that would result in any employee supervising another employee who is related with the second degree of affinity or the
third degree of consanguinity to the supervisory employee.
Section 11.04 Provisions Relating to Assignment, Execution and Garnishment
The property, real and personal, belonging to the city shall not be liable to be sold or appropriated under any writ or execution or
cost bill. The funds belonging to the city, in the hands of any person, firm or corporation shall not be liable to garnishment,
attachment, or sequestration; nor shall the city be liable to garnishment on account of any debt it may owe or funds or property it
may have on hand or owing to any person. Neither the city nor any of its officers or agents shall be required to answer any such
writ of garnishment on any account whatever. The city shall not be obligated to recognize any assignment of wages or funds by its
employees, agents, or contractors.
Section 11.05 City Not Required to Give Security or Execute Bond
It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceeding in which the City of Gonzales is a party, for any bond, undertaking, or
security to be demanded or executed by or on behalf of said city or any of the state courts, but in all such actions, suits, appeals,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/414
or proceedings same shall be conducted in the same manner as if such bond, undertaking or security had been given as required
by law.
Section 11.06 Special Provisions Covering Damage Suits
Before the city shall be liable to damage claim or suit for personal injury, or damage to property, the person who is injured or
whose property is damaged or someone in his/her behalf shall give the city manager or the person performing duties of city
secretary, notice in writing after the occurrence of the alleged injury, or damage, stating specifically such notice when, where and
how the injury or damage was sustained, and setting forth the extent of the injury or damage as accurately as possible. No action
at law for damages shall be brought against the city for personal injury or damage to property prior to the expiration of thirty days
after the notice hereinbefore described has been filed with the city manager or the person performing the duties of city secretary,
not later than two years after the occurrence of the injury or damage to property. In case of injuries resulting in death, before the
city shall be liable in damages therefor, the person or persons claiming such damages shall after the death of the injured person
give notice as above required in case of personal injury. Provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be construed to
mean that the City of Gonzales waives any rights, privileges, defenses or immunities in tort actions which are provided under the
common law, the constitution and general laws of the State of Texas.
Section 11.07 Separability Clause
If any section or part of section of this charter shall be held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not
affect the remainder of this charter nor the context in which such section or part of section so held invalid may appear, except to
the extent that an entire section or part of section may be inseparably connected in meaning and effect with the section or part of
section to which such holding shall directly apply.
Section 11.08 Effect of This Charter on Existing Law
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force under the city government of Gonzales and not in conflict with the
provisions of this charter, shall remain in force under this charter until altered, amended or repealed by the city council after this
charter takes effect; and all rights of the City of Gonzales under existing franchises and contracts are preserved in full force and
effect to the City of Gonzales.
Section 11.09 Applicability of General Laws
The constitution of the State of Texas, the statutes of said state applicable to home ruled municipal corporations, as now or
hereafter enacted, this charter and ordinances enacted pursuant hereto shall, in the order mentioned, be applicable to the City of
Gonzales, but the city shall also have the power to exercise any and all powers conferred by the laws of the State of Texas upon
any other kind of city, town or village, not contrary to the provisions of said home rule statutes, charter and ordinances, but the
exercise of any such powers by the City of Gonzales shall be optional with it; and it shall not be required to conform to the law
governing any other cities, towns or villages unless and until by ordinance it adopts same.
Section 11.10 Amending the Charter
Amendments to this charter may be framed and submitted to the voters of the city in the manner provided by TEX. LOC. GOV'T.
CODE CHAPTER 9, as now or hereafter amended.
Section 11.11 Charter Review Commission
The city council shall appoint a charter review commission consisting of five citizens of the City of Gonzales at the July City
Council meeting in even-numbered years. Each councilmember shall appoint one (1) member to the commission. The charter
review commission shall be empaneled from August 1st through January 31st. The final report of the commission shall be
presented to the council no later than the February regular council meeting.
(Amended by Ord. 2015-1 at an election held on May 9, 2015)
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1.100 CODE OF ORDINANCES*
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/414
Sec. 1.101 Adoption
There is hereby adopted the Code of Ordinances of the City of Gonzales as compiled, edited and published by Franklin Legal
Publishing, Inc.
Sec. 1.102 Designation and Citation of Code
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be designated the “Code of
Ordinances, City of Gonzales, Texas,” and may be so cited.
Sec. 1.103 Catchlines of Articles and Sections
The catchlines of the several articles and sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the
article or section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such articles and sections, nor as any part of the articles and
sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such articles and sections, including the
catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
Sec. 1.104 Definitions and Rules of Construction
In the construction of this code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following rules shall be
observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council:
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly indicated.
City and Town. Each means the City of Gonzales, Texas.
Council. Whenever the words “council” or “this council” or “the council” are used, they shall mean the city council of the City of
Gonzales, Texas.
City Manager, City Secretary, Chief of Police or Other City Officers. The words “city manager,” “city secretary,” “chief of police”
or other city officers or departments shall be construed to mean the city manager, city secretary, chief of police or such other
municipal officers or departments, respectively, of the City of Gonzales, Texas.
County. The term “county” or “this county” shall mean the County of Gonzales, Texas.
May. Is permissive.
Month. The word “month” shall mean a calendar month.
Must and Shall. Are each mandatory.
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural number shall
include the singular.
Oath. The word “oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the words “affirm” and
“affirmed.”
Official Time Standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean standard time or daylight-saving time as may
be in current use in the city.
Owner. The word “owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in
partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, or the whole or of a part of such building or land.
Person. The word “person” shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and
corporate as well as to individuals.
Property. Means and includes real and personal property.
Real Property. Means and includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/414
Sidewalk. Means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
Signature or Subscription. Shall include a mark when a person cannot write.
State. The words “the state” or “this state” shall be construed to mean the State of Texas.
Street. Shall have its commonly accepted meaning and shall include highways, sidewalks, alleys, avenues, recessed parking areas
and other public rights-of-way including the entire right-of-way.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.
V.T.C.S., V.T.P.C., V.T.C.C.P., V.T.C.A. Refer to the divisions of Vernon's Texas Statutes Annotated.
Written or In Writing. The term “written” or “in writing” shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters, or
figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
Year. Shall mean a calendar year.
Sec. 1.105 Severability of Parts of Code
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this
code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be declared unconstitutional by the
valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining
phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council
without the incorporation in the code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.
Sec. 1.106 Repeal of Ordinances
The repeal of an ordinance or any portion thereof shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any ordinance
which has been previously repealed.
Sec. 1.107 Amendments or Additions to Code
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, and amendments to such ordinances, hereinafter enacted or presented to the
city council for enactment, shall be drafted, so far as possible, as specific amendments of, or additions to, the code of ordinances.
Amendments to this code shall be made by reference to the chapter and section of the code which is to be amended, and additions
shall bear an appropriate designation of chapter, article and section; provided, however, the failure so to do shall in no way affect
the validity or enforceability of such ordinances.
Sec. 1.108 Supplementation of Code
(a) By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by
the city council. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the
city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in
the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the code and will, where necessary,
replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have
been inserted, the code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the code
by omission thereof from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare
the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement,
insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for articles, sections and other subdivisions of the code
printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/414
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to articles, sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the code and, where
necessary to accommodate new material, change existing article or section or other subdivision numbers;
(4) Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to “this chapter,” “this article,” “this section,”
“this subsection,” etc., as the case may be; and
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance articles or sections
inserted into the code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance
material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
Sec. 1.109 General Penalty for Violations of Code; Continuing Violations
(a) Unless otherwise specifically stated within the provisions of this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance set
forth herein that is punishable by a fine that does not exceed the amount authorized by Section 12.23 of the Texas Penal Code
does not require a culpable mental state, and a culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove any such offense.
(b) Unless otherwise specifically stated within the provisions of this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance set
forth herein that is punishable by a fine that exceeds the amount authorized by Section 12.23 of the Texas Penal Code shall
require a culpable mental state of “criminal negligence.”
(Ordinance 2006-01 adopted 1/3/06)
ARTICLE 1.200 FEE FOR QUITCLAIM DEEDS FROM THE CITY
(a) A fee of actual costs is hereby authorized and is required to be charged for each quitclaim deed or other conveyance of any
interest in real estate out of the city where such quitclaim and conveyances are made to remove cloud from title and for which the
city receives no other consideration. Such fee shall be paid before the delivery of any such quitclaim deed or other conveyance.
(b) Such fee, as well as all costs of preparing such quitclaim deeds and other conveyances and the resolutions relating to same,
shall be paid by the grantee in said quitclaim deed or other conveyance or by the person requesting the same.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title I, Chapter 11, Section 11.01)
ARTICLE 1.300 CORPORATE SEAL
There is hereby adopted as the official corporate seal of the city a seal consisting of the embossed impression of a circular
metallic disk, containing on the outer upper rim the words “City of Gonzales,” on the outer lower rim the date “October 2, 1835,”
and containing in the center the form of a star with a cannon including the words “come and take it” written below. (Ordinance
2018-24 adopted 8/9/18)
ARTICLE 1.400 RECORDS MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 1.401 Definitions
Department Head. The officer who by ordinance or administrative policy is in charge of an office by the city that creates or
receives records.
Essential Record. Any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of its operations in an emergency or disaster,
to the recreation of its legal and financial status, or to the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state.
Municipal Records. All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic
tape, electronic media, or other information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic, and regardless of
whether public access to them is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by the city or any of its officers
or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business, are hereby declared to be the records of the city and shall be
created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no
other manner.
Permanent Record. Any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as permanent.
Records Control Schedule. A document prepared by, or under the authority of, the records management officer which lists the
records maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that the records management
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/414
program may require.
Records Management. The application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation, and
disposal of records for the purpose of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping. The term includes the
development of records control schedules, the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential
and permanent records, the economical and space-effective storage and inactive records, control over the creation and distribution
of forms, reports, and correspondence, and the management of micrographic and electronic and other records storage systems.
Records Management Officer. The person designated in Section 1.404 of this article.
Records Management Plan. The plan developed under Section 1.405 of this article.
Retention Period. The minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of
certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction.
Sec. 1.402 Municipal Records Declared Public Property
All municipal records as defined in Section 1.401 of this article are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No municipal
official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such records even though he or she may
have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited.
Sec. 1.403 Policy
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over the creation,
distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all municipal records through a comprehensive system of
integrated procedures for their management from creation to ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas
Local Government Records Act and accepted records management practice.
Sec. 1.404 Designation of Records Management Office
The city secretary, and the successive holders of said office, shall serve as records management officer for the city. As provided
by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the director and librarian of the state library
within thirty days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as applicable.
Sec. 1.405 Records Control Schedule
The records management officer shall develop a records control schedule that complies with minimum requirements established
on records retention schedules issued by the state library and archives commission.
Sec. 1.406 Duties of Records Management Officer
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall:
(1) Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its implementation;
(2) Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures;
(3) In cooperation with department heads identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each municipal
office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to re-establish operations quickly and
with minimum disruption and expense;
(4) Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the city;
(5) Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies;
(6) Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design and control
system for the city;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/414
(7) Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the state library and archives commission
to determine if the records management program and the municipality's records control schedules are in compliance
with state regulations;
(8) Disseminate to the city council and department heads information concerning state laws and administrative rules
relating to local government records;
(9) Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of the records of the
city are carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program and the
requirements of state law;
(10) Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control schedules or through
records destruction authorization requests, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the
estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition.
(Ordinance 2012-16 adopted 4/3/12)
ARTICLE 1.500 AIRPORTS
Sec. 1.501 Operation of Motor Vehicles on Runways Restricted
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than workers engaged in work at the municipal airport of the city and city employees
and other persons actually engaged in the servicing of aircraft thereon, to drive or operate an automobile, truck or other motor
vehicle except aircraft upon, over or across the paved portion of any runway of the municipal airport. (1995 Code of Ordinances,
Title IX, Chapter 91, Section 91.01)
Sec. 1.502 Adoption of Civil Air Regulations
The Federal Aviation Regulations promulgated by the Federal Aviation Agency are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part of
this subchapter, not less than three copies of which are on file in the office of the city secretary, as though fully set forth and
incorporated herein. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 91, Section 91.02)
Sec. 1.503 Airplane Hangar Rentals
(a) Hangar rental for hanger space at the Gonzales Airport is as set below per month per hangar, such rental to be paid on or
before the tenth day of each month. If such rental shall not be timely paid, then the city shall have an express landlord's lien on
the plane and goods of the tenant and can treat this lease as terminated and can at their option forcibly retake the leased premises.
(1) Small hangar (35 ft. x 40 ft.): $175.00 per month.
(2) Medium hanger (34 ft. x 43 ft.): $225.00 per month.
(3) Large hanger (50 ft. x 60 ft.): $300.00 per month.
(4) Extra large hanger (60 ft. x 100 ft.): $600.00 per month.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 91, Section 91.03; Ordinance 2017-9 adopted 8/1/17)
(b) Persons who rent such hangars must use them for storage of an airplane and must own or rent an airplane at all times. In the
event such airplane is not stored in such hangar for 30 days, then the tenant shall be evicted. The lease on such hangars is
specifically not assignable. The term own or rent is meant an actual cash contribution of not less than 5% of the actual cost of the
airplane purchase price or lease price. An actual certificate of registration or other documentary proof of such must be submitted
to the city. If the airplane involved is owned by a partnership, upon desolation of such, the partner who receives the airplane shall
have the hangar lease awarded to him for as long as he owns such plane.
(c) Any person renting a hangar who shall not own an airplane shall be subject of being evicted from such hangar on 30 day's
notice by the city manager and any prepaid rent shall be forfeited.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 91, Section 91.03)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/414
ARTICLE 1.600 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 1.601 Organization of Emergency Management
(a) There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with
state law.
(b) An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director.
(c) The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying
out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this article. The director may delegate authority for execution of these duties to the
coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the director.
(d) The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so
designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of
this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency
management plan.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 94, Section 94.01)
Sec. 1.602 Emergency Management Director; Powers and Duties
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following:
(1) Conduct an ongoing survey of actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the city and an
ongoing program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to
prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur.
(2) Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city, and shall
recommend for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of
such plan.
(3) Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in
excess of seven days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation declaring,
continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed
promptly with the city secretary.
(4) Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives which are necessary for carrying out the purposes
of this article. Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to
bring its contents to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or
impede, promptly filed with the city secretary.
(5) Direction and control of the operations of the emergency management organization of the city as well as the
training of emergency management personnel.
(6) Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management
organization of the city.
(7) Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal emergency management
organizations.
(8) Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the
carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan.
(9) Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of
the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an
agreement with the county in which said city is located and with other municipalities within the county, for the countywide
coordination of emergency management efforts.
(10) Supervision of, and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including
acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/414
the city.
(11) Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and
other purposes.
(12) Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could be used during a
disaster, as provided for herein.
(13) Other requirements as specified in Texas Disaster Act of 1975, being Tex. Gov't. Code, §§ 418.001 et seq.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 94, Section 94.02)
Sec. 1.603 Emergency Management Plan
(a) A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan shall set forth
the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers and
designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this article.
(b) As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state division of emergency
management. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the
state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the
functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency
management plan shall be considered supplementary to this article and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 94, Section 94.03)
Sec. 1.604 Interjurisdictional Program
The mayor is authorized to join with the county judge and the mayors of the other cities in the county in the formation of an
emergency management council for the county and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of a joint emergency
management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to
participate in a county-wide program of emergency management insofar as the program may affect the city. (1995 Code of
Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 94, Section 94.04)
Sec. 1.605 Provisions to Supersede Existing Provisions
At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect, they shall
supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 94, Section 94.05)
Sec. 1.606 Liability
This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety and
neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule,
or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the
result of said activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation
grants to the city a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or parts of
such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack or natural
or manmade disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any
person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the
property of such person. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 94, Section 94.06)
Sec. 1.607 Commitment of Funds
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity
authorized by this article without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by
contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council unless during a declared disaster. During a
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/414
declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the
protection of health, life or property. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 94, Section 94.07)
Sec. 1.608 Violations
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management
organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article, or to do any act forbidden by any rule or
regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article.
(b) It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of
identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to do so has been granted to
such person by the proper officials.
(c) Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or the termination of a
warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article and shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this article.
(d) A violation of any provision of this article is a Class C misdemeanor. Each violation constitutes a separate offense.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 94, Section 94.08)
Sec. 1.609 Conflict With State or Federal Statutes
This article shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval order, rule or
regulation. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 94, Section 94.09)
ARTICLE 1.700 PARKS AND RECREATION
Division 1. Park Regulations
Sec. 1.701 Unlawful Acts Listed Within the Limits of City Parks
(a) It shall be unlawful within the limits of any city park to:
(1) Hitch, fasten, lead, drive or let loose any animal, reptile, or fowl of any kind, provided that this shall not apply to
dogs when led by a cord or chain, not more than six feet long, except in designated areas.
(2) (A) Ride or drive any horse or other animal, except in designated areas.
(B) Ride, drive or go at a rate of speed faster than speed limits as posted on standard traffic signs, upon any
bicycle, motorcycle, automobile, or any other vehicle whatsoever, upon any drive or street in any park of the
city; or
(C) Ride or drive any such motorcycle, automobile or other motorized vehicle upon any walk in such park,
except in designated areas.
(3) (A) Carry or discharge any firearm, firecrackers, rockets, torpedoes or any other fireworks, air guns, BB
guns, bow and arrows, slingshots; or
(B) Hit golf balls except in designated areas.
(4) (A) Damage, cut, break, injure, deface, or disturb any tree, shrub, plant, rock, building, cage, pen,
monument, fence, bench or other structure apparatus, or property; or
(B) Pluck, pull up, cut, take or remove any shrub, bush, plant or flower; or
(C) to mark or write upon, paint, or deface any building, monument, fence bench or other structure.
(5) Cut or remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand, gravel or fertilizer.
(6) Make or kindle a fire, except in picnic stoves, braziers, fire pits or designated areas provided for that purpose.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/414
(7) Wash dishes or to empty saltwater or other waste liquids elsewhere than in sinks provided for such purposes.
(8) Leave garbage, cans, bottles, papers or other refuse elsewhere than in receptacles provided therefor.
(9) Participate or engage in any activity on any public park area when such activity will create a danger to the public
or may be considered a public nuisance. The city manager may designate particular locations within park areas for
specific activities.
(10) Play or bet at or against any game which is played, conducted, dealt or carried on with cards, dice, or other
device, for money, chips, shells, credit or any other representative of value, or to maintain or exhibit any gambling
table or other instrument of gambling or gaming.
(11) Use or speak any threatening, abusive, insulting or indecent language in any of the public parks, and no person
shall commit, in any such parks, any obscene, lewd or indecent act or create any nuisance.
(12) Disturb in any manner any picnic, meeting, service, concert, exercise or exhibition.
(13) Distribute, post, place, or erect any advertising handbill, circular, bill, notice, paper or other advertising device
without prior permission of the city manager.
(14) Sell or offer for sale any food, drinks, confections, merchandise or services, unless such person has a written
agreement or a permit issued by the city manager.
(15) Practice, carry on, conduct or solicit for any trade, occupation, business or profession without approval of the
city manager.
(16) Remain, stay or loiter in any public park between the hours of 1:00 a.m. or 6:00 a.m. or remain, stay or loiter in
any park in other than open hours as posted.
(17) For any person over the age of six years to use the restrooms and washrooms designated for the opposite sex.
(18) Hunt or kill any animal or bird of any kind whatsoever within the limits of any park within the city.
(b) (1) Baseball played on municipally owned property shall not be played after 11:30 p.m. except with special
permission of the city manager.
(2) All baseball fields located on municipally-owned property will be vacated by midnight and the lights cut off by
such time.
(c) (1) All vehicles used for the purpose of transporting freight and merchandise, or brick, stone, or gravel, and
all those commonly known as floats, moving wagons, express or delivery wagons are prohibited from entering upon or
being driven through any of the public parks of the city, except by special permission of the city manager subject to
appropriate conditions and safeguards.
(2) No vehicle shall be driven over or across the curbs, sidewalks, grass or lawn within any park area unless signs
permit. Parking is to be done in areas set aside for this purpose only. In areas having no parking set aside, all parking
will take place outside of the boundary or curbline, where existing. Where parking stalls have been designated all
vehicles shall be parked on such lots within and between the lines designating a single vehicle parking space and not
otherwise. Where parking lots or areas within public parks of the city have been designated for head-in parking to
front on a visible parking line without delineated single vehicle spaces, the front of the vehicle shall be placed on the
parking line and as near as practicable to side of the last parked vehicle in line. No vehicle shall be parked on left
behind any other vehicle in the parking line or back of such parking line in any manner so as to obstruct, block or
hinder ingress or egress from the line. Officers of the police department of the city shall issue to violators of this
section, traffic tickets. Where a vehicle is parked or left in violation of this section in such a manner as to obstruct or
block traffic and the owner or operator of the vehicle cannot be found, police officers of the city may move the vehicle
so that traffic will not be impeded. No variation to the requirements of this division shall be allowed except by special
permit issued by the city manager.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 101, Section 101.01)
Sec. 1.702 Closing Hours
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/414
The city municipal parks shall be closed to the public between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. and the presence of any
person in the parks during such hours shall be unlawful; provided, this section does not apply to employees of the city in the parks
on official business nor to persons in the parks on the occasions as provided in Section 1.703. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX,
Chapter 101, Section 101.02)
Sec. 1.703 Permit for Special Functions
(a) Upon proper application 24 hours in advance, a permit may be secured from the police department for use of one of the
municipal parks and it shall not be unlawful for persons to be in the specific parks during the hours specified in the permit, nor for
one hour after the end of such function. There shall be no fee imposed for the permit. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX,
Chapter 101, Section 101.03)
(b) Such permits shall apply to all city parks, including but not limited to the city's recreational vehicle parks. (Ordinance
adopting Code)
Sec. 1.704 Independence Park Municipal Golf Course
(a) The city owns a golf course located in Independence Park and established the following rules for the use thereof:
(1) The golf course is a restricted area and anyone other than golfers are not permitted on the golf course.
(2) No swimming is allowed in the water irrigation tanks located on the golf course.
(3) No vehicles are to be operated on the golf course other than the vehicles permitted by the clubhouse attendant.
(4) No playing on the golf course without the authorization of the clubhouse attendant.
(b) The city hereby designates the Gonzales Golf Association to promulgate rules for the conduct of play which such rules will
be posted near the clubhouse.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 101, Section 101.04)
Secs. 1.705 - 1.710 Reserved
Division 2. Glass Beverage Containers Within Any City Park
(a) It shall be unlawful to possess glass beverage containers within any city park in the City of Gonzales, except in concession
buildings.
(b) The following types of glass containers are permitted within the city parks:
(1) Glass-lined vacuum bottles and glass-lined picnic beverage coolers;
(2) Baby bottles or baby food jars containing products for consumption by a baby;
(3) Glass bottles containing over the counter or prescribed drugs;
(4) Glass containers made for the containment and serving of food; and
(5) Any other such similar glass containers as listed above.
(c) Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ordinance 2001-13 adopted 6/4/01)
Division 3. Administration and Enforcement
Sec. 1.711 Department of Parks and Recreation
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/414
There shall be a department of city government to be known as the department of parks and recreation. The department shall be
under the supervision of the director of parks and recreation, who shall be appointed by the city manager and shall be responsible
to the city manager in the conduct and affairs of the department. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 101, Section
101.15)
Sec. 1.712 Officials to Enforce Provisions
The director, park attendants designated by the director, and police department, shall, in connection with their duties imposed by
law, diligently enforce the provisions of this article. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 101, Section 101.16)
Sec. 1.713 Authority to Eject Persons From Park
The director, park attendants designated by the director, and any member of the police department shall have the authority to eject
from the park any person acting in violation of this article. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 101, Section 101.17)
Sec. 1.714 Seizure of Property
The director, park attendants designated by the director, or any member of the police department shall have the authority to seize
and confiscate any property, thing or device in the park or used in violation of this article. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX,
Chapter 101, Section 101.18)
ARTICLE 1.800 FINANCE
Sec. 1.801 Returned Check Fee
There shall be a $20.00 fee for any check returned unpaid to the city for insufficient funds. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.802 Processing Fee
In accordance with Texas Local Government Code 132.003(b) a one and one-half percent (1.5%) transaction fee shall hereby be
assessed for each credit/debit transaction made for any fee, fine, court cost, or other charge by any method whether via website, in
person, over the phone, mail, fax, or other like method received by the city, its assignee, agent, or representative, or any other
person retained by the city. (Ordinance 2017-17 adopted 10/3/17)
ARTICLE 1.900 TREE TRIMMING
Sec. 1.901 Introduction
(a) The tree trimming specifications and policy are designed to apply to the trimming and removal of any plant, bush, or tree
growth interfering with the safe operation of the electrical system, right-of-way visibility, and to maintain parks and public
property in a safe, proper and manageable manner. It is not the intent of this policy to deface the appearance or damage the life of
any plant, bush, or tree for the sake of doing so, but to protect the safety and welfare of the citizens of the city and its employees.
(b) These specifications prescribe standards to ensure consistent tree trimming practices, and efficient, economical line
clearance maintenance. They shall provide a basis for determining whether tree trimming is necessary or appropriate, and shall
dictate the methods to be adhered to in the performance of the work activity described in this document. This policy takes into
account sections of the American National Safety Institute Standards (ANSI).
(c) All city departments are committed to complying with the terms and conditions of this policy and any ordinances applicable
to the trimming of any plants, bushes, or trees. These guidelines are also recommended for all franchises, firms, persons, or
corporations involved in trimming trees within the city.
(d) The primary goal for electrical line clearance is to maintain a safe and reliable electrical distribution system. While
establishing proper line clearance, tree trimming shall be in a manner that best directs tree growth away from electrical
conductors and facilities and street rights-of-way, extend trimming cycles, and reduce the overall amount of future trimming work
required. Because of the difficulty in developing line clearances which would cover all circumstances, the electrical
superintendent and/or city manager reserves the right to assess, on a case-by-case basis, any special situations where the strict
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/414
application of these specifications and policies might be impractical or inappropriate. However, the intent is to strive to meet the
clearances set out herein.
Sec. 1.902 Notification
(a) Initial notification shall be made by door tag or personal contact or visit with the property owner or occupant. The reason
for trimming or removal should be explained to the property owner or occupant. If the reason is a violation of city ordinance, the
process for resolving the matter should be explained. Arrangements should also be made to correct the matter as soon as possible.
(b) When scheduled trimming to a section of town is established the occupants in the area should be notified by door tag or
personal contact or visit and a schedule should be published in the local newspaper and aired on the local radio station at least one
week in advance of the proposed schedule.
(c) If property owner wants the city to take care of the matter or violation, the work will be scheduled as soon as possible.
(d) If the property owner wants to take care of the matter or violation themselves, the work needs to be scheduled and
completed within ten days or a reasonable time frame agreed to by the property owner and city. Amount of time considered to be
reasonable will depend upon the degree of need to correct.
(e) If all attempts to contact the property owner/occupant fail then a certified letter will be sent giving the property
owner/occupant ten days from the signed receipt date, accepting the letter, to correct the problem or make arrangements to correct
the problem. If action is not taken or contact has not been made by the property owner/occupant within fifteen days from the date
of the letter or ten days from acceptance of the letter or if the property owner/occupant refuses to correct the violation within a
reasonable time frame, the matter will be turned over to the municipal court.
(f) If a situation arises involving any plant, bush or tree that presents an immediate or inherent danger to the public, the
employees, or the utility system, the city shall have the ability to take immediate action to correct the problem to the best of its
ability.
Sec. 1.903 Individual Request for Assistance
The following shall apply to property owner requests and individual request for assistance in trimming or topping plants, bushes,
or trees, where the property owner will be responsible for completing trimming or removal.
(1) Each request shall be evaluated individually, and may require an on-site visit by the responsible department and
property owner or occupant.
(2) If possible, electrical lines shall be removed or de-energized by the electrical department to permit safe removal
of the tree or tree limbs by the property owner, occupant, contractor, entity, or any other person. However, no property
owner, occupant, contractor, entity, or any other person may trim or remove trees, or vegetation around any electrical
utility without prior approval from the electrical superintendent or city manager.
(3) The property owner may be directed, at the option of the electrical department, to have the service drop
temporarily disconnected to allow safe tree trimming or removal by the property owner.
(4) All departments trimming, removing or assisting in the trimming and removal of plants, bushes, or trees shall
properly mark or barricade the area in which trimming is being performed to prevent injury to the public or
employees.
(5) If it is determined that the request for assistance from the city should be granted on an expedited basis the
property owner shall schedule time with the city so that either the city or property owner may have the work
performed, as soon as possible, to avoid risk of injury to the public, employees, or electrical system.
(6) Whenever possible, all such requests shall be deferred until the normally scheduled trimming cycle, for the area
in which the property is located or to a time that will be least detrimental to the plant, bush or tree.
Sec. 1.904 Tree Removal
The following shall apply when the city initiates a tree removal and after communication with the property owner or tenant: the
tree presents a danger to the public; a danger to the traffic; a danger to the electrical system; a tree is destabilizing electric utility
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/414
structures; a tree is totally involved with the electrical system and clearance cannot be obtained without removal; where affected
trees have dominant terminal leaders (pines, etc.) and can not be directionally pruned away from the electrical system; and other
situations that may poise a danger to the public or employees. The removal of trees except in an emergency situation shall require
prior authorization of the public works director or city manager.
(1) The electrical department shall safely remove limbs near energized lines before removing the remainder of the
tree. Other departments shall safely remove as many limbs as possible near or in rights-of-way before removing the
remainder of the tree. All departments shall properly mark or barricade the area in which trimming is being performed
to prevent injury to the public or employees.
(2) The final stump cut will be as close to the ground as possible. Branch debris shall be removed by the department
performing the work. The removal of stumps shall be the responsibility of the property owner.
Sec. 1.905 Disposal of Pruned Material
The following shall apply to cleanup, removal and disposal of pruned material:
(1) Each department shall remove and dispose of only those plants, bushes, trees or portions of plants, bushes, and
trees trimmed by that department. When possible, removal and cleanup shall be completed within ten days of time cut.
However, general practice shall be to remove the brush upon completion of the work. No cut limbs, trunks, brush,
trash or other debris will be left on the premises, or adjacent streets or alleys.
(2) Removal and disposal of remaining portions of any plant, bush or tree pruned by the property owner is the
responsibility of the property owner. Whenever possible options for disposal should be explained to the customer.
Sec. 1.906 Electrical Line Clearances
Line clearance distances attained during tree trimming operations shall vary depending on the power line voltage and the type of
tree encountered. High voltage lines require greater clearances. The tree trimming operations shall provide clearance as
appropriate for the line voltage and average growth rate of the affected trees, with the overall objective of achieving a minimum
of four to five-year pruning cycle. The electrical department shall start and follow a schedule route which follows the primary
feeder lines.
(1) Line clearing shall begin only after careful consideration of the position occupied by the electrical system
relative to the adjacent trees, and the growth rate of the affected trees.
(2) If the trimming required to obtain adequate clearance from an electrical facility and/or conductor (i.e. leaning
pole, low pole height, sagging wire, etc.) would significantly affect the shape of the tree, the electrical department
shall determine if the electrical facility and/or conductor can be adjusted to reduce the trimming required.
(3) The clearance specified herein shall be consistently achieved to the best of the department's ability. Special
efforts shall be undertaken for reasonable resolution of any property owners objections or disputes. If the property
owner does not wish for the trees to be trimmed and the ability exists that the lines can be rerouted the property owner
may request that the lines be rerouted at the property owner's expense. The property owner will be responsible for all
costs associated with the rerouting of any electric lines not excluding any easements or deed research. If a situation
arises that the ability to reroute the lines is available and the property owner is willing to pay all associated costs, but
the extent of research and manhours required to reroute is considered to be too great by city management, they may
refuse to reroute without approval by council.
(4) Telephone or television cable facilities shall not be considered in determining line clearances.
(5) (A) Where possible, the following clearances shall be attained:
(i) Service drop, streetlights and conductors: 3 feet.
(ii) Secondary conductors less than 600 volts: 3 feet.
(iii) Primary conductor greater than 600 volts: 6 feet.
(iv) Greater distances may be achieved if easement allows.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/414
(B) All attempts will be made to ensure that cuts do not exceed 6 feet. However, for the health of the tree,
limbs will be cut back to the closest secondary or parent limb.
(C) The shape and appearance of all trees will be considered, during the trimming process, in an attempt to
preserve the overall appearance of the tree.
(6) According to the Texas State Law, article 143C it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to cause
any person or equipment to be within 10 feet of high power lines unless the utility company has been notified and
protective equipment is in place to prevent contact with conductors (lines). Therefore it is also the city's policy to
prevent any person, firm, or corporation from placing or maintaining any object, tree, or equipment within six feet of a
power line.
(7) The electrical department shall remove all overhang above the pole or primary conductors, or as directed by city
management. Poles, guy wires, down guys, transformers, and other electrical facilities shall be free of weight, strain or
altered positions caused by contact with plants, bushes, or tree limbs. Guy wires, down guys and poles shall be free of
vines. The electric department, at its own discretion, shall determine whether to cut and/or remove all vines or plant
growth obstructing or limiting access, at the base of, or on the affected electrical facility, pole, guy wire or down guy.
Sec. 1.907 Right-of-Way Clearances
The following section accounts for minimum height requirements.
(1) No plant shall be maintained having a height greater than three feet (3') above the level of the centerlines of the
nearest abutting street or in the area of a triangle formed by the intersecting property lines and a diagonal line joining
the property lines at points twenty feet from their intersection of any corner lot on which a front yard is required.
(2) No plant shall be maintained having a height greater than three feet (3') above the level of the centerline of the
nearest abutting street or in that area which lies between the property lines of any corner lot and the curblines of any
street (sidewalk areas).
(3) A minimum of ten feet (10') clearance above the street level at the nearest curbline in that area of visibility
triangle on such corner lot.
(4) A minimum of eight feet (8') clearance above the sidewalk level in that area between the property line and the
curbline of any abutting street.
(5) A minimum of five feet (5') clearance between any tree or plant from any fire hydrant.
(6) A minimum of ten feet (10') clearance above the street level at the curbline and graduated toward the centerline
of the street to a clearance of 14 feet above the centerline.
(7) City management shall have a written notice served upon the owner or occupant of any property upon which any
violation exists to correct within ten days after service of this notice. Service of said notice may be by certified mail or
by personal service upon the owner or occupant. If condition is not corrected by the end of such 10-day period, a
complaint shall be filed with the municipal court.
(8) Street superintendent has the authorization to trim or remove any tree or plant which obstructs any traffic-control
device in the city.
Sec. 1.908 Responsibility of Homeowner or Contractors - UFPO Regulations
In accordance with existing city laws, any homeowner or contractor planning work in the right-of-way that involves excavation of
any sort will have the responsibility to obtain permits required by the city to identify any underground utilities in the area of
excavation. Such permit shall be obtained from the city.
Sec. 1.909 Penalty
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, upon conviction thereof shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/414
(Ordinance 2012-01 adopted 1/10/12)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE 2.100 ANIMALS
Sec. 2.101 Definitions
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
Animal-at-Large. Any animal not under the restraint (as defined in this section) of a person capable of controlling the animal on
or off the premises of the owner.
Animal Care and Control Officer. Any person designated by the City of Gonzales as an enforcement officer who is qualified to
perform such duties as required by this article and/or state law.
Animal Shelter. Any facility operated by a humane society, or municipal agency or its authorized agents, for the purpose of
impounding animals under the authority of this article or state law for care, confinement, return to owner, adoption or euthanasia.
Auction. Any place or facility where animals are regularly bought, sold, or traded, except for those facilities otherwise defined in
this article. This definition does not apply to individual sales of animals by owners.
Bite. Puncturing or tearing of the skin by an animal's teeth.
Cat. Any live or dead cat (Fells Catus).
Circus. A commercial variety show featuring animal acts for public entertainment.
Commercial Animal Establishment. Any pet shop, grooming shop, guard dog or obedience training center, animal auction, riding
school or stable, zoological park, circus, performing animal exhibition, or boarding or breeding kennel.
Currently Vaccinated. Vaccinated and satisfying the following criteria:
(1) The animal must have been at least three months of age at the time of vaccination.
(2) At least 30 days have elapsed since the initial vaccination.
(3) Not more than 3 years have elapsed since the most recent vaccination.
Dog. Any live or dead dog (Canis Familiaris), except hybrids.
Domestic Animal. Tame, domesticated, of or pertaining to the family or household.
Fowl. A bird of any kind, domestic cock or hen (Gallus Gallus).
Grooming Shop. A commercial establishment where animals are bathed, clipped, plucked or otherwise groomed.
Guard Dog. Any professionally trained dog that will detect and warn its handler that an intruder is present in or near an area that
is being secured.
Hybrid Animal. The cross between a normally domestic animal and an animal that is normally found in the wild. The offspring of
such a mating is a hybrid animal.
Kennel or Cattery. Any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire,
training for a fee, or selling dogs or cats, and containing facilities for keeping more than four animals of the same species.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/414
Licensed Veterinarian. A veterinarian licensed to practice veterinary medicine in one or more of the 50 states.
Livestock. Domestic animals used or raised on a farm, especially those kept for a profit; specifically, horses, ponies, mules,
donkeys, cattle, goats, rabbits, sheep and swine, regardless of age, sex or breed.
Local Health Authority or Rabies Control Officer. The animal control officer shall be designated as the rabies control officer and
shall handle all duties required under the Rabies Control Act of 1981 and all amendments to that act.
Observation Period. The 10 days following a bite incident during which the biting animal's health status must be monitored. The
10 day observation period will begin on the day of the bite incident (day one).
Owner. Any person, partnership, or corporation owning, keeping, or harboring one or more animals. An animal shall be deemed
to be harbored if it is sheltered for three consecutive days or more, or if it returns to a residence or business on three separate
days.
Performing Animal Exhibition. Any spectacle, display, act, or event, other than circuses, in which performing animals are used.
This shall include animal amusement vendors such as, but not limited to, pony-go-round rides, commercial horseback pictures
and the like.
Person. Any individual, corporation, government or governmental subdivision, or agency, business trust, estate, partnership,
association, or any other legal entity.
Pet or Companion Animal. Any animal kept for pleasure rather than utility; an animal of a species that has been bred and raised to
live in or about the habitation of humans and is dependent on people for food and shelter.
Pet Shop. Any person, partnership, or corporation, whether operated separately or in connection with another business enterprise
(except for a licensed kennel), that buys, sells, or boards any species of animal.
Possible Exposure to Rabies. Receipt of a bite or scratch from any warm blooded animal, animal to human or animal to animal, is
reason to suspect exposure to rabies.
Provocation. Any purposeful act that causes an animal to bite, scratch, or attack in protection of self, owner, or owner's premises.
Entrance, in any manner, into an area where an animal is properly under restraint in compliance with city ordinances would be
considered provocation, irrespective of the reason for such entrance.
Public Nuisance Animal. Any animal or animals or fowl that unreasonably annoy humans, endanger the life or health of other
animals or persons, or substantially interfere with the rights of citizens, other than their owners, to enjoyment of life or property.
Public nuisance animal shall mean and include, but is not limited to, any animal that:
(1) Is repeatedly at large or stray;
(2) Damages the property of anyone other than its owner;
(3) Molests or intimidates pedestrians or passersby;
(4) Trespasses on school grounds;
(5) Chases vehicles;
(6) Excessively makes disturbing noises, including but not limited to continued and repeated howling, barking,
whining or other utterances causing unreasonable annoyance, disturbance, or discomfort to neighbors or others in
close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored;
(7) Causes fouling of the air by odor and thereby creates unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to neighbors or
others in close proximity to the premises where the animal is kept or harbored;
(8) Causes unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings where the animal or animals are kept or harbored;
(9) Is offensive or dangerous to the public health, safety, or welfare by virtue of the number and/or types of animals
maintained; or
(10) Attacks other domestic animals.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/414
Quarantine. Strict confinement, for the purpose of preventing the spread of disease, under restraint by closed cage, isolation
kennel, rabies chamber, paddock, or in any other manner approved by the local health authority on the private premises of the
owner or at a facility approved by the Texas Department of Health.
Quarantine Period. That portion of the observation period during which a biting animal is physically confined for observation as
provided for under the quarantine method and testing section of this article.
Rabies. An acute viral disease of man and animal affecting the central nervous system and usually transmitted by an animal bite
or saliva.
Reptile. Any cold blooded, scaly vertebrate, such as a turtle, lizard or snake of any kind.
Restraint. Shall mean as follows:
(1) Off-Premises. Secured by a leash or lead and under the control of a responsible person and obedient to the
person's commands.
(2) On-Premises.
(A) Secured by a leash or lead and under the control of a responsible person; or
(B) Confined to the realty or premises of the owner of such dog or animal by a fence of sufficient strength and
height to prevent such dog or other animal from escaping therefrom; or
(C) Confined inside a house on such premises; or
(D) Under the direct supervision of the owner or other responsible person and obedient to that person's
commands.
(3) Prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for the leash to be arranged in a manner that allows the dog or other animal to
get on or across or within eight (8) feet of any street, park or other public land or within eight (8) feet of any sidewalk,
public way, place or building, water, electric or gas meter or any receptacle used to accept mail or papers, when such
leash is stretched to its full length. Any animal so arranged shall be considered dangerous to the public in general and
declared a nuisance, and shall be impounded. Cats shall be exempt from the leash requirement but if designated a
“public nuisance animal” as defined above shall be subject to impoundment.
Riding School or Stable. Any place that has available for hire, boarding, and/or riding instruction, any horse, pony, donkey, mule,
or burro; or any place that regularly buys, sells, or trains the above animals, including a racetrack, trotting track, or rodeo.
Scratch. A scrape left by the claws or nails of an animal and of sufficient severity to break the skin and draw blood.
Sick Animal. Any animal that appears to be suffering from an infectious, contagious, or communicable disease, or that is showing
evidence of a physical injury, physical disorder, or traumatic injury, or that has an elevated temperature.
Stray. An animal running free or at large, with no physical or verbal restraint.
Unowned Animal. Any animal for which an owner has not been identified.
Vaccinated. Properly injected with a rabies vaccine licensed for use in that species by the United States Department of Agriculture
and administered by or under the direct supervision of a licensed veterinarian.
Veterinary Hospital. Any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis, and treatment
of diseases and injuries of animals.
Vicious Animal. Any animal that attacks, bites, or injures human beings or domesticated animals without adequate provocation, or
which because of temperament, conditioning, or training, has a known propensity to attack, bite, or injure human beings or
domesticated animals; or an individual animal which the local health authority has reason to believe has a dangerous disposition,
likely to be harmful to humans or other animals.
Wild Animal. Any animal except the common domestic species, including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, horses, cattle, swine,
sheep, and goats, regardless of the state or duration of captivity.
Wildlife. Any animal that occurs naturally in the wild state.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/414
Wild State. Living in its original, natural condition; not domesticated.
Zoological Park. Any facility operated by a person, partnership, corporation or government agency, other than a pet shop or
kennel, displaying or exhibiting one or more species of non-domesticated animals.
Sec. 2.102 Animal Care and Control Officer
Animal control officers shall be appointed to enforce all provisions of this chapter, including gathering up and impounding or
quarantining any livestock, fowl, cats, dogs, or other domestic and non-domestic animals found running at large (stray) within the
city limits.
Sec. 2.103 Restraint; Nuisances; Animal Bites
(a) All dogs, cats, and other animals shall be kept under restraint and not allowed to run at large, stray.
(b) An owner shall exercise proper care and control of his or her animals to prevent them from becoming a public nuisance.
(c) Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building or secure enclosure in such a manner that such female dog or
cat cannot come into contact with another animal of the same type but of opposite sex except for planned breeding.
(d) Any animal within the city that shall bite, scratch, or otherwise attack a person who is not at the time trespassing upon the
property of the owner or person having control of such animal, nor provoking or teasing such animal, shall be deemed vicious or
dangerous to persons or other animals and the animal control officer may order that such animal be kept muzzled, or that such
animal be kept within a sufficient enclosure to insure it cannot attack any person or other animal again, or may order that such
animal be permanently removed from the corporate limits of the city, or that such animal be delivered to the animal control officer
to be humanely euthanized.
(e) Any peace officer or person may at any time report an attack by any dog upon themselves or any person. When such a
report is taken, the animal control officer shall investigate such report, and if proven to be fact, shall inform the owner of the dog,
if an owner can be located, of the attack. The dog will then be taken up and quarantined as per the laws of the state, Texas Health
and Safety Code, Chapter 826.
(f) If the attack upon any person is proven to be an unprovoked attack, the owner will be notified in person or in writing by the
animal control officer within 30 days of the attack and the dog shall be declared a “vicious or dangerous dog.” The owner of the
dog shall then:
(1) Register the dangerous dog with the animal control officer for the area in which the dog is kept;
(2) Restrain the dangerous dog at all times on a leash in the immediate control of a person or in a secure enclosure;
and
(3) Obtain liability insurance coverage or show financial responsibility in an amount of at least $100,000.00 to
cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous dog causing bodily injury to a person, as per the Texas
Health and Safety Code, Chapter 822.
(g) It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or keep on his premises or in or about his premises, or premises under his
control, any vicious animal except as directed by this article. Upon conviction, harboring a vicious animal in violation of this
article is a Class “C” misdemeanor.
(h) No part of this article shall preclude at any time the filing of a complaint in the court of competent jurisdiction.
Sec. 2.104 Impoundment; Violation Notice*
(a) Unrestrained dogs, cats, and nuisance animals shall be taken by the animal control officer or police and impounded in an
animal shelter and there confined in a humane manner. Any animal that poses a threat to public health and safety, any wild animal
kept illegally, or any animal that has been cruelly treated or abused shall also be impounded. For purposes of discharging the
duties imposed by the provisions of this article or other applicable laws, and to enforce the same, duly authorized representatives
or employees may enter upon private property to the full extent permitted by law, which shall include but not be limited to entry
upon private, unfenced property when in pursuit of any animal which he or she has reason to believe is subject to impoundment
pursuant to the provisions of this article or other applicable laws.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/414
(b) Licensed impounded dogs and cats shall be kept for not fewer than 144 hours (six days).
(c) Unlicensed impounded dogs, cats, other domestic animals, and livestock shall be kept for not fewer than 72 hours (three
days).
(d) Wild dogs, cats, or other animals may be kept up to 72 hours at the discretion of the animal control officer.
(e) Obviously sick or injured animals may be taken up and humanely euthanized at the discretion of the animal control officer,
if the animal is wearing no tag of any kind so that the rightful owner cannot be notified of their animal's injuries.
(f) Any seriously injured or sick animal may be put down by the animal control officer as quickly and as humanely as possible
to stop further suffering of the animal.
(g) If, by a vaccination tag or other means, the owner of an impounded animal can be identified, the animal control officer shall
immediately upon impoundment notify the owner by direct contact, telephone, or other reasonable means.
(h) An owner reclaiming an impounded animal shall pay all impounding fees and vaccination fees as needed for animals before
they shall be returned to the owner. Boarding fees shall also be charged to the owner at a rate of $10.00 per day for food and
housing for the animal. The impounding and pick up fee shall not exceed $25.00 for a dog or a cat, and all other fees shall be
charged at whatever costs are accumulated in impounding the animal (such as any trailer or help as may be contracted for to move
the animal to the shelter).
(i) Subsequent impounding of the same animal occurring within a 12 month period shall be charged double the impound fee.
(j) Owners of animals that are known by the animal control officer to be the proper owner of that animal may be issued a
citation for failure to restrain their animal and may be subject to a fine.
(k) No sick or injured animal shall be released to its owner until the animal control officer shall be satisfied that arrangements
have been made for proper treatment of the sick or injured animal.
(l) Any animal impounded in the animal shelter for a period exceeding the times laid out in this article shall become the
property of the local government authority and shall be placed for adoption or humanely euthanized. Any livestock kept over 72
hours may be sold or auctioned to cover the costs of impoundment and boarding.
(m) At any time within 14 calendar days from the date of the sale, the owner of any animal impounded and sold under the
provisions of this article shall have the right to redeem the same by paying to the purchaser thereof double the amount paid by the
purchaser for such animal in addition to any reasonable expenses incurred by the purchaser in keeping the same.
(n) In addition to, or in lieu of, impounding an animal found at large, the animal control officer or a police officer may issue to
the known owner of such animal a notice of a violation of this article. Any person who is convicted of owning an animal at large
shall pay a fine.
Sec. 2.105 Authority to Slay Animals Running at Large
If any animal is found running at large in violation of this article, and after having received at least two complaints on the animal,
and the animal cannot be safely caught and impounded, and the animal is determined to be a threat to public safety then the
animal may be put down by the animal control officer or any police officer using that force deemed necessary and taking into
consideration the public health and safety.
Sec. 2.106 Animal Care
(a) No owner shall fail to provide his animals with:
(1) Sufficient wholesome and nutritious food;
(2) Clean and sufficient quantities of water;
(3) Adequate ventilation;
(4) Shelter space and protection from the weather;
(5) Veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/414
(6) Humane care and treatment.
(b) No person shall beat, cruelly treat, torment, overload, overwork, or otherwise abuse an animal.
(c) No person shall cause, instigate, or permit any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight, or other combat between animals or between
animals and humans.
(d) No owner of an animal shall abandon such animal. If an owned animal has been impounded by the animal control officer,
no owner shall allow the animal to remain in the animal shelter beyond the maximum time allowed (six days), for the purpose of
adopting the animal at a lower cost than the fine and/or fees due.
(e) Chickens, ducklings, or rabbits younger than eight weeks of age may not be sold in quantities of fewer than 25 to a single
purchaser. This does not include local business establishments that would sell such animals or fowl in their normal course of
business.
(f) No person shall give away any live animal, fish, reptile, or bird as a prize for, or as an inducement to enter, any contest,
game, or other competition; as an inducement to enter a place of amusement; or as an incentive to enter into any business
agreement whereby the offer was for the purpose of attracting trade.
(g) No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the same shall be liable to
be eaten by any animal, provided that it shall be lawful for a person to expose on his own property common rat poison mixed only
with vegetable substance.
(h) No person, except a person licensed by the Texas Parks and Wildlife department, shall place or set out steel jaw leg and/or
neck traps with the intent of trapping any animal.
(i) Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic or non-domestic animal shall as soon as practicable
report such injury or death to the animal control officer so that the animal may be picked up.
(Ordinance 2004-14 adopted 12/6/04)
Sec. 2.107 Fowl and Livestock
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person who is the owner of any hog or pig of any kind, or any person who has any hog or pig
under their management or control, to keep the same, or allow the same to remain in any pen or in any other place within the city
limits. This does not include Vietnamese potbellied pigs, in which one per residence is permitted.
(b) No person shall keep upon any tract of land or any lot within the city limits any livestock or farm animals of any kind,
including but not limited to cattle, sheep or goats of any kind unless the tract of land or lot has a minimum of 20,000 square feet
of surface. Up to one head of livestock may be kept for each 20,000 square feet of surface on the tract of land or lot excluding any
dwelling or any part thereof. No fractional measurements of land will be allowed, nor shall the livestock be allowed to roam free,
graze, or be kept within 500 feet of any food service establishment or food processing establishment, regardless of ownership or
occupancy of such establishments. All persons keeping the livestock upon any tract of land or lot within the city limits will be
held responsible for the cleanliness and upkeep of the land or lot so as not to allow it to become a public nuisance by the odor that
may be created by the keeping of the livestock.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a horse, mule or jenny in the city limits without obtaining a permit.
(1) Horses, mules or jenny.
(A) Each animal shall have access to a covered, shelter area. The shelter area will be a minimum of fifteen feet
by fifteen feet (15'X15') for each animal and shall be constructed in a sturdy, workman-like manner. A minimum
of one wall will be attached to the shelter to provide a windbreak for the animal. The adequacy of the shelter will
be at the discretion of the city manager or his designee;
(B) Contiguous, and in addition to the (15'x15') shelter, each animal will have access to a thirty feet by thirty
feet (30'x30') exercise area. This area must be free of any items or materials that may pose a hazard to the
animal;
(C) Horses are allowed to be tethered outside the exercise area no more than eight (8) hours per day. A tether
is considered to be a lead-rope made of chain, ten feet (10') in length attached to a halter. The lead-rope shall be
attached to a sturdy material rope or chain with a length of twenty feet (20');
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/414
(D) Each animal shall have access to a sufficient supply of fresh, clean water while in the exercise area, the
shelter area, or tethered;
(E) Stallions are not allowed within the city and there is to be no breeding of horses, mules or jenny inside the
city limits;
(F) All animals that are to be kept via a permit will have all required vaccinations prior to being allowed inside
the city limits;
(G) All animals that are to be kept via a permit will have all required “Coggins” papers prior to being allowed
inside the city limits;
(H) The enforcement officer may revoke the permit for any horse, mule or jenny if the permit holder fails to
comply with subsections (A)–(G) above.
(d) No person shall keep upon any tract of land or lot within the city limits any domestic fowl, such as, but not limited to
chickens, turkeys, guinea fowl, geese and/or ducks, unless the fowl are securely penned on the property of the owner and not be
allowed to roam free. Any fowl of any kind found to be roaming free by the animal control officer within the city limits will be
considered to be unowned and may be taken up or disposed of as may be deemed necessary to prevent the fowl from becoming a
public nuisance. Male domestic fowl are not permitted within the city limits and the breeding of domestic fowl is strictly
prohibited within the city limits. All owners or keepers of the fowl within the city limits will be held responsible for the
cleanliness and upkeep of the tract of land or lot upon which the fowl are being kept so as not to allow it to become a public
nuisance by the odor that may be created by the keeping of the fowl.
(e) Subsections (a), (b) and (c) above shall not apply to animal shelters, veterinary establishments, animal hospitals operated by
a licensed veterinarian, livestock auctions, livestock shows or events, rodeos, or commercial animal establishments located on
property zoned for such purposes. Such establishments, however, must meet sanitation requirements and keep animals securely
caged or penned.
(f) Subsections (a), (b) and (d) above shall not apply to those students participating in 4-H or FFA who engage in the raising of
livestock or fowl for the purpose of showing them in a livestock show.
(1) These persons shall be required, however, to register the keeping of such animals or fowl with the animal control
department.
(2) There will be no fee for registering of livestock or fowl for the purpose of showing in a livestock show.
Registration shall list the name and address of the student, the exact address and location where the animals or fowl
are being kept, and period of time the animals or fowl will be kept at that location.
(g) Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00.
(Ordinance 2018-9 adopted 4/3/18)
Sec. 2.108 Keeping of Wild Animals
(a) No person shall own, possess, or have custody on his premises of any wild or vicious animal (including any poisonous or
otherwise dangerous reptile) for display, training, or exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee, unless the person
registers the animal or reptile with the animal care and control department. This registration may be made between the hours of
8:40 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.
(b) No person shall keep or permit to be kept any wild animal, including a poisonous or otherwise dangerous reptile, as a pet,
unless licensed to do so by the Texas Parks and Wildlife department.
(c) Subsection (a) above shall not be construed to apply to zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions, circuses or
veterinary hospitals.
Sec. 2.109 Animal Waste
The owner of every animal shall be responsible for the removal of any excreta deposited by his animal(s) on public walks,
recreation areas, or private property including the property of the owner.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/414
Sec. 2.110 Loan of Live Traps by the City to Citizens
Any small animal trap that is loaned to any citizen of the city by the animal control department of the animal control department
will have a fee of $1.00 per day charged to the citizen borrowing the trap. The citizen is responsible for the upkeep and baiting of
the trap while he or she is in possession of the trap. Any trap destroyed, lost, or stolen is the responsibility of the person renting
the trap. If the trap is lost damaged or stolen, the full replacement cost of the trap shall be charged to the person renting the trap.
All funds so generated will be used to purchase more traps or to replace worn out traps.
Sec. 2.111 Chapter Compliance Does Not Relieve Other Compliance Requirements
The keeping of any animal in accordance with the provisions of this article shall not be construed to authorize the keeping of the
same in violation of any zoning ordinance or any other ordinance of the city.
Sec. 2.112 Enforcement; Interference With Animal Care and Control Officer
(a) The civil and criminal provisions of this article shall be enforced by those persons or agencies designated by municipal
authority. The animal care and control officer shall have the authority to issue citations to anyone he finds in violation of this
chapter.
(b) It shall be a violation of this article to interfere with the animal control officer in the performance of his duties.
Sec. 2.113 Spay and Neuter Requirements
Any dog or cat adopted from the animal shelter or the pet adoption center shall be spayed or neutered prior to adoption, or if the
animal is too young the adopter shall commit to have the animal spayed or neutered when it has reached the age of six months.
The costs of spaying or neutering are to be borne by the adopters and the Friends of Gonzales Animal Shelter, Inc.
ARTICLE 2.200 RABIES CONTROL*
Sec. 2.201 Rabies Vaccination
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, harbor, or have custody or control of a dog or cat over 120 days of age
within the city unless such dog or cat is currently vaccinated against rabies by the injection of anti-rabies vaccine by or under the
direct supervision of a licensed veterinarian.
(b) Every owner of a dog or cat immunized against rabies as required herein shall procure a rabies vaccination certificate from
the veterinarian administering the vaccine. Such certificates shall contain the following information:
(1) Owner's name, address, and telephone number.
(2) The species, sex, age, size (lbs.), predominant breed, and color of the vaccinated animal.
(3) The vaccine used, producer, expiration date, and serial number.
(4) The date vaccinated.
(5) Rabies tag number.
(6) Veterinarian's signature and license number.
(c) A veterinarian or person under the direct supervision of a veterinarian who vaccinates a dog or cat as required herein shall
furnish the owner thereof with a metal tag approved by the animal care and control officer bearing a number corresponding to the
number placed on the certificate, and with lettering showing immunization and the year thereof. This tag shall be attached to the
properly fitted collar of the dog or cat for which it is issued, and shall be worn at all times in a conspicuous place on the collar. If
the dog or cat is not wearing a tag the animal care and control officer may demand the owner show the certificate of vaccination
describing the animal, not just the tag. Such certificate of vaccination shall be provided by the owner to the animal care and
control officer within one business day.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/414
Sec. 2.202 Reports of Exposure to Rabies
(a) Any veterinarian who shall find any animal within the city limits afflicted with any disease which is transmissible from
animal to man shall immediately report to the city health officer and the animal control officer such case together with the name
and address of the owner and the location of the animal at that time.
(b) Persons having knowledge of any animal exhibiting symptoms of or animals that have been exposed to rabies, or that has
bitten, scratched or otherwise attacked a person or another animal, or that the person suspects to be rabid or could reasonably
suspect is capable of transmitting rabies, shall report the animal or incident to the animal control officer as soon as possible but
not any later than 24 hours from the time of the incident. The report shall include the name and address of any victim and the
owner of the animal, if known, and any other information relating to the incident or animal.
Sec. 2.203 Quarantine Procedures for Animals*
(a) Every animal that bites, scratches, or otherwise attacks another animal or person, or any animal that is reasonably suspected
of having rabies in the city shall be impounded at once and held for observation in an approved quarantine facility. This
observation period shall not be less than 10 full days starting with the day of the bite or attack incident as day one. The owner
may choose to have the animal quarantined at an approved veterinary clinic of his choice. The owner of the animal shall be
responsible for all impoundment fees and all feed expenses accumulated during this time whether to the city quarantine facility or
veterinary clinic.
(b) In the event the owner of such animal described above refuses to surrender such animal on demand, such action shall
constitute a Class “C” misdemeanor.
(c) If the owner of the animal described above cannot be found or identified, or the animal was a stray, the animal control
officer may take any steps necessary to catch for quarantine or to destroy the animal, so that the head may be submitted for
examination by the Texas Department of Health.
(d) Any wild animal that is not normally a domesticated animal that bites or attacks any person or other animal shall be at once
destroyed and the head submitted for testing according to state law.
(e) If the owner of such animal can be identified, that person shall be responsible for the cost of the disposition of the animal,
including the preparation and shipment of the animals head for testing. If the owner chooses not to pay for the quarantine, then
the animal shall be humanely destroyed and the brain submitted for testing to the Texas Department of Health.
(f) At the discretion of the animal care and control officer, the unowned animal may be humanely euthanized for immediate
rabies diagnosis prior to the end of the quarantine period.
(g) No animal that has been placed in quarantine for possible rabies infection may be released without proof of current rabies
vaccination, which is the certificate that was given to the owner of the animal at the time of vaccination. The metal tag given to
the owner of any animal upon vaccination by the veterinarian shall not be taken as proof of vaccination.
(h) Home quarantine of a biting animal in the city shall not be recognized by the animal care and control office of the animal
care and control department as a legal quarantine of the animal.
(i) A licensed veterinarian must observe the animal at least on the first and last days of the quarantine period. The animal shall
be transported on both the first and last day of the quarantine to the veterinarian chosen by the owner of the animal for
observation of the animal. The owner of the animal shall be responsible for any and all fees charged by the animal clinic for the
observation.
Sec. 2.204 Disposition of Domestic Animals Exposed to Rabies
(a) Unvaccinated animals which have been bitten or directly exposed by physical contact with a rabid animal or its fresh tissues
shall be humanely euthanized or, if sufficient justification for preserving the animal exists, the exposed animal shall be
immediately vaccinated against rabies, placed in strict isolation for six months, and given a booster vaccination one month prior
to release from isolation.
(b) Vaccinated animals which have been bitten or otherwise exposed to a rabid animal shall be humanely euthanized or, if
sufficient justification for preserving the animal exists, the exposed vaccinated animal shall be given a booster rabies vaccination
and placed in strict isolation for three months.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/414
(c) These provisions apply only to domestic animals for which an approved rabies vaccine is available.
(d) These provisions will be in accordance with current state law.
(Ordinance 2004-14 adopted 12/6/04)
CHAPTER 3
BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 3.100 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS*
Division 1. General Provisions
Sec. 3.101 Official City Map
The map or plat of the city prepared by the city, now on file in the office of the city secretary, is designated as the official map and
plat of the city, and all streets shall be named and all buildings, structures and lots shall be numbered in accordance therewith.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 96, Section 96.01)
Sec. 3.102 Access Driveways to Highways; Adoption of State Regulations
The booklet, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary, entitled Regulations for Access Driveways to State
Highways, dated September 23, 1953, as amended in September 1960, and published by the Texas Highway Department in
accordance with Minute Order No. 34719, is hereby adopted by the city for the public safety and protection of the citizens of the
city. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 96, Section 96.02)
Sec. 3.103 Growth of Shrubs and the Like at Intersections
(a) Definition. For the purpose of this section the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
Street Gutter Flow Line. The street gutter flow line of the curb adjacent to and bordering upon each such restricted area; in the
event there be no such curb, the height restrictions set forth in this section shall be based upon the actual level of the paved or
used port on of the public street adjacent to and bordering upon each such restricted area.
(b) Enforcement of Provisions. In addition to any penalty which may be imposed for the violation of this section, the city shall
be entitled to enter upon and remove from the triangular corner areas described in this section any of the growths prohibited by
this section. Such entry and removal shall be without liability to the owners thereof.
(c) Restricted Areas. The areas in the city restricted by the provisions of this section are as follows:
(1) All of that portion of land lying within a triangular shaped area on each street corner within the city described by
metes and bounds as follows: beginning at the precise corner of intersection point of the curbs of each of the two
streets forming each corner and extending 20 feet along each such curbline from said curb intersection point, the third
side being determined by the drawing of a straight line from the ends of such 20-foot extensions; whether said land be
privately owned or unpaved or untraveled street right-of-way property.
(2) Where no curbs are in existence at such street intersections, the 20-foot lines shall coincide with the central flow
line of the ditches paralleling such uncurbed streets as shall be determined by the city engineer.
(d) Any trees planted, grown and maintained in any restricted area shall not have branches or foliage extending from the trunk
thereof at a height lower than 15 feet from the street gutter flow line.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 96, Section 96.03; Ordinance adopting Code)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/414
Secs. 3.104 - 3.110 Reserved
Division 2. Sidewalk Maintenance and Construction
Sec. 3.111 Maintenance of Sidewalks; Duty of Owner
It is the duty and obligation of all owners, occupants, and users of real property abutting upon streets within the city at their own
cost and expense, to keep and maintain the sidewalks (and paving laid thereon) bordering their property level, at curb grade, and
free to depressions, excavations, elevations, inequalities, obstacles, obstructions, or encroachments, natural or artificial, above or
below ground level, or which overlap, impinge upon, or appropriate any part of the sidewalk area or the space up to eight feet
above it; and to allow no oils, greases, ice, snow or water to collect or remain thereon; and, generally, in every manner, to keep
such sidewalks in a safe adequate, and in defective condition so that they are easily accessible to and may be freely and safely
used by the public for travel by foot. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 96, Section 96.15)
Sec. 3.112 Injury to Persons on Sidewalks; Liability of Owner
Where and when, by reason of a violation of any of the foregoing provisions, injury or damage is occasioned to or inflicted upon
any person, whether on the sidewalk or in the street, primary liability for all such injury or damage shall rest upon the owner,
occupant, and user of the property abutting upon such defective sidewalk. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 96,
Section 96.16)
Sec. 3.113 Definitions
For the purpose of this article the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
Owner. The property owner, occupant, or user, individual or firm having the work done by the contractor.
Contractor. The person, partnership, corporation or other entity, which undertakes or contracts to construct sidewalks in city
streets and alleys.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 96, Section 96.17)
Sec. 3.114 Permit Required
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership or corporation to construct, reconstruct or repair any sidewalk in the city without
first obtaining a permit for such work from the city manager, applications for which shall be made on forms furnished by the city.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 96, Section 96.18)
Sec. 3.115 Transference of Permit
No permit issued under this article or any construction to be done thereunder, shall be assigned, transferred or sublet but the
permittee shall remain in personal charge of all work done thereafter. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 96, Section
96.19)
Sec. 3.116 Certain Officials to Furnish Information
(a) The city manager or some city street or building official or engineer designated by the city manager shall furnish
information establishing lines and grades for the construction, reconstruction or repair of any improvement covered by this article,
after a permit has been granted for such construction, and all such construction shall be in accordance with such lines and grades
and subject to approval of the city manager or such official designated by him. Stakes shall be set by or at the expense of the
contractor. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 96, Section 96.20)
(b) All sidewalks shall be constructed in compliance with ADA regulations. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.117 Materials
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/414
No materials shall be used in any construction mentioned in this article until the same has been inspected and approved by the
city manager and any such material which is not approved by the city manager shall be removed from the streets and sidewalks at
the expense of the contractor. No concrete mixture shall be poured until forms and excavations have been inspected and approved
by the city manager or his authorized representative. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 96, Section 96.21)
Sec. 3.118 Placement of Materials in Streets; Barricades
No more than one-third of the width of the street shall be occupied by materials, equipment or tools and barricades shall be placed
around such equipment so as to leave at lease two-thirds of such street open for traffic, which barricades and street obstructions
shall be supplied with lights at nighttime so that the same will serve as protection to the public as a result of such obstruction in
such streets. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 96, Section 96.22)
Sec. 3.119 Violations
Any contractor who violates any provision or requirement of this article as hereinbefore or hereinafter set out, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and may be punished in accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in Section 1.109 of this code. Any
contractor who shall sublet or assign his contract or permit any other to have control of such work, shall not receive any other or
further permits to do any kind of construction work covered by this article, as the penalties for such violation. (1995 Code of
Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 96, Section 96.23)
Secs. 3.120 - 3.125 Reserved
Division 3. Excavations*
Sec. 3.126 Permit Provisions
(a) Before cutting or excavating any street or alley, the person, firm, association or corporation so desiring to do same shall
apply for a permit to do same with the city secretary. The contents of such permit application shall contain the following:
(1) Name of person, firm, association or corporation desiring such permit and their address along with the name,
address and telephone number of the person or persons to contact in the event of problems with the proposed
excavation.
(2) Location of the excavation and approximate size thereof.
(3) A corporate surety performance bond in the amount of $5,000.00 payable to the city for any violation of
requirements of Section 3.127 shall be submitted with such application.
(4) A $10.00 permit fee will be tendered.
(b) If the city secretary is of the opinion that subsection (a) of this section has been complied with, he shall issue a permit.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 96, Section 96.35)
Sec. 3.127 Repair Requirements
(a) All dirt, asphalt, sand, clay, rock and gravel excavated shall be removed from the site within 24 hours of such excavation.
(b) Any piping shall be bedded in sand or pea gravel. The hole created by such excavation shall be filled with crushed
limestone, no larger than ¾ inch in size.
(c) On all asphalt streets, a minimum of one inch (1") of compacted asphalt shall be placed on top of the crushed limestone.
(d) On all gravel streets, compacted pit run gravel shall be placed on top of the crushed limestone, and such gravel shall be at
least of the same quality as the rest of the street surface.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 96, Section 96.36; Ordinance adopting Code)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/414
Sec. 3.128 General Requirements
(a) Adequate warning devices, flares, and barriers shall be provided by the permit holder for the protection of the general
public.
(b) In the event of cave-in or rain, the permit holder, must within one hour's notice to the person or person named in the
application, shall have equipment and personnel at the site of the excavation to repair the street or alley.
(c) The city manager or his designee shall be allowed to inspect any excavation site at any time.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 96, Section 96.37)
Sec. 3.129 Violations
Should any person, firm, association or corporation excavate or cut into any street or alley within the corporate limits of the city
without first obtaining a permit, then such act shall be deemed offense against the ordinances of the city and shall be punished in
accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in Section 1.109 of this code. The city shall also be entitled to injunctive
relief in district court against such person, firm, association or corporation. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 96,
Section 96.38)
Secs. 3.130–3.149 Reserved
Division 4. License Agreement for City-Owned Property
Sec. 3.150 Applicability
The improvements must have been constructed prior to October 6, 2009.
Sec. 3.151 Pre-request Meeting Required
Prior to filing a written request for a license agreement, the property owner shall confer with the city manager and his staff to
discuss the necessity for the license agreement.
Sec. 3.152 Request for License Agreement; Fee
The property owner shall submit a written request for a license agreement with a plat of the subject property showing the
improvement encroaching on city property. A nonrefundable fee in an amount established by the city council shall be paid with
the written request. This fee will be applied to the total cost of the license agreement should the city council grant a license.
Sec. 3.153 Costs
Property owners shall incur all costs and fees related to the license agreement, including but not limited to, surveys, license
agreement preparation, legal expenses and recording fees.
Sec. 3.154 Right-of-Way Retained by City
The city shall reserve a right-of-way easement over and across the subject property.
(Ordinance 2009-07 adopted 10/6/09)
ARTICLE 3.200 BUILDING CODES
Sec. 3.201 Codes Adopted
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/414
(a) The following codes in their most current edition along with amendments thereto, of which a copy of each is filed in the
office of the building official, are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set forth herein:
(1) 2015 International Building Code.
(A) Appendix B - Board of Appeals.
(B) Appendix C - Group U - Agricultural Buildings.
(C) Appendix D - Fire Districts.
(D) Appendix E - Supplementary Accessibility Requirements.
(E) Appendix F - Rodent Proofing.
(F) Appendix G - Flood Resistant Construction.
(G) Appendix I - Patio Covers.
(H) Appendix J - Grading.
(I) Appendix K - Administrative Provisions.
(2) 2015 International Mechanical Code.
(A) Appendix A - Combustion Air Openings and Chimney Connector Pass-Throughs.
(3) 2015 International Plumbing Code.
(A) Appendix B - Rates of Rainfall for Various Cities.
(B) Appendix C - Structural Safety.
(C) Appendix D - Degree Day and Design Temperatures.
(D) Appendix E - Sizing of Water Piping Systems.
(4) 2015 International Residential Code.
(A) Appendix A - Sizing and Capacities of Gas Piping.
(B) Appendix B - Sizing of Venting Systems Serving Appliances Equipped With Draft Hoods, Category I
Appliances, and Appliances Listed for Use and Type B Vents.
(C) Appendix C - Exit Terminals of Mechanical Draft and Direct - Vent Venting Systems.
(D) Appendix D - Recommended Procedure for Safety Inspection of an Existing Appliance Installation.
(E) Appendix E - Manufactured Housing Used as Dwellings.
(F) Appendix F - Passive Random Gas Controls.
(G) Appendix G - Piping Standards for Various Applications.
(H) Appendix H - Patio Covers.
(I) Appendix I - Private Sewage Disposal.
(J) Appendix J - Existing Building and Structures.
(K) Appendix K - Sound Transmission.
(L) Appendix M - Home Day Care - R-3 Occupancy.
(M) Appendix N - Venting Methods.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/414
(N) Appendix O - Automatic Vehicular Gates.
(O) Appendix P - Sizing of Water Piping Systems.
(P) Appendix R - Light Straw-Clay Construction.
(Q) Appendix S - Strawbale Construction.
(R) Appendix T - Recommended Procedure for Worst-Case Testing of Atmosphere Venting Systems Under
N1102.4 or N1105 Conditions< 5ACH50.
(S) Appendix U - Solar Ready Provisions - Detached One- and Two-Family Dwellings, Multiple Single-
Family Dwellings (Townhomes).
(5) 2009 International Energy Conservation Code.
(A) Appendix RA - Recommended Procedure for Worst Case Testing of Atmospheric Venting Systems Under
R402.4 or R405 Conditions< 5ACH50.
(B) Appendix RB - Solar Ready Provisions - Detached One- and Two-Family Dwellings, Multiple Single-
Family Dwellings (Townhomes).
(6) 2015 International Property Maintenance Code.
(A) Appendix A - Boarding Standard.
(7) 2015 International Fuel Gas Code.
(A) Appendix A - Sizing and Capacities of Gas Piping (IFGS).
(B) Appendix B - Sizing of Venting Systems serving appliances equipped with draft hoods, category I
Appliances and appliances listed for use with type B vents (IFGS).
(C) Appendix C - Exit Terminals of Mechanical Draft and Direct-Vent Venting Systems (IFGS).
(D) Appendix D - Recommended Procedure for Safety Inspection of an Existing Appliance Installation
(IFGS).
(8) 2015 International Private Sewage Disposal Code.
(A) Appendix A - System Layout Illustrations.
(B) Appendix B - Tables for Pressure Distribution Systems.
(9) 2015 International Fire Code.
(A) Appendix A - Board of Appeals.
(B) Appendix B - Fire-Flow Requirements for Building.
(C) Appendix C - Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution.
(D) Appendix D - Fire Apparatus Access Roads.
(E) Appendix E - Hazard Categories.
(F) Appendix F - Hazard Ranking.
(G) Appendix G - Cryogenic Fluids - Weight and Volume Equivalents.
(H) Appendix H - Hazardous Materials Management Plan (HMMP) and Hazardous Materials Inventory
Statement (HMIS) Instructions.
(I) Appendix I - Fire Protection Systems - Noncompliant Conditions.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/414
(J) Appendix J - Emergency Responder Radio Coverage.
(K) Appendix K - Construction Requirements for Existing Ambulatory Care Facilities.
(L) Appendix L - Requirements for Firefighter Air Replenishment Systems.
(M) Appendix M - High-Rise Buildings-Retroactive Automatic Sprinkler Requirement.
(10) 2014 NFPA National Electrical Code.
(A) Annex A through H.
(11) 2015 ICC Performance Code.
(A) Appendix A - Risk Factors of Use and Occupancy Classifications.
(B) Appendix B - Worksheet for Assigning Specific Structures to Performance Groups.
(C) Appendix C - Individually Substantiated Design Method.
(D) Appendix D - Qualification Characteristics for Design and Review of Performance Based Designs.
(E) Appendix E - Use of Computer Models.
(12) 2015 Existing Building Codes.
(A) Appendix B - Supplementary Accessibility Requirements for Existing Buildings and Facilities.
(13) 2015 National Life Safety Code.
(14) 2015 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code.
(Ordinance 2015-3 adopted 5/14/15)
(b) Nothing in this article hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any
rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby
repealed; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this article. (Ordinance 2000-
10 adopted 6/5/00)
Sec. 3.202 Reference to Board of Adjustments and Appeals
Whenever the codes enacted under this article shall refer to the board of adjustments and appeals, the reference shall have the
meaning of the city council. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 150, Section 150.03)
Sec. 3.203 Reference to Building Official
Whenever the code enacted under this article shall refer to the building official, the reference shall have the meaning of the city
manager and/or his employees, as assigned, to administer this article. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 150, Section
150.04)
ARTICLE 3.300 SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS*
Sec. 3.301 Defects Constituting Substandard Buildings
All buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects or lack of facilities shall be deemed to be a substandard
building:
(1) Because of faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or any other cause, it is especially liable to fire and
constitutes or creates a fire hazard.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/414
(2) Because of its condition or because of lack of secured doors or windows, it is available to and frequented by
malefactors or disorderly persons who are not lawful occupants of the structure.
(3) All buildings or structures which do not have the number of water closets, urinals and lavatories required by
plumbing regulations of the city, or which have pit privies where the same are not permitted by law, or which are not
connected to the city sewer when required by law, or where inadequate and unsanitary pit privies or septic tanks are
maintained.
(4) All buildings or structures that have become deteriorated through natural causes or by damage through exposure
to the elements, especially wind, hail, or rain, or damage through fire, to the extent that the roof, windows and doors,
or portions of the house, buildings, or structure which protect from the weather, will no longer reasonably protect from
the weather.
(5) All buildings or structures which are so structurally deteriorated that they are in danger of collapse, or which
cannot be expected to withstand the reasonably anticipated storms and/or hurricanes.
(6) All buildings or structures so constructed or permitted to be so constructed as to constitute a menace to health or
safety including all conditions conducive to the harboring of rats or mice or other disease carrying animals or insects
reasonably calculated to spread disease, and including such conditions hazardous to safety as inadequate bracing or the
use of deteriorated materials.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 150, Section 150.15)
Sec. 3.302 Substandard Buildings Shall Constitute Menace
All substandard buildings or structures within the terms of this article which shall constitute a menace to the health, morals,
safety, or general welfare of its occupants or of the public are declared to be a public nuisance and shall be ordered to be vacated,
repaired, or demolished as hereinafter provided. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 150, Section 150.16)
Sec. 3.303 City Manager to Investigate Buildings; Notice
(a) The city manager or his designee shall investigate and inspect all buildings believed to be substandard and shall cause
notice to be delivered to owners of substandard buildings and shall hold a hearing as hereinafter provided. (1995 Code of
Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 150, Section 150.17)
(b) Before the eleventh day after the date the building is secured or action is ordered, or the building is repaired, removed or
demolished pursuant to Section 3.304, the building official shall give notice to the owner by:
(1) Personally serving the owner with written notice; or
(2) Depositing the notice in the United States mail, addressed to the owner at the owner's post office address; or
(3) Publishing the notice at least twice within a ten day period in a newspaper of general circulation in the county in
which the building is located; if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's post office address is unknown;
or
(4) Posting the notice on or near the front door of the building if personal service cannot be obtained and the
owner's post office address is unknown; and
(5) In addition to the above, depositing notice in the United States mail to all lienholders and mortgagees who can
be determined from a reasonable search of instruments on file in the office of the county clerk. If the required notice is
mailed and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as “refused” or “unclaimed,” the validity of the notice is
not affected, and the notice shall be deemed as delivered.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.304 Order to Vacate, Repair or Demolish Building
Substandard buildings or structures may be ordered to be and shall be, vacated, repaired or demolished under the following
conditions, regulations and procedure:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/414
(1) Emergency Measures. When there exists an emergency as defined in subsection (A) below, certain measures
may be taken, notification given and procedure followed as is set forth in this subsection:
(A) When it shall appear that a building or structure in the city is a substandard building under the terms of
this article and that such building or structure or the manner of its use constitutes an immediate and serious
danger to life or property, the condition shall be deemed to justify the use of emergency measures, and the city
council by a majority vote may order any of the following emergency measures to be taken:
(i) Immediate vacation of such building structure and/or adjoining buildings or structures;
(ii) Vacation of the danger area around such building or structures;
(iii) Such emergency shoring-up and bracing of walls, roofs, end supports as are required to render such
buildings or structure safe;
(iv) The destruction of such walls, roofs and supports or the entire structure of so much thereof as cannot
be braced or made secure with safety; or
(v) Posting of notices on or near such building or structures, notifying the public of such orders and
ordering all persons to keep out of such building, buildings, structures, or structure, and the areas of danger
surrounding it or them.
(B) When any of the above mentioned measures are ordered to be taken, notice of such order shall be given as
follows:
(i) Such order shall be directed to the owner of such substandard building/buildings or his authorized
representative, if the same shall be known. Where notification can be accomplished without increasing the
danger to life or property, notice shall be given by personal service on the owner of the building or
structure, or his representative;
(ii) In the event that such notification would create such a delay as would materially increase the danger
of life or property, then such notice need not be given.
(C) In the event that such notification is unnecessary or in the event such notice is given and the owner or his
representative shall refuse or fail to carry out the orders of the city council or shall fail to carry out such order
satisfactorily, then, in either such event the city manager may proceed to carry out such orders either by private
contract or through an agency of the city, and the cost thus incurred shall constitute a valid lien against the
property so repaired.
(2) Normal Procedure. Where an emergency does not exist, the following steps may be taken in the condemnation
of a substandard building:
(A) When it shall come to the notice of the city council that a building or structure in the city is substandard
under the terms of this article, the city council may cite the owner of such building or structure or his authorized
agent or representative, to appear, and show cause why such building should not be declared to be a substandard
building and why he should not be ordered to vacate, repair or destroy such building or structure. The date of
such hearing shall be not less than ten days after such citation shall have been made.
(B) Such citation may be served by delivery of a copy thereof to the owner, or the person in possession, or, if
such premises be unoccupied, by attaching a copy of such citation in a place of prominence on such building or
structure.
(C) On the day set in such citation for hearing, hearing shall be had and on the basis of such hearing the city
council shall determine whether or not such building or structure is a substandard building or structure, then, in
that event, the city council shall issue such orders as shall appear reasonably necessary to prevent the building or
structure from being a hazard to life or property and to eliminate the building or structure's substandard qualities.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 150, Section 150.18)
Sec. 3.305 Standard for Ordering Repair, Vacation or Demolition of Buildings
The following standard may be followed in substance by the city council in ordering repair, vacation or demolition:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/414
(1) If the substandard building or structure can reasonably be repaired so that it will no longer be in a condition
which is in violation of the terms of this article, it shall be ordered repaired.
(2) If the substandard building or structure is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health, morals, safety,
or general welfare of its occupants or of the public, it shall be ordered to be vacated.
(3) In any case where a substandard building or structure is 50% damaged or decayed, it shall be demolished, and in
all cases where a building cannot be repaired so that its existence will no longer be in violation of the terms of this
article, it shall be demolished.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 150, Section 150.19)
Sec. 3.306 Liability
Neither the city nor any authorized agent acting under the terms of this article shall be liable or have any liability by reason of
orders issued or work done in compliance with the terms of this article. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 150,
Section 150.20)
Sec. 3.307 Enforcement of Orders
It shall be the duty of the city attorney to enforce the orders of the city council, upon appeal, by filing action in the appropriate
court of this state, when so instructed by the city council. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 150, Section 150.21)
Sec. 3.308 Violation of Provisions
Any person who shall willfully refuse or fail to leave a building which has been ordered vacated under the terms of this article, or
who shall enter an area around such building that has been declared to be dangerous and notice of which declaration shall have
been posted, and/or any person who shall interfere with or hinder the vacation, repair or demolition of any building under the
terms of this article, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as set forth in Section 1.109 of this code. In case the
owner or occupant of any substandard building ordered vacated, repaired, or demolished under the terms of this article shall be a
corporation, and shall violate any provision of this article, the president, vice-president, secretary, treasurer of such corporation, or
any manager, agent or employee of such corporation shall be also severally liable for the penalties therein provided. (1995 Code
of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 150, Section 150.22)
ARTICLE 3.400 DEMOLITION REGULATIONS
Sec. 3.401 Permit Required
Any person desirous of demolishing any house, building or other structure situated with the city limits shall, prior to
commencement of any portion of such work, obtain from the city a permit for each house, building or structure to be demolished.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 150, Section 150.35)
Sec. 3.402 Permit Fee
Each applicant for a demolition permit shall pay a fee of $25.00 for each permit issued under this article. (1995 Code of
Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 150, Section 150.36)
Sec. 3.403 Applicant's Bond
At the time of making an application for a permit under this article, the applicant shall file with the building inspector a $500.00
cash bond, where the applicant is a contractor, or a $250.00 cash bond, where the applicant is the owner of the property. The bond
shall be conditioned that the principal, if granted a permit, will accomplish such demolition in strict accordance with the terms of
this article, and will pay to the city any expense incurred by it in eliminating fire hazards or other conditions created by such
demolition which are detrimental to the public welfare. Such bond shall be made payable to the city and shall inure to the benefit
of any person damaged or injured, in any manner by the principal obligor by reason of such demolition, except the agents,
servants or employees of the principal obligor. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 150, Section 150.37)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/414
Sec. 3.404 Issuance of Permit
The building inspector shall examine the application for a permit under this article and the bond of the applicant and, if he is
satisfied that the application is in order, he shall issue to the applicant a permit to demolish the house, building or other structure
designated thereon. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 150, Section 150.38)
Sec. 3.405 Permit Not Transferable
Any permit issued under this article shall be personal to the permittee and not transferable. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV,
Chapter 150, Section 150.39)
Sec. 3.406 Expiration of Permit
Any permit issued under this article shall automatically terminate 60 calendar days from and after its issuance, unless extended or
renewed by further application to the building inspector. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 150, Section 150.40)
Sec. 3.407 Disconnection of Public Utilities
It shall be unlawful for any person issued a permit pursuant to this article to disconnect any public utilities without the consent of
the utility owner or organization controlling such connections. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 150, Section 150.41)
Sec. 3.408 Notice to City When Work Completed
When any demolition work authorized by a permit issued under this article is completed, the person to whom such permit was
issued shall promptly notify the building inspector. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 150, Section 150.42)
Sec. 3.409 Inspection of Premises When Work Completed; Repair of Damage to Public Property or Dangerous
Conditions
Upon receipt of the notice provided for in Section 3.408, the building inspector shall cause an inspection to be made of the
premises to determine that no damage has been done to public property and that the premises has been left in such condition as
not to be detrimental to the public welfare. If the building inspector finds that public property has been damaged or that the
premises are in such condition as to be detrimental to the public welfare, he shall notify the permittee of such finding. The
permittee shall within two days of the date of such notification, begin the work necessary to repair such damage or correct such
detrimental condition, which work shall be done under the supervision of, and to the entire and complete satisfaction of the
building inspector. In the event the permittee fails to begin work within two days after such notification, the building inspector
may promptly and, at his discretion, cause the necessary work to be done on behalf of the city and shall certify to the city the
amount thus expended. Such amount becomes a sum certain owing to the city by the permittee and the surety on his bond. (1995
Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 150, Section 150.43)
Sec. 3.410 Permitted Work Time Limit
The building official may impose a time limit as an additional condition of a permit for completion of demolition work once work
shall have commenced, providing that for cause one or more extensions of time, for periods not exceeding 60 days each, may be
allowed in writing by the building official. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 150, Section 150.44; Ordinance adopting
Code)
Sec. 3.411 Work Standards
(a) Demolition work having commenced shall be pursued diligently and without unreasonable interruption with due regard to
safety. It is the intent of this section to limit the existence of an unsafe condition or nuisance on the premises during the period of
demolition operations.
(b) Any surface holes or irregularities, wells, septic tanks, basements, cellars, sidewalk vaults, or coal chutes remaining after
demolition of any building or structure shall be filled with material as approved by the building official, and shall be graded in
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/414
such manner that will provide effective surface drainage.
(c) All debris and accumulation of material resulting from demolition of any building or structure shall be removed from the
premises.
(d) All building sewers shall be effectively plugged with concrete at the property line, or as may be required by the building
official.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 150, Section 150.45)
ARTICLE 3.500 ELECTRICAL REGULATIONS
Division 1. General Provisions
Sec. 3.501 Purpose
The spirit and intent of the provisions contained within this article are to protect the city and its citizens from the installation of
workmanship and materials and devices that may endanger life and property, and therefore all installations shall be approved from
the standpoint of good mechanical workmanship as well as good electrical workmanship. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV,
Chapter 151, Section 151.001)
Sec. 3.502 Definitions
For the purpose of this article the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
Board. The examining and supervising board of electricians of the city.
Journeyman Electrician. Any person who does not contract with the owner of any building (or other person procuring the
services of an electrician) but works for and under the direction of a master electrician.
Apprentice Electrician. A person who works for a person in the maintenance of the electrical equipment and installation in the
building or buildings owned by or occupied by such person in the conducting of their business.
Master Electrician. Any person engaged in the business of installing or repairing, or contracting to install or repair, wires,
conductors and equipment used within or on buildings for the transmission of electrical current for electric light, heat, power or
signaling purposes, together with the fittings for same necessary for the protection of such wires, conductor and equipment.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 151, Section 151.002)
Sec. 3.503 Unauthorized Acts or Persons
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, move or attach to any wire, switch or other appliance belonging to or controlled
by any public service corporation or the electric department of the city, or cause the same to be done, unless such person is in
employ of the public service corporation or the electric department of the city so owning such wire, switch or other appliance.
(b) In case of an emergency such as fire, storm or fallen wires, any experienced or competent person may cut and remove, or
cause to be cut and removed, any wire or wires or other appliance that may endanger the lives or safety of the public. Provided,
that in this event the person cutting or removing such wire shall properly notify the public service corporation or electric
department of the city to whom the wires belong.
(c) The provisions of this article shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility of any corporation,
copartnership, association, individual or agent thereof, installing, operating or controlling any electric wiring or electrical
apparatus for damages to anyone thereby, or for full and faithful performance of the contract, nor shall the city be held as
assuming any liability by reason of the inspection authorized herein or certificate or permit issued pursuant to the provisions of
this article.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 151, Section 151.003)
Secs. 3.504–3.510 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/414
Division 2. Electrical Code
Sec. 3.511 Adoption of Code
For the purpose of safeguarding of persons and property from hazards arising from the use of electricity, The National Electrical
Code, 2014 edition, is adopted, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary, as the rules and regulations to be
observed in all electric wiring, construction, installation, repair, alteration, operation and maintenance of electric wiring,
apparatus and fixtures except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, and the same is hereby made a part of this article to
the same extent as if set out in full. (Ordinance 2015-3 adopted 5/14/15)
Secs. 3.512–3.515 Reserved
Division 3. Registration Provisions
Sec. 3.516 Exceptions to Provisions
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following:
(1) Electrical work done by a property owner in a building owned and occupied by him as his home. However, all
work and service herein named or referred to shall be subject to permit, inspection and approval in accordance with
the terms of all applicable provisions of this code, state law and city ordinances, rules and regulations.
(2) Electrical work done by persons engaged by any public service company, in the construction and maintenance of
their public utility systems.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 151, Section 151.025)
Sec. 3.517 Registration Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of installing electric wiring and electrical apparatus on or within any
building in the city for use in connection with electric light, heat, or power as a master electrician, journeyman electrician or
apprentice electrician without first appearing in person or by duly authorized representative and qualifying for the appropriate
registration therefor. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 151, Section 151.026)
Sec. 3.518 Registration Fees
At the time of filing an application for a registration required by the provisions of this article, the applicant therefor shall pay to
the city secretary a registration fee therefor as follows:
(1) Master Electrician.
(A) Original, $150.00.
(B) Renewal, $25.00.
(2) Journeyman Electrician.
(A) Original, $100.00.
(B) Renewal, $25.00.
(3) Apprentice Electrician.
(A) Original, $50.00.
(B) Renewal, $25.00.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/414
Sec. 3.519 Insurance Required
Before any master electrician's registration shall be approved under the provisions of this article, the applicant therefor shall file
with the city secretary a certificate of insurance, conditioned that the applicant will obey all applicable provisions of this code,
state law and city ordinances, rules and regulations, and will hold the city harmless from all damages that may occur by reason of
any electric work done by such applicant. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.520 Registration
Whenever a person shall successfully pass the examination prescribed for the position as an electrician for which he has applied,
the building official shall notify the city secretary of such fact. When the state issues the registration to the electrician, the city
shall register the electrician to perform work in the city. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.521 Nature of Master Electrician's Registration
A master electrician's registration issued by the city shall entitle the holder thereof to engage in the business of installing wiring
and electrical apparatus inside or on any building or buildings for use in connection with electrical light, heat or power within the
city and installing wiring and electrical apparatus inside or on any building or buildings for use in connection with electrical light,
heat, or power outside the city if the property is served by the municipal electric system. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV,
Chapter 151, Section 151.031)
Sec. 3.522 Unauthorized Use
It shall be unlawful for any holder of a registration issued under the provisions of this article to allow his name to be used by any
other party, either for the purpose of doing work or obtaining a permit. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 151, Section
151.033)
Sec. 3.523 Expiration
Every registration issued under the provisions of this article shall expire on next December 31 following the issuance of such
registration. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 151, Section 151.034)
Sec. 3.524 Renewal
Each registration issued under the provisions of this article may be renewed by the holder thereof on January 1 of each year upon
the payment of the required fee to the city secretary, along with evidence that the required insurance is still in full force and effect;
provided that such registration has not been revoked prior thereto. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 151, Section
151.035)
Secs. 3.525 - 3.535 Reserved
Division 4. Permits and Inspections
Sec. 3.536 Permit Required
No wiring, devices or equipment for the transmission, distribution or utilization of electrical energy for light, power and/or heat,
shall be installed within or on any building or structure, nor shall any alteration or addition be made in such existing wiring,
device or equipment without first securing a permit therefor from the city secretary. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter
151, Section 151.045)
Sec. 3.537 Restrictions on Issuance
No permit required by this article shall be issued unless the applicant therefor is the holder of a registration to perform the class of
work described in such permit or is authorized by this article. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 151, Section 151.046)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/414
Sec. 3.538 When Permit Not Required
(a) No permit shall be required under the provisions of this article for the installation of wiring, devices or equipment for
telephone, telegraph, district messenger or teleautograph systems, or any signaling systems operating at 48 volts or less.
(b) No permit shall be required for the installation of electric wiring, devices or equipment installed for or by the city electric
department for or by a public utility corporation operating under a franchise from the city to transmit and sell electrical energy;
provided such wiring, devices or equipment are for the use of the electric department or the corporation in its operation as a
public utility as provided for in its franchise.
(c) No permit shall be required to replace any electrical fixtures or appliances which require no change in the electric wiring for
such fixture or appliance.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 151, Section 151.047)
Sec. 3.539 Application
Application for a permit required by the provisions of this article, describing the work to be done, stating the location of the work,
whether the work will consist of a new installation or addition to, or alteration of, an old installation, and the name of the owner
or occupant shall be made in writing to the city secretary by the person installing the work. The person making application for
such permit shall state in the application the sizes of conductors to be used in or upon any building for all services, mains, feeders,
and subfeeders, the areas to be served by such conductors, also showing the basis used in computing the required site of such
conductors and shall, when required by the electrical inspector, file with him complete plans and specifications for the installation
necessary to determine whether the installation as described will be in conformity with the requirements of the provisions of this
article. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 151, Section 151.048)
Sec. 3.540 Permit Fees
(a) Commercial Construction.
(1) Base permit fee: $50.00.
(2) New/addition (project area per square foot: base permit fee plus price per square foot):
(A) 1–3,000: $0.30.
(B) 3,001–10,000: $0.20.
(C) 10,001–20,000: $0.10.
(D) 20,001–40,000: $0.08.
(E) 40,001–50,000: $0.04.
(F) 50,000 and up: $0.02.
(3) Remodel:
(A) 1-3,000: $0.10.
(B) 3,001–10,000: $0.05.
(C) 10,001 and up: $0.03.
(4) Fee schedule for the minimum number of inspections listed below. Each may require additional inspections
depending upon the size of the project:
(A) Slab or pier and beam: $25.00.
(B) Framing: $25.00.
(C) Roof: $25.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/414
(D) Siding: $25.00.
(E) Insulation: $25.00.
(F) Drywall/wall covering: $25.00.
(G) Trim/accessories: $25.00.
(H) Final: $25.00.
(I) CSI report: $25.00.
(b) Residential Construction.
(1) Base permit fee: $25.00.
(2) New/addition:
(A) Project area per square foot: Base permit fee plus price per square foot.
(B) Per square foot: $0.30.
(3) Remodel:
(A) Per square foot: $0.20.
(4) Fee schedule for the minimum number of inspections listed below. Each may require additional inspections
depending upon the size of the project:
(A) Slab or pier and beam: $25.00.
(B) Framing: $25.00.
(C) Roof: $25.00.
(D) Siding: $25.00.
(E) Insulation: $25.00.
(F) Drywall/wall covering: $25.00.
(G) Trim/accessories: $25.00.
(H) Final: $25.00.
(I) CSI report: $25.00.
(c) Accessory/Carport/Storage.
(1) Base permit fee: $25.00.
(2) Project area per square foot (base permit fee plus price per square foot): Per square foot: $0.02.
(3) Fee schedule for the minimum number of inspections listed below. Each may require additional inspections
depending upon the size of the project:
(A) Site verification: $25.00.
(d) Electrical.
(1) Base fee: $25.00.
(2) Device fee: $0.50 each.
(3) Service upgrade: $50.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/414
(4) Fee schedule for the minimum number of inspections listed below. Each may require additional inspections
depending upon the size of the project:
(A) Service: $25.00.
(B) Rough-in: $25.00.
(C) Final: $25.00.
(e) Plumbing.
(1) Base fee: $25.00.
(2) Fixture/faucets/fittings: $2.00 each.
(3) Fee schedule for the minimum number of inspections listed below. Each may require additional inspections
depending upon the size of the project:
(A) Building sewer: $25.00.
(B) Top out: $25.00.
(C) Trim out: $25.00.
(D) Final: $25.00.
(4) The following are a combined base and inspection fee:
(A) Building drain: $75.00.
(B) Water service line: $75.00.
(C) Gas test: $75.00.
(D) Storm drain: $75.00.
(E) Grease trap/interceptor: $75.00.
(F) Manholes: $75.00.
(G) Medical gas: $75.00.
(H) Irrigation: $75.00.
(I) Backflow preventer: $75.00.
(f) Storage/Fuel/Oil Tanks.
(1) Base fee: $50.00.
(2) Per gallon/price per gallon:
(A) 1–2,000: $0.10.
(B) 2,001–5,000: $0.05.
(C) 5,001 and up: $0.03.
(3) Fee schedule for the minimum number of inspections listed below. Each may require additional inspections
depending upon the size of the project:
(A) Foundation: $25.00.
(B) Piping/pressure: $25.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/414
(C) Final: $25.00.
(g) HVAC.
(1) Base fee: $25.00.
(2) Air conditioner: $5.00 per ton.
(3) Exhaust fan: $5.00 each.
(4) Add or modify duct: $5.00 per outlet.
(5) Fee schedule for the minimum number of inspections listed below. Each may require additional inspections
depending upon the size of the project:
(A) Rough-in: $25.00.
(B) Final: $25.00.
(h) Asphalt/Concrete.
(1) Base fee: $25.00.
(2) Project area per square foot: Base permit fee plus price per square foot.
(3) Per square foot: $0.03.
(4) Fee schedule for the minimum number of inspections listed below. Each may require additional inspections
depending upon the size of the project:
(A) Rebar/wire mesh: $25.00.
(i) Demolition. Base fee and inspection: $25.00.
(j) House Leveling. Base fee and inspection: $75.00.
(k) Roofing. Base fee and inspection: $100.00.
(l) Plan review fee. 15% of permit fee.
(m) Fence. Over 6' in height:
(1) Per linear foot: $0.30.
(2) Inspection: $25.00.
(n) Reinspection Fee on Any Project. $25.00.
(Ordinance 2017-4 adopted 2/7/17)
Sec. 3.541 Issuance of Permit
Upon approval of the application for a permit required by the provisions of this article and the plans and specifications of the
work to be done, if submitted, the permit shall be issued therefor. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 151, Section
151.050)
Sec. 3.542 Deviation From Permit
The permit, when issued under the provisions of this article, shall be for such installation as is described in the application, and no
deviation shall be made from the installation so described without the written approval of the electrical inspector. (1995 Code of
Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 151, Section 151.051)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/414
Sec. 3.543 Distribution of Copies
Permits issued by the city secretary under the provisions of this article shall include an original and three copies. The original
copy shall go to the applicant for permit. The first copy shall go to the city secretary to file as a voucher for fees received. The
second copy shall be mailed to the owner when the work has been completed and approved. The third copy shall remain in the
permit file for record. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 151, Section 151.052)
Sec. 3.544 Inspections
(a) There shall be two inspections of all electrical work done pursuant to the provisions of this article, as follows:
(1) A rough-in inspection, or before any work, wire or device shall have been concealed; and
(2) A final inspection after all work has been completed.
(b) Requests for any such inspections shall be made by the person performing the work 24 hours in advance.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 151, Section 151.053)
Secs. 3.545 - 3.555 Reserved
Division 5. Technical Provisions
Sec. 3.556 Minimum Size of Main Service Entrance
In no instance shall the main service entrance be smaller than a 100 amp service and will be a minimum of 120/240 volt.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.557 Grounding of Service Entrance
Each service entrance shall be grounded at the meter or service switch. The ground shall be No. 6, or larger, and supported along
its entire length. The ground connection may be either a driven approved ground rod, driven to a minimum of five feet or to a
firm connection to an underground water pipe so as to cause a 30 ampere fuse to blow between either of the outside wires and the
ground. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 151, Section 151.066)
Sec. 3.558 Location of Meter
The city electric department or building official shall designate the location of the meter. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.559 Protective Device
An externally operated fused service switch or protective device must be placed in all service wires. The same shall be located on
the exterior of the premises being served and shall be at the nearest readily accessible place to the point of entrance. Where the
service load is not over 400 amperes; a single switch device must be installed which will disconnect the entire service load to the
premises. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 151, Section 151.068)
Sec. 3.560 Additional Switches or Breakers
If the service load requires more than the number of stitches or breakers specified in paragraph 2351A of the National Electrical
Code, then nothing less than a 100 ampere fused main switch or circuit breaker shall be installed. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title
XV, Chapter 151, Section 151.069)
Sec. 3.561 Size of Conductors
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/414
(a) All conductors shall be installed in compliance with the National Electrical Code.
(b) Exception for Aluminum Conductors. The minimum aluminum size wire conductor to be used is #2.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 151, Section 151.070)
Sec. 3.562 Overhead Installation of Wires
Every person owning or operating a line of wires over streets, alleys or buildings in the city shall use only wires that are suitable
and strong; shall suitably and safely attach them to strong and sufficient supports and insulate them at all points of attachment,
except ground wires; shall remove all wires abandoned for use; shall suitably insulate every wire where it enters a building, and if
such wire is other than wire designated to carry an electric light or power current, shall attach it at suitable and convenient points
in the circuit and near the place of entering the building an appliance calculated to prevent at all times a current of electricity of
such intensity or volume as to be capable of injuring electrical instruments or causing fire from entering the building by means of
such wire beyond the point at which such appliance is attached. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 151, Section
151.071)
Sec. 3.563 Wires Not to Obstruct Fire Department
No wire shall be installed, operated or maintained over any street, alley, sidewalk or building in this city which shall be liable to
seriously interfere with the work of the fire department in the use of ladders or other apparatus, or which shall obstruct or render
hazardous the use of fire escapes. On complaint of the fire chief or fire marshal, the interfering obstruction or hazardous wire
shall be removed or properly rearranged. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 151, Section 151.072)
Secs. 3.564 - 3.575 Reserved
Division 6. Electrical Inspector
Sec. 3.576 Creation of Office
There is hereby created in and for the city the office of electrical inspector. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 151,
Section 151.085)
Sec. 3.577 Appointment
The office of electrical inspector shall be filled by appointment made by the city manager with the approval of the city council.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 151, Section 151.086)
Sec. 3.578 Technical Knowledge
The person who is to fill the office of electrical inspector shall be well versed in the rules and requirements of the National
Electrical Code. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 151, Section 151.087)
Sec. 3.579 Term
The electrical inspector shall hold his office for such time as the city manager shall direct. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV,
Chapter 151, Section 151.088)
Sec. 3.580 Inspector Prohibited to Work as Electrician
The electrical inspector shall not engage in business as a master electrician either directly or indirectly within the city while
employed by the city as electrical inspector. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 151, Section 151.089)
Sec. 3.581 Supervision of Inspections
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/414
The electrical inspector shall have entire supervision over the electrical inspection of all electrical work within the city. (1995
Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 151, Section 151.090)
Sec. 3.582 Duty to Inspect
The electrical inspector shall, upon application on proper forms for the installation of electrical wiring, devices and equipment,
and upon payment of the required fees, make inspections of all new electrical installations and make reinspection of any existing
electrical installations at such time as he may deem necessary for the purpose of the safeguarding of life and property within the
city. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 151, Section 151.091)
Sec. 3.583 Appointment of Assistants
The electrical inspector shall have the authority to appoint one or more assistants to assist in electrical inspections; provided such
appointments shall be approved by the city manager. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 151, Section 151.092)
Sec. 3.584 Right of Entry
The electrical inspector shall have the right to enter any building during reasonable hours in the discharge of his official duties for
the purpose of making any inspection or test of any electrical wiring, device and equipment therein. Where such installations are
found dangerous to life or property or to the work of the fire department or otherwise not in conformity with existing or past
regulations, he is hereby empowered to disconnect such parts of installations or to order disconnection of electric service to any
building after having given notice, in writing, to the parties concerned, and such defective electric wiring shall not be again
connected until made safe as directed by the electrical inspector. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 151, Section
151.093)
Sec. 3.585 Obstruction of Performance of Duties
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the electrical inspector in the discharge of his duties or to prevent or in any
manner attempt to prevent them from carrying out the provisions of this article. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter
151, Section 151.094)
Sec. 3.586 Interpretation of Electrical Code
The electrical inspector shall decide all disputed questions pertaining to the installation of all electric wiring, devices and
equipment. Such decision shall be interpreted by taking into consideration the National Electrical Code and the National Safety
Code, and in the light of the standards generally recognized by the trade concerning the safe and proper installation of electrical
wiring, devices and equipment. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 151, Section 151.095)
Sec. 3.587 Suspension of Registration; Appeal
(a) The electrical inspector shall have the right and authority to suspend the registration of any master electrician, upon the
violation of any applicable provision of this code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation.
(b) Upon such suspension, the electrical inspector shall file with the city secretary a statement setting forth the reasons for such
suspension, a copy of such report shall be filed with the secretary to be delivered to the master electrician, upon his request.
(c) If the master electrician shall feel aggrieved by such suspension, he may notify the city council, in writing, by delivery to
the city secretary such notice that he feels aggrieved. At the next meeting of the city council, the suspended electrician may
appear and be heard.
(d) If, upon full hearing before the city council, it is determined by the city council that such suspension is not well founded,
such suspension shall be rescinded by the council. If the council shall determine that such suspension is well taken, it shall, by
order spread upon the minutes, revoke such registration, and shall thereupon further direct the city attorney to take such action as
may be necessary to forfeit the bond of such master electrician whose registration has been so revoked.
(e) In the event the master electrician whose registration has been suspended fails or refuses to appeal to the city council within
ten days from the date of such suspension, the city secretary shall place before the council the report of the electrical inspector, at
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/414
the next regular meeting of the council for action by the council to revoke the suspension or to revoke the registration and forfeit
the bond as herein provided.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 151, Section 151.096)
Secs. 3.588 - 3.595 Reserved
Division 7. Building Official to Supervise Electricians
Sec. 3.596 Applicants for Registration
It shall be the duty of the building official to pass upon all persons desiring to engage in business as a master electrician,
journeyman electrician or apprentice electrician within the city, approval for registration. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV,
Chapter 151, Section 151.111; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 3.600 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.601 Statutory Authorization
The legislature of the state has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, Texas Water Code, section 16.315, delegated the responsibility
of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the city does ordain as follows.
Sec. 3.602 Findings of Fact
(a) The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and
relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
(b) These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood
heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands
because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.
Sec. 3.603 Statement of Purpose
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses
due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense
of the general public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer
lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a
manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
(7) Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
Sec. 3.604 Methods of Reducing Flood Losses
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/414
In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive
increases in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood
damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved
in the accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage;
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may
increase flood hazards to other lands.
Sec. 3.605 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application.
Alluvial Fan Flooding. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and
is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow
paths.
Apex. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes
unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
Appurtenant Structure. A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of
which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
Area of Future Conditions Flood Hazard. The land area that would be inundated by the 1-percent-annual chance (100-year) flood
based on future conditions hydrology.
Area of Shallow Flooding. A designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map
(FIRM) with a 1-percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined channel
does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of Special Flood Hazard. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a 1-percent or greater chance of flooding
in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed rate making
has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE,
A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
Base Flood. The flood having a 1-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Base Flood Elevation (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood
insurance study (FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting
from the flood that has a 1-percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year - also called the base flood.
Basement. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
Breakaway Wall. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and
construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or
supporting foundation system.
Critical Feature. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection
provided by the entire system would be compromised.
Development. Any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/414
Elevated Building. For insurance purposes, a nonbasement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground
level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
Enclosure. An enclosure is a fully enclosed area below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building
access or storage in an area other than a basement. To qualify as an enclosure, the area must meet the nonelevation design
requirements of 44 CFR 60.3. See also the definition of lowest floor.
Existing Construction. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced before the
effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. Existing construction may also be
referred to as existing structures.
Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective
date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
Flood Elevation Study. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water
surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion
hazards.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has
delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Flood Insurance Study (FIS). See flood elevation study.
Flood or Flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood Protection System. Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and
which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject
to a special flood hazard and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal
barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with
sound engineering standards.
Floodplain Management. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage,
including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain Management Regulations. Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special
purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of
police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the
purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Floodplain or Floodprone Area. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of
flooding).
Floodproofing. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
Floodway. See regulatory floodway.
Freeboarding. A term used to describe the safety margin provided above the BFE. Most communities choose a freeboard of 1 to 3
feet above BFE.
Functionally Dependent Use. A use, which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close
proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of
cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing
facilities.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/414
Highest Adjacent Grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
Historic Structure. Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the
Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing
on the National Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance
of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary [of the Interior] to qualify as a
registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs
that have been certified either:
(A) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(B) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Levee. A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering
practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
Levee System. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and
drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
Lowest Floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure,
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a
building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable
nonelevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
Manufactured Home. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term manufactured home does not
include a recreational vehicle.
Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
Mean Sea Level. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or
other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced.
New Construction. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or
after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, new construction means structures for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and
includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of
floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
Nonresidential Structure. A nonresidential structure includes, but is not limited to: small business concerns, churches, schools,
farm buildings (including grain bins and silos), poolhouses, clubhouses, recreational buildings, mercantile structures, agricultural
and industrial structures, warehouses, hotels and motels with normal room rentals for less than 6 months' duration, and nursing
homes.
Reasonably Safe From Flooding. Base floodwaters will not inundate the land or damage structures to be removed from the SFHA
and that any subsurface waters to the base flood will not damage existing or proposed buildings.
Recreational Vehicle. A vehicle which is:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/414
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Regulatory Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
Residential Structure. A residential structure is one that is considered to be a domicile or is used for residential purposes for 6
months or more. Residential structures include a single-family home, multiple unit apartment buildings, a residential
condominium, or a manufactured or modular home.
Riverine. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Special Flood Hazard Area. See area of special flood hazard.
Start of Construction. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub.
L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit
date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement,
footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is
principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.
Substantial Damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial Improvement. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which
equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before start of construction of the improvement. This term
includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or
safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure.
Variance. A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements see
section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.)
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management
regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of
compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) [of the National Flood Insurance Program
regulations] is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Water Surface Elevation. The height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where
specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
Sec. 3.606 Lands to Which This Article Applies
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/414
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city.
Sec. 3.607 Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and
engineering report entitled, The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for City of Gonzales dated December 3, 2010, with accompanying
Flood Insurance Rate Maps and/or Flood Boundary-Floodway Maps (FIRM and/or FBFM) dated December 3, 2010, and any
revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article.
Sec. 3.608 Establishment of Development Permit
A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article.
Sec. 3.609 Compliance
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this
article and other applicable regulations.
Sec. 3.610 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where
this article and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.
Sec. 3.611 Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
Sec. 3.612 Warning and Disclaimer of Liability
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific
and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by
manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the community
or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision
lawfully made hereunder.
Sec. 3.613 Penalties for Noncompliance
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms
of this article and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this article by failure to comply with any of its
requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a
misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof
be fined not more than $500.00, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Nothing
herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
Secs. 3.614–3.630 Reserved
Division 2. Administration
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/414
Sec. 3.631 Floodplain Administrator–Designation
The city manager or his/her designee is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions
of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance - National Flood Insurance
Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
Sec. 3.632 Same–Duties and Responsibilities
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article.
(2) Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the proposed building site project, including the
placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding.
(3) Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this article.
(4) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those
federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required.
(5) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards
(for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the
floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
(6) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is the Texas Water
Development Board (TWDB) and also the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), prior to any
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
(7) Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
(8) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 3.607, the floodplain
administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available
from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 3.
(9) When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30
and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development,
when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of
the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community.
(10) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations,
a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases
the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than 1 foot, provided that the community first completes all of
the provisions required by section 65.12.
Sec. 3.633 Permit Procedures
(a) Application for a floodplain development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by
him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation
of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the
location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
(1) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially
improved structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed;
(3) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure
shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 3.652(2);
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/414
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of
proposed development;
(5) Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 3.632(1);
(b) Approval or denial of a floodplain development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the
provisions of this article and the following relevant factors:
(1) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(2) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the
individual owner;
(3) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(4) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(5) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(6) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and
repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
(7) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of
wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
(8) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(9) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
(10) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area.
Sec. 3.634 Variance Procedures
(a) The appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the
requirements of this article.
(b) The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement,
decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article.
(c) Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent
jurisdiction.
(d) The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(e) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this article.
(f) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size
contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant
factors in section 3.633(b) of this division have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(g) Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the appeal board may attach such conditions to
the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article (section 3.603).
(h) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge
would result.
(i) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair
or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/414
(j) Prerequisites for granting variances:
(1) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the
flood hazard, to afford relief.
(2) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(A) Showing a good and sufficient cause;
(B) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(C) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats
to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or
conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(3) Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted
to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be
commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
(k) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development
necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
(1) The criteria outlined in subsections (a)–(i) are met; and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood
and create no additional threats to public safety.
Secs. 3.635–3.650 Reserved
Division 3. Flood Hazard Reduction
Sec. 3.651 General Standards
In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements:
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy;
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize
flood damage;
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
(4) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation,
plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding;
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the system;
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of
floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.
Sec. 3.652 Specific Standards
When a residential or nonresidential structure is intended to be constructed in an approximate A zone, a BFE must be determined
by using the same engineering standards and methods that are used to develop BFEs in a flood insurance study (FIS). In all areas
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/414
of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 3.607, section 3.632(8), or
section 3.653(c), the following provisions are required:
(1) Residential Construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have
the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional
engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this
subsection as proposed in section 3.633(a)(1), is satisfied.
(A) If a new substantially improved residential structure is constructed outside the SFHA but is within 1 foot
of the centerline of a known but unmapped water course (including an intermittent water course on the
community's FIRM, then it shall be elevated so that the lowest floor (including basement) is a minimum of 12
inches or 1 foot above the highest adjacent grade.
(B) All residential structures that are constructed outside the SFHA shall be elevated 12 inches or 1 foot above
the highest adjacent grade.
(2) Nonresidential Construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or
other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to a minimum of 12
inches or 1 foot above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that
below the base flood level the structure is watertight to a minimum level of 12 inches or 1 foot above the BFE with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect
shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the
design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this
subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which
such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
(3) Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor
that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are
subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing
for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(A) A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than 1 square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
(B) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than 1 foot above grade.
(C) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(4) Manufactured Homes.
(A) Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall
be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement,
manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of
anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This
requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(B) Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and
AE on the community's FIRM on sites:
(i) Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision;
(ii) In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;
(iii) In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or
(iv) In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred
substantial damage as a result of a flood;
be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to a
minimum of 12 inches or 1 foot above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/414
(C) Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured
home park or subdivision with zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the
provisions of subsection (4) of this section be elevated so that either:
(i) The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or
(ii) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at
least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to
an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
(5) Recreational Vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the
community's FIRM either:
(A) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or
(B) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
(C) Meet the permit requirements of section 3.633(a), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for
manufactured homes in subsection (4) of this section.
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only
by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
Sec. 3.653 Standards for Subdivision Proposals
(a) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with
sections 3.602, 3.603, and 3.604 of this article.
(b) All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions
shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of section 3.608, section 3.633; and the provisions of this division.
(c) Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is lesser, if not
otherwise provided pursuant to section 3.607 or section 3.632(8) of this article.
(d) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate
drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(e) All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
Sec. 3.654 Standard for Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO/AH Zones)
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 3.607, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These
areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where
the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet
flow; therefore, the following provisions apply:
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no depth number is specified). They also shall
have the ductwork, and exposed plumbing and electrical components elevated 12 inches or 1 foot above the BFE.
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures:
(A) Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if
no depth number is specified); or
(B) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base specified flood
depth in an AO zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH zone, level the structure is watertight with
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/414
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy.
(3) A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the
standards of this section, as proposed in section 3.633(a)(3), are satisfied.
(4) Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters
around and away from proposed structures.
Sec. 3.655 Floodways
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 3.607, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway
is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential,
the following provisions shall apply:
(1) Fill material of any kind is prohibited within the regulatory floodway as delineated on the community's FIRM.
(2) Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development
within the SFHA unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance
with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels
within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(3) If subsection (1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all
applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this division.
(4) Under the provisions of 44 CFR chapter 1, section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a
community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base
flood elevations, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by section 65.12.
(Ordinance 2010-05 adopted 8/3/10)
ARTICLE 3.700 MANUFACTURED HOUSING AND MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARKS*
Division 1. General Provisions
Sec. 3.701 Definitions
For the purpose of this article the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
Licensee. Any person licensed to operate and maintain a manufactured housing park under the provisions of this article.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 153, Section 153.01)
Manufactured Home. A structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of
Housing and Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections,, which in traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in
width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent
chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities,
and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems. The term does not include a recreational vehicle as
defined by 24 C.F.R. Section 3282(g).
Manufactured Housing or Manufactured Home. A HUD-code manufactured home or mobile home and collectively means and
refers to both.
Mobile Home. A structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling
mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet,
and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning and electrical systems. Mobile homes are
prohibited within the city.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/414
Mobile Home Parks. Any plot of ground upon which facilities are provided for locating two or more manufactured houses to be
occupied for dwelling, regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodation.
Mobile Home Space. Any plot of ground within a mobile home park designed for the accommodation of one mobile home.
Natural or Artificial Barrier. Any embankment, fence, hedge or other feature that serves to block pedestrian access or visibility.
Operator. The person in charge of operating any mobile home park either under written or verbal lease, or other arrangement,
whereby he exercises control over the premises.
Owner. The person in whose name the title to the lot block, tract or parcel of land is shown to be.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 153, Section 153.01)
Sec. 3.702 Applicability of Provisions
For purposes of this article, the provisions contained herein are applicable to manufactured housings used for both residential
purposes as well as commercial purposes. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Secs. 3.703 - 3.705 Reserved
Division 2. License and Permit Provisions
Sec. 3.706 Permit Required for Placement of Manufactured Housing
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to locate, maintain or live in any manufactured housing or to replace any existing
manufactured housing in any place other than in a duly licensed and lawful manufactured housing park unless such person shall
first secure a permit from the city manufactured housing park board.
(b) Permits shall be issued by the manufactured housing park board upon application therefor filed by the applicant for such
license. The application shall contain the name and address of the applicant and a description of the property upon which such
manufactured housing is to be located. Such application shall be filed with the city manager who shall examine the same, and if
he finds the same to be in proper form he shall refer such application to the manufactured housing park board, and such
application shall be set down for further hearing after notice of the time and place of hearing shall have been given by publishing
notice thereof once a week for two consecutive weeks in some newspaper of general circulation published in the city which notice
shall give the name of the applicant, a description of the property to which it relates, and the date, time and place of the hearing.
The cost of publishing such notice shall be paid by the applicant. Upon such hearing, a permit may be granted if such application
conforms to the guidelines for the issuance for permits now or which may hereafter be promulgated by the city council and by the
board. However, no such permit shall be issued unless adequate water, electric and sewer facilities shall be available within a
reasonable distance of such manufactured housing location and shall be granted only upon the condition that such manufactured
housing shall be connected with the sewer system and shall have installed water, reasonable sanitary facilities and shall be
connected with electricity.
(c) A permit shall be granted upon application to all present owners of single mobile, homes under subsection (b) above.
(d) Such permit, when issued, shall be valid as long as the manufactured housing, with respect to which permit was issued,
remains in place on such location for three months thereafter. Such permit is assignable during the previously mentioned three
month period by the original permittee, and within such three month period, another manufactured housing may be moved into
the same location as where the original manufactured housing was located without applying for a new permit. If each
manufactured housing with a permit is moved and not replaced by another manufactured housing within a period of three months,
a new permit shall be applied for as provided in subsection (b) above. However, such permit may be revoked for failure to pay the
monthly license fee hereinafter set out.
Sec. 3.707 Licensing Provisions for Manufactured Housing Parks
(a) License Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate a manufactured housing park within the city
limits, unless such person shall first obtain a license therefor, except that the maintenance or operation of a manufactured housing
park now in existence and heretofore licensed may be continued while and so long as it complies with the provisions of this
article.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/414
(b) Application. Application for an initial manufactured housing park license shall be filed, in triplicate, with the city manager,
shall be in writing, signed by the applicant and shall include the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant;
(2) The location and legal description of the manufactured housing park;
(3) A complete plan of the park;
(4) Plans and specifications of all buildings, improvements and facilities constructed or to be constructed within the
manufactured housing park; and
(5) The name and last known address of all property owners and all residents living within 300 feet of the outside
boundaries of such park or proposed park.
(c) Hearing; Issuance.
(1) Upon the filing of such application, the city manager shall make or cause to be made a study of such proposed
manufactured housing park, and if he finds such application and the proposed plan to be in accordance with the
provisions of this article, he shall refer such application, together with his findings to the manufactured housing park
board for hearing.
(2) The city clerk shall give not less than seven days notice of such hearing to each property owner and resident
living within 300 feet of the outside boundaries of such manufactured housing park by depositing a notice thereof
addressed to each such person at his or her last known address in the United States mail, and after such notice has been
duly given, the board shall hear such application at the time and place designated on such notice and grant or refuse
the same in accordance with guidelines laid down by the city council and by the manufactured housing park board.
(3) No such license shall be issued unless such manufactured housing park or proposed manufactured housing park
shall fully comply with all of the provisions of this article and the guidelines aforesaid. The issuance of such license
shall be temporary, and such license shall not be made final until an inspection of such manufactured housing park
shall be made after completion of the city manager or under his direction and the same shall have been found to have
been completed according to the plans under which such license was issued.
(d) Expiration of Permit; Renewal. All licenses issued under the terms of this article shall expire on December 31 following the
issuance of such license. An application shall be filed by the licensee for renewal of the license under the provisions of this
subsection within 30 days prior to the expiration of such license, and a new license shall be issued by the city manager or under
his direction unless the city manager finds the licensee to be in violation of the terms and provisions of this article.
(e) Transfer. Upon application in writing for transfer of a license issued under the provisions of this article and the payment of
a fee of $5.00, the city clerk shall issue a transfer if the transferee is of good moral character.
(f) Fees. The annual license fee for each manufactured housing park shall be in accordance with the following schedule:
(1) Two to five manufactured housing spaces, $5.00.
(2) Six to 25 manufactured housing spaces, $25.00.
(3) 26 or more manufactured housing spaces, $50.00.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 153, Section 153.16)
Secs. 3.708 - 3.710 Reserved
Division 3. Standards for Manufactured Housings and Manufactured Housing Parks
Sec. 3.711 Location
Mobile home parks may be located in any district as prescribed and approved by the manufactured housing park board. (1995
Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 153, Section 153.25)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/414
Sec. 3.712 Drainage of Site
Each manufactured housing park shall be located on a well drained site, properly graded to ensure rapid drainage and freedom
from standing pools of water. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 153, Section 153.26)
Sec. 3.713 Minimum Dimensions of Spaces
Mobile home spaces in each manufactured housing park shall be provided consisting of a minimum of 1,800 square feet for each
space which shall be at least 30 feet wide and clearly defined. However, those manufactured housing parks in existence on the
effective date of this article (i.e., August 13, 1973), which provide manufactured housing spaces having a width or area less than
that herein prescribed, may continue to operate with spaces of the existing width and area, but in no event shall any manufactured
housing space be less than 25 feet wide and have an area of less than 1,250 square feet. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV,
Chapter 153, Section 153.27)
Sec. 3.714 Clearance Between Manufactured Housings
Mobile homes shall be so harbored on each space within a manufactured housing park that there shall be at least 15 feet of
clearance between manufactured housings. No manufactured housing shall be located closer than 15 feet from any building
within the park or from any property line boundary bounding the park. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 153, Section
153.28)
Sec. 3.715 Off-Street Parking
Off-street parking facilities in the ratio of one and one-half spaces for each manufactured housing space shall be provided in a
manufactured housing park. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 153, Section 153.29)
Sec. 3.716 Driveways
All manufactured housing spaces within a manufactured housing park shall abut upon a driveway of not less than 20 feet in
width, which shall have unobstructed access to a public street, alley or highway. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter
153, Section 153.30)
Sec. 3.717 Walkways
(a) Walkways not less than two feet wide shall be provided from the manufactured housing spaces to the service buildings
within each manufactured housing park. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 153, Section 153.31)
(b) All walkways shall be in compliance with ADA regulations. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.718 Materials, Illumination of Driveways, Walkways
All driveways and walkways within each manufactured housing park shall be provided with an all-weather surface and lighted at
night with electric lamps of not less than 25 watts each, spaced at intervals of not more than 100 feet. (1995 Code of Ordinances,
Title XV, Chapter 153, Section 153.32)
Sec. 3.719 Electrical Outlets
In no instance shall the main service entrance for manufactured homes be smaller than a 100 amp service and will be a minimum
of 120/240 volt. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.720 Appurtenances to Manufactured Housings
It shall be unlawful for any person operating a manufactured housing park or occupying a manufactured housing to construct or
permit to be constructed in such park or in connection with such manufactured housing any additional structure, building or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/414
shelter in connection with or attached to a manufactured housing; except however, awnings of canvas or metal, suitably
constructed, may be attached to a manufactured housing. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 153, Section 153.34)
Sec. 3.721 Natural or Artificial Barrier Required
Each boundary of a manufactured housing park, except those adjacent to a street or highway right-of-way, shall be provided with
a continuous natural or artificial barrier. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 153, Section 153.35)
Sec. 3.722 Compliance With Technical Provisions
All plumbing, electrical work and water connections on or at any park licensed under the provisions of this article and each
manufactured housing space, and each manufactured housing placed thereon shall be in conformity with the provisions of this
code, state law and all city ordinances, rules and regulations regulating such work. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter
153, Section 153.36)
Sec. 3.723 Sewage, Waste Disposal
(a) Waste from showers, bathtubs, flush toilets, urinals, lavatories, slop sinks and laundries in service and other buildings
within each manufactured housing park shall be discharged into a public sewer system in compliance with applicable provisions
of this code, or into a private sewer and disposal plant or septic tank system of such construction and in such manner as will
present no health hazard.
(b) Each manufactured housing space shall be provided with a trapped sewer at least four inches in diameter, which shall be
connected to receive the waste from the shower, bathtub, flush toilet, lavatory and kitchen sink of the manufactured housing
harbored in such space and having any or all of such facilities. The trapped sewer in each space shall be connected to discharge
the manufactured housing waste into a public sewer system in compliance with applicable provisions of this code, or into a
private sewer disposal plant or septic tank system of such construction and in such manner as will present no health hazard.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 153, Section 153.37)
Sec. 3.724 Garbage Receptacles
Private receptacles with tight-fitting covers shall be provided in each manufactured housing park in quantities adequate to permit
disposal of all garbage and rubbish. Garbage cans shall be located not farther than 300 feet from any manufactured housing space.
The cans shall be kept in sanitary condition at all times. Garbage and rubbish shall be collected and disposed of as frequently as
may be necessary to ensure that the garbage cans shall not overflow. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 153, Section
153.38; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.725 Fire Protection
(a) Every manufactured housing park shall be equipped at all times with fire extinguishing equipment in good working order,
of such type, size and number and so located within the park as to satisfy applicable reasonable regulations of the fire department.
No open fires shall be permitted at any place which may endanger life or property. No fires shall be left unattended at any time.
(b) Bottled gas for cooking purposes shall not be used at individual manufactured housing spaces unless the containers are
properly connected by copper or other suitably metallic tubing. Bottled gas cylinders shall be securely fastened in place. No
cylinder containing bottled gas shall be located in a manufactured housing space or within five feet of a door thereof. State and
local regulations applicable to the handling of bottled gas and fuel must be followed.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 153, Section 153.39)
Sec. 3.726 Maintenance
All service buildings and the grounds of each manufactured housing park shall be maintained in a clean, sightly condition and
kept free of any condition that will menace the health of any occupant or the public or constitute a nuisance. (1995 Code of
Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 153, Section 153.40)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/414
Sec. 3.727 Compliance With Sewage and Utilities Standards Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a manufactured housing park, or to rent spaces in a manufactured housing park,
without complying with the provisions herein contained relating to the furnishing of sewage and utilities. (1995 Code of
Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 153, Section 153.41)
Sec. 3.728 Running Waters Sanitary Facilities
It shall be unlawful for anyone to occupy a manufactured housing in any such manufactured housing park without running water
inside of such trailer house and sanitary facilities available therein, which have been connected with the city sewer system. (1995
Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 153, Section 153.42)
Secs. 3.729 - 3.730 Reserved
Division 4. Administration and Enforcement
Sec. 3.731 City Council to Discharge Duties Until Board is Appointed
Until such time as a board shall have been duly appointed and qualified, the city council shall discharge all of the duties imposed
upon the manufactured housing park board. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 153, Section 153.50)
Sec. 3.732 Manufactured Housing Park Board
(a) There is created a board to be known as the manufactured housing park board which shall hear all applications for permits
and licenses hereunder and shall have the power to issue permits and licensed under the terms and provisions of this article and in
accordance with the guidelines which may hereafter be laid down by the city council and by such board.
(b) The board shall consist of three members to be appointed by the city council. The three members of the board constituting
the initial board shall be appointed for terms of one, two and three years, respectively, and one member of such board shall be
appointed annually by the city council and the city council shall fill all vacancies.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 153, Section 153.51)
Sec. 3.733 Penalty
Any person or persons found in violation of this article shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in
Section 1.109 of this code. Each day of violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title
XV, Chapter 153, Section 153.99)
ARTICLE 3.800 SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS*
Division 1. General Provisions
Sec. 3.801 Purpose
(a) It is the purpose of this article:
(1) To enhance the aesthetics and attractiveness of the city for its citizens and visitors by:
(A) Establishing standards for the spacing of billboards, maximum sign facings, and maximum billboard
heights.
(B) Relating billboards to the approved major thoroughfare plan.
(C) Protecting historic districts and the ambiance of city avenues and municipal parks from further intrusion of
billboards. The provisions of this article shall be applicable to the entire area within the corporate limits of the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/414
city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
(2) To protect the public health, safety and welfare by setting standards for:
(A) The construction and erection of billboards and other types of signs.
(B) Ensuring the safe construction, electrical connections and safety of all signs covered under this article.
(c) Except as hereinafter specified, any sign existing on the effective date of this article which does not conform with the
provisions of this article will not be affected by the article.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.001)
Sec. 3.802 Jurisdiction
The provisions of this article shall be applicable to the entire area within the corporate limits of the city and in the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.002)
Sec. 3.803 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
Advertising Bench. Any bench providing seating to the general public without charge, which may bear advertising. Advertising
benches are not regulated by this article.
Bill. An advertising poster or a handbill.
Billboard. An erection annexed to the land for the purpose of posting advertising bills and posters and having a sign face area
exceeding 32 square feet.
Billboard Operator. Any person who holds a Texas Outdoor Advertising License to install, erect, service, maintain, alter, repair or
demolish billboards.
Building Official. The person within the city charged with the administration and enforcement of this article.
Commercial Sign Operator. Any person installing, erecting, servicing, maintaining, altering, repairing or demolishing commercial
signs.
Cultural Facilities. Establishments such as, but not limited to, museums, art galleries, public libraries and community centers,
botanical and zoological gardens and theaters for performing arts which, although they may charge an admission fee, are
essentially nonprofit and are principally funded through public expenditures, foundation grants and donations.
Developer. One who is engaged in the business of assembling, preparing and promoting land for real estate development. A
developer may or may not actually be involved in residential construction, for example, homebuilding.
Directional Traffic Control Signs. Traffic control signs installed by the city or state.
Embellishments. Any feature such as a cutout, neon or plastic letters, clock, electric device and space extension which is added to
an outdoor advertising structure.
Fireproof Structure. A sign constructed entirely of steel members, including structural support for the sign face. The sign face and
its support members may be constructed of wooden or metal panels.
Historic Area. A district or zone designated by the city council or a unit of the state or federal government, within which the
buildings, structures, appurtenances and places are of basic and vital importance because of their association with history or
because of their unique architectural style and scale. An historic area may also be a part of or related to a square, avenue, park or
other area, the design of which should be preserved and developed based on cultural, historical or architectural motives or
purposes.
Historical Building. Any building or structure which is designated as historically or architecturally significant by a unit of local,
state or federal government.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/414
May. Implies permissiveness and connotes a nonmandatory action.
Neighborhood. A distinct segment of the community whose boundaries are defined by physical barriers such as major arterial
streets and railroads and natural features such as creeks and rivers.
Outputs. An industry term referring to reproductions of that portion of the graphic elements of a billboard which project beyond
the normal limits of the advertising face to dramatize the copy and the advertising message.
Park. A publicly owned tract of land designated and used by the public for active and passive recreation.
Shall. Connotes a mandatory action.
Sign. Any object, device, display or structure or part thereof visible from a street or walkway, which is used to advertise, identify,
display, direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location by
any means including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images. The enumeration
of signs in this definition shall not be considered to be exclusive. Sign includes all other devices or structures as may reasonably
be included under it, whether attached or unattached. This definition excludes all national or state flags, nonelectric window
displays, graffiti, athletic scoreboards and the official announcements or signs of government. Types of signs include, but are not
limited to, the following:
(1) Animated or Moving Sign. Any sign or part of a sign which changes physical position by any movement or
rotation or which gives the visual impression of such movement or rotation.
(2) Awning or Marquee Sign. A sign that is mounted or painted on an awning or marquee that is otherwise permitted
by ordinance.
(3) Back-to-Back Sign. A structure containing two parallel signs whose faces are oriented in opposite directions and
are spaced no more than 10 feet apart.
(4) Billboard Sign. Any outdoor sign, description, device, figure, painting, drawing, message, placard, poster,
structure or thing, except those advertisements placed on benches provided for the convenience of the public, which
directs the attention of the traveling public to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or
offered at a location other than the premises on which the sign is located.
(5) Canopy Sign. A sign that is mounted or painted on a canopy.
(6) Commercial Sign. A sign which directs attention to a business, product, service or activity.
(7) Electric Sign. Any sign on which letters, designs or messages are formed or outlined by electric illumination or
by a transparent or translucent medium which is electrically illuminated, whether the illuminating device is contained
within or on the sign, all outside building outlining and interim decorative displays and gas tube window outlining.
Signs illuminated by electric lights which are not attached to the sign, and signs which are lighted by floodlights or
projectors are not classified as electric sign within the meaning of this article. Any portable sign that has electrical
components attached, connected to or part of the sign or support, whether electrified or not, shall be considered an
electric sign and all sections of this article pertaining to electric signs shall apply.
(8) Flashing Sign. Any directly or indirectly illuminated sign which exhibits changing natural or artificial light or
color effects by any means whatsoever.
(9) Governmental Signs. A sign erected and maintained pursuant to and in discharge of any governmental functions
or required by law, ordinance or other governmental regulation.
(10) Nonconforming Sign. A sign which was lawful prior to the adoption on August 23, 1994, or revision or
amendment of this article, but which fails, because of such adoptions, revision or amendment, to conform to this
article.
(11) Occupational Signs. Signs not to exceed three square feet in area denoting only the name and profession of an
occupant in a commercial, public, office or institutional building.
(12) Off-Premise Commercial Sign. A sign which directs attention to a business, product, service or activity other
than that which is conducted on the premises where such sign is located.
(13) Off-Premise Portable Sign. Any portable sign which directs attention to a business, product, service or activity
other than that which is conducted on the premises where such sign is located.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/414
(14) On-Premise Commercial Sign. A sign which directs attention to a business, product, service or activity which is
conducted upon the premises where such sign is located.
(15) Overhanging Sign. A sign which is suspended over a sidewalk, street or other public right-of-way. An
overhanging sign may or may not be a projecting sign.
(16) Pole Sign. A sign that is mounted on a free standing pole or other support.
(17) Political Sign. A temporary sign announcing or supporting political candidates or issues in connection with any
national, state or local election.
(18) Portable Sign. Any sign designed or constructed to be easily moved from one location to another, including a
sign mounted upon or designed to be mounted on a trailer, wheeled carrier or other nonmotorized mobile structure. A
portable sign which has its wheels removed shall still be considered a portable sign. The term nonelectric portable sign
means any portable sign which does not have electrical components.
(19) Projecting Sign. A sign that is wholly or partly dependent upon a building for support and which projects more
than 12 inches from such building.
(20) Real Estate Sign. A sign pertaining to the sale or lease of the premises or a portion of the premises on which
the sign is located.
(21) Roof Sign. A sign that is mounted on and is wholly supported by the roof of a building and which projects
above the point of a building with a flat roof, the cave line of a building with a gambrel, gable or hip roof, or the deck
of a building with a mansard roof.
(22) Sign Face. The area or display surface used for the message.
(23) Sign Face Area. The entire advertising area of a sign excluding any framing, trim or molding and the
supporting structure.
(24) V-Type Sign. A structure composed of two signs with the facts oriented in opposing directions and in the shape
of the letter V; provided, however, that only one face can be viewed from any one direction.
(25) Wall Sign. A sign fastened to or painted on the wall of a building or structure in such a manner that the wall
becomes the supporting structure for or forms the background surface of the sign and which does not project more
than 12 inches from such building or structure.
(26) Window Sign. Any sign on the surface of a window of any establishment which advertises services, products or
sales.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.003)
Sec. 3.804 Posting Signs and Bills on Public Property
(a) No person shall affix a sign or bill by any means whatsoever to any public building, property or thing belonging to the city
or to any other public entity without the approval of that authority. This prohibition shall extend also to posting bills within city
parks or to trees on public rights-of-way.
(b) This section shall not be construed to prevent any public official from posting a governmental sign or bill for a public
purpose.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.004)
Sec. 3.805 Posting Signs and Bills on Private Premises
No person shall affix a sign or bill by any means whatsoever to any private property without having first obtained the written
permission of the owner or his or her agents. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.005)
Sec. 3.806 Obscene, Indecent, Immoral Matter
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/414
No person shall erect or display any obscene matter upon any sign. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section
155.006)
Sec. 3.807 When Signs Constitute a Nuisance; Abatement
(a) Any sign erected, altered, used or maintained in violation of this article shall constitute a public nuisance.
(b) If the owner or operator fails to remove a sign within 14 days after being notified in writing to do so, it may be removed by
the city at the expense of the owner or the person erecting, using or maintaining it.
(1) Any sign so removed shall be stored or impounded and shall not be returned to the owner until all applicable
charges are paid.
(2) If any sign remains unclaimed for a period of 30 days after its removal, or if the removal and storage costs are
not paid within the 30 day period, the city may destroy, sell or otherwise dispose of the sign.
(c) No future permits will be issued to the owner or operator until all previous fines and costs have been paid.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.007)
Sec. 3.808 Nonconforming Status; Fines
(a) Any sign or billboard which has been assessed by a city building official as being damaged beyond 50% of its replacement
value must be removed no later than 30 days after written notification. After 90 days, the owner will be subject to fines up to, but
not to exceed, $200 per day for each day the violation exists after the initial 90 day period following initial violation notification.
(b) Upon removal or destruction of any nonconforming sign or billboard, nonconforming status shall be lost to that site and no
new nonconforming sign or structure shall be erected thereon; except, however, that any owner, as of the effective date hereof, of
any nonconforming sign or billboard may replace the sign or billboard with another of equal or smaller dimensions that otherwise
complies with the requirements of this article.
(c) Should any sign become insecure or in danger of falling or otherwise unsafe in the opinion of the building official, the
owner thereof, or the person or firm maintaining the same, shall upon written notice from the building official, forthwith in the
case of immediate danger and in any case within 10 days, remove such sign or secure the same in a manner to be approved by the
building official, in conformity with the provisions of this article. If such order is not complied with within 10 days, the building
official shall remove such sign at the expense of the owner or lessee thereof.
(d) All abandoned signs or billboards must be removed within 90 days from the date of abandonment.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.008)
Sec. 3.809 Persons Subject to Violations
The permit holder, owner, agent, person or persons having the beneficial use of the sign, the owner of the land or structure on
which the sign is located, and the person in charge of erecting the sign are all subject to the provisions of this article and are
subject to the penalty provided in Section 1.109 of this code. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.009)
Secs. 3.810 - 3.815 Reserved
Division 2. Permits
Sec. 3.816 Permits Required
(a) Unless specifically exempted, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, substantially alter or relocate any billboard or
sign without first obtaining the proper permit from the building inspector and making payment of the fee required. “Substantially
alter” shall not include routine painting, posting or maintenance.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/414
(b) No permit shall be required for the construction and/or repair of signs damaged or destroyed by an act of God, or by the
occurrence of any other event beyond the control of the owner or occupant.
(c) Exceptions to the permit requirements of this article are:
(1) Real estate, finance and construction signs.
(2) Directional traffic control signs.
(3) Political signs.
(4) Governmental signs.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.020)
Sec. 3.817 Application for Permit
(a) Applications for permits to erect, alter, replace or relocate any commercial sign, portable sign or billboard sign shall contain
or have attached thereto the following information:
(1) Application.
(A) Name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(B) Location of building, structure or lot to which or upon which the sign is to be attached or erected.
(C) Position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings or structures, including other signs.
(D) The plans and specifications including type, size, shape, color, electrical wiring, construction, type of
materials, method of attachment to building or structure and foundation for freestanding signs.
(2) Billboards. When applying for a billboard permit, the billboard operator shall, in addition to the foregoing,
furnish the following information at the time of permit application:
(A) The location of the proposed sign in relation to the property lines, and any building, fence and the like, on
the property;
(B) Building setback lines and the location of any easements on the property;
(C) Location and distance to the nearest billboard;
(D) Affidavit from the property owner authorizing erection of the sign, or an executed lease agreement;
(E) Street address of the sign;
(F) Engineer's certification for all billboards in excess of 200 square feet.
(3) Repair. Application for sign repair permits shall contain or have attached thereto the following information:
(A) Name, address, and telephone number of the sign owner.
(B) Name, address and telephone number of the person providing the repair service.
(C) Location off building, structure or lot upon which sign is located.
(D) Description of the repair activity to be performed.
(E) Such other information as the building official shall require to show full compliance with this and all other
laws and ordinances of the city.
(b) All applications shall be submitted to the building official for approval 10 days prior to installation of a commercial sign or
billboard.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/414
(c) It shall be the duty of the building official, upon the filing of an application for a sign permit, to examine such plans and
specifications and other data and the premises upon which it is proposed to erect or repair the sign, and if it shall appear that the
proposed structure is in compliance with all the requirements of this article, the building code and all other laws and ordinances of
the city, he or she shall then issue the sign permit. If the work authorized under a sign permit has not been completed within six
months after date of issuance, the permit shall become null and void.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.021)
Sec. 3.818 Permit Fees
The following permit fees shall be collected for each sign permit issued:
(1) Commercial Signs $25.00.
(2) Billboards $100.00.
(3) Portable Signs $20.00.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.022)
Secs. 3.819 - 3.820 Reserved
Division 3. Construction and Maintenance
Sec. 3.821 Preventing Obstructions
(a) All signs governed by this article shall be situated in a manner which does not interfere with or obstruct windows, doors or
other means of exit from the building.
(b) No signs shall be supported on or attached to any fire escape, door or window casing.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.035)
Sec. 3.822 Creating Hazards
(a) No signs shall be erected on or over public property in a manner which interferes with any fire hydrant, traffic light, fire
alarm box or streetlight.
(b) Billboards and commercial signs shall not be erected in any location where, because of traffic conditions, fire or explosion
hazards, the sign would imperil public safety or hamper the functions of the fire department as determined by the building official
or fire marshal.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.036)
Sec. 3.823 Attachment and Wind Loads
(a) All signs shall be securely fastened or anchored to a building wall, structural framing or other foundation with a sufficient
number of bolts or anchors to resist the stress resulting from the dead weight of the sign and wind loads.
(b) Both commercial signs and billboards shall be constructed to resist a minimal horizontal wind load of 30 pounds per square
foot of service area.
(c) The use of staples, wires and wood plugs in erecting signs is prohibited.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.037)
Sec. 3.824 Materials; Supports
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/414
(a) All signs governed by this article, excluding electrical signs, shall be constructed of durable materials and securely attached
to framework and supports made of wood, metal or other similar material of equivalent strength.
(b) Commercial signs may be made of pressed wood.
(c) All electrical signs shall have metal supports and frames.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.038)
Sec. 3.825 Electric Signs; Wiring; Distance Standards
(a) Electrically illuminated signs or signs which are equipped in any way with electrical devices or appliances shall conform to
all electrical provisions and requirements of the National Electrical Code. The building official shall have the right to check all
wiring for code compliance.
(b) The outer edge of the sign shall remain at least two feet inside the curbline and shall not begin beyond the distance of three
feet from the property line. A minimum space of seven feet shall exist between the lowest portion of any sign overhanging a
public sidewalk and the sidewalk grade.
(c) All electric signs must comply with the applicable provisions of this article and the National Electrical Code.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.039)
Sec. 3.826 Overhanging Signs
All permanent signs shall be erected so as not to overhang any street, alley or plaza. Signs may be hung over a sidewalk and over
that space between the curb and sidewalk, provided the space is not used for or designed to be used for vehicular ingress and
egress to a building. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.040)
Sec. 3.827 Temporary Signs
(a) Temporary signs, including A-framed and sandwich board signs constructed of lightweight materials, shall, with the
exception of banner signs, be staked to the ground or securely affixed to a structure or sufficiently weighted. Unframed cloth
banner signs may project over a public street subject to approval by the building official. The sign erector shall certify that such
sign will not interfere with the public safety.
(b) Cloth banner signs projecting over and across street rights-of-way must meet the following criteria:
(1) The sign must advertise or promote a noncommercial, not-for-private-profit event, a community charitable drive
or a community announcement.
(2) No part of the banner sign shall be closer to the street grade than 14½ feet.
(3) Standard sign hooks, lag screws or expansion bolts and shields shall be used where required to support the sign.
(c) No more than one real estate sign shall be allowed for a residence, lot or building with the exception that a residence, lot or
building having more than one street access may have one sign per street access. Real estate signs shall not exceed nine square
feet in size. No person shall erect, maintain or permit the erection of, for real estate advertising purposes, any balloon, flag,
pennant or other floating or inflatable device anchored to the ground, or to any other structure.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.041)
Sec. 3.828 Wall Signs
(a) The frames and panels of all signs which are to be attached to the wall of a building shall be constructed of wood, metal or
other durable materials approved by the building official. Standard sign hocks, expansion bolts or through bolts with the washers
on the inside of the wall shall be used, depending on the weight and area of the sign and the condition of the wall to which it is to
be attached as required by the building official. Before the sign can be installed, the commercial sign operator or building owner
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/414
must ensure that the wall, when the sign is affixed to it, will be able to withstand a wind pressure load of at least 30 pounds per
square foot.
(b) Nonelectric wall signs may not project more than 12 inches from the face of the building. Electrical wall signs may extend
no more than 18 inches from the building face.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.042)
Sec. 3.829 Projecting Signs; Generally; Installed on a Pipe
(a) Generally. Projecting signs may not extend more than nine feet from the property line. Additionally, the outer edge of the
sign shall remain at least two feet inside the curbline and shall not begin beyond a distance of three feet from the property line. A
clear space of not less than seven feet shall be provided between the bottom of the sign and the sides grade or ground level.
(b) Installed on a Pipe. If the building is set back from the property line, projecting sign may be installed on a pipe overhang,
provided that:
(1) The pipe may be set inside the property line, unless the line is more than 25 feet away from the street curb. In
the latter instance, the pipe may be set at the property side of the sidewalk or if there is no sidewalk no closer than 10
feet to the curb. If the pipe is set in an area that can be traversed by vehicles, it must be surrounded by curbing as
specified by the building official.
(2) Projecting signs must comply with the regulation clearances over sidewalks and distances from curblines.
(3) No wooden poles or timbers shall be used. Only sound, straight steel, galvanized or iron pipes in good condition,
free from all major flaws and defects and painted with weatherproof paint, are authorized.
(4) All pipes must be set at least three feet in the ground and embedded in concrete.
(5) The crossarms of angle iron for side guys are to be bolted or welded to the pipes in a secure manner, and side
guys are to be of galvanized cable.
(6) The pipe must extend far enough above the top of the sign to provide space for a suitable headlift, which must be
galvanized cable.
(7) All pipes shall be of sufficient diameter and strength to properly support the weight of the signs which are to be
installed on them as follows:
Weight in Pounds Size in Inches
Up to 75 3
From 75 to 250 4
From 250 to 325 5
From 325 to 400 6
(8) All pipes used for signs weighing in excess of 100 pounds shall be of the well-casing type or the equivalent.
Lighter weight pipe may be used for signs weighing 100 pounds or less and situated entirely within the property lines.
In no case, however, may a sign be supported by a pipe less than three inches in diameter.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.043)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/414
Sec. 3.830 Pole or Pole-Mounted Signs
(a) No pole, post or standard used to support any sign or floodlight shall be set up or upon any sidewalk, street or public
property.
(b) Pole-mounted, nonlettered, physical representative signs, including without limitation, pole-mounted automobiles, boats or
airplanes, are prohibited. No pole or pylon-mounted sign shall exceed 65 feet in height from ground level to top edge.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.044)
Sec. 3.831 Roof Signs
(a) Roof signs shall be used for on-premises advertising only, subject to limitation with regard to historic districts as set forth in
Section 3.858.
(b) A roof sign shall not exceed 10 feet in total height above that portion of the roof of the building or structure over which it is
erected. All such signs shall be constructed of durable material. Adequate provision shall also be made for grounding all metallic
parts of all roof signs as a protection against lightning. No roof sign shall be erected so as to extend over a sidewalk, street or
other public property.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.045)
Sec. 3.832 Marquee Signs
Marquee signs not more than four feet tall may extend around three sides of the marquee, subject to any restrictions with regard to
historic districts as set forth in Section 3.858. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.046)
Secs. 3.833 - 3.835 Reserved
Division 4. Billboards
Sec. 3.836 Size, Distance and Height Restrictions
(a) Extraterritorial Jurisdiction. All billboards erected within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city shall not exceed 200
square feet in size, shall not be closer than 400 feet apart, measured along the same side of the highway or street and shall have a
maximum height of 20 feet with a minimum ground clearance of 8 feet.
(b) City Limits. All billboards erected within the city shall not exceed 80 square feet in size, shall not be closer than 400 feet
apart, measured along the same side of the highway or street and shall have a maximum height of 20 feet with a minimum ground
clearance of 8 feet.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.060)
Sec. 3.837 Setback Requirements
(a) Generally. All billboards are to be set back 400 feet from the boundaries of the following: all parks, avenues, cemeteries,
publicly owned sports complex boundaries, cultural facilities, historic buildings or structures, historical districts, schools, and
universities and facilities of higher education.
(b) Setback From Property Lines. Billboards which measure 80 square feet or more of sign face area shall be set back a
minimum of 10 feet from any property line. Billboards which measure 80 square feet or less of sign face area shall be set back a
minimum of 5 feet from property lines.
(c) Distance From Overpass, Railings and the Like. All billboards shall be set back a distance at least 15 feet from the railing of
an overpass or bridge on any road, street, highway or expressway.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.061)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/414
Sec. 3.838 Engineer Certifications
(a) A drawing certified by a structural engineer shall be required for each type of billboard which exceeds 200 square feet of
sign face and is over 50 feet high. The drawing shall attest that the particular kind of sign will withstand a wind load of 30 pounds
per square foot and shall state the depth to which the support structure must be set for the specific type of soil conditions. These
drawings shall be kept on file in the building inspections department.
(b) If an operator requests a permit for a billboard measuring 200 square feet or less of sign face and which is under 50 feet
high, he or she may utilize an engineer certified chart in lieu of the drawing referenced herein. This chart shall specify the pipe
diameter for various sizes of signs, as well as the foundation of the signs according to general soil conditions. The chart must be
certified by a structural engineer registered in the state. A copy of the chart shall be submitted to the department of building
inspections with permit application. At the time an application for a permit is made, the operator shall note on the application
what specific type of soil is prevalent at the site.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.062)
Sec. 3.839 Billboards on Public Property
No billboard, or any part thereof, shall be located on or above any public property or street right-of-way, unless approved by city
ordinance. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.063)
Sec. 3.840 Residential Zones
No billboards shall be erected on property zoned as residential or historical. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155,
Section 155.064)
Sec. 3.841 Construction
Every billboard shall satisfy the following construction requirements:
(1) The billboard shall be firmly and solidly constructed to withstand a wind load of at least 30 pounds per square
foot of area.
(2) An open space of at least eight feet shall be provided between the bottom of the billboard and the ground. If
necessary, support bracing for the sign may extend through the open space.
(3) All billboards exceeding 20 feet in height shall be of fireproof construction.
(4) Base aprons measuring not less than 24 inches high shall be attached to the bottom of all billboards with sign
faces measuring 10 feet or more in height and 40 feet or more in width.
(5) All service platforms shall have a jack or support at each structural upright and shall have a minimum width of
20 inches of worker's walking surface. Service platforms shall be mandatory on all billboards measuring more than 12
feet between ground level and the bottom of the sign face.
(6) All exposed wood or metal surfaces, including treated but unpainted stringers, platforms, jacks or other supports,
excepting galvanized metal, shall be painted, both front and back, upon installation of the billboard.
(7) Billboards shall be designed and emplaced not to create a traffic hazard near street intersections or railroad
crossings. Billboards shall not be positioned in a way which obscures or physically interferes with a traffic sign, signal
device or a driver's view of approaching, merging or intersecting traffic.
(8) Billboards shall not be illuminated in a manner which interferes with the effectiveness of or obscures an official
traffic sign, signal or device nor may the light emitted from any billboard cause glare to or impede the vision of the
driver or any motor vehicle.
(9) There shall be a distance of 14 feet between the ground and the bottom rung of any ladder which is permanently
attached to the billboard structure.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/414
(A) The 14 foot separation between the bottom rung of the ladder and the ground is necessary to ensure public
safety. Accordingly, billboards existing on the effective date of the article which do not meet this standard shall
not be awarded nonconforming status.
(B) The sign inspector is authorized to issue citations to any billboard operator whose signs are in violation of
this section.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.065)
Sec. 3.842 Maintenance
All billboards must be kept in good repair. If the lot on which the billboard is located is undeveloped, the area between the
billboard and the street or highway to which it is oriented, as a well as a 25 foot radius around the support pole, must be kept free
of all sign materials, weeds, debris, trash and other refuse. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.066)
Secs. 3.843 - 3.845 Reserved
Division 5. Portable Signs
Sec. 3.846 Inspection; Wiring; Certification
All portable electric signs must be wired by and certified by a master electrician or must carry the label of a testing company or
organization named in the National Electrical Code. Wiring at the premise where the sign is displayed must be by a master
electrician. Heavy duty grounded extension cords may be used for temporary portable signs. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV,
Chapter 155, Section 155.080)
Sec. 3.847 Location
No portable sign, whether electric or nonelectric, shall be placed on any sidewalk, street or other public thoroughfare. (1995 Code
of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.081)
Sec. 3.848 Lessors of Portable Signs; Fee
All persons engaged in the business of leasing portable signs shall pay a fee of $20.00 per sign owned for lease or rent. No lessee
of a portable sign shall be required to pay a separate permit fee. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section
155.082)
Sec. 3.849 Permit; Application by Owner of On-Premise Portable Signs
The applicant for a permit required under this section shall furnish the following information upon the application for a permit:
(1) The applicant is applying for a permit as the owner of the sign for use on his own premises only.
(2) The portable sign is either electric or nonelectric.
(3) The premises where the sign is to be located while in use.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.083)
Sec. 3.850 Permit; Grounds for Denial
No permit shall issue for any portable sign if:
(1) The top of the sign, including decorative trim, is more than eight feet above the ground;
(2) The sign has built within it or affixed to it any type of rotating beacon electric light;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/414
(3) The sign includes animation;
(4) The sign utilizes exposed electric bulbs and is found, upon inspection, to be missing one or more bulbs, thus
exposing a socket.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.084)
Sec. 3.851 Duration of Permit
No single permit shall be issued for an off-premises portable sign for more than 21 consecutive days. (1995 Code of Ordinances,
Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.085)
Secs. 3.852 - 3.855 Reserved
Division 6. Special Restrictions
Sec. 3.856 Territorial Application of Special Restrictions
The special restrictions set forth in this division shall apply to the original 49 blocks of inner city Gonzales. (1995 Code of
Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.100)
Sec. 3.857 Size of Signs
(a) The maximum allowable size of signs for a particular building shall be determined on the basis of the number of frontage
feet of that building and the following chart:
Frontage
(Feet of Building)
Maximum Area of Sign Face
(Square Feet)
0-25 30
26-50 40
51-100 64
101-150 75
151-200 100
201-250 125
251-300 150
301-350 175
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/414
351-400 200
(b) A business may have one or more signs on its facade; however, the total square footage of all signs must not exceed that
allowed in subsection (a) above.
(c) Subsections (a) and (b) above apply to the front of corner buildings with the exception that a corner building may have
additional signs displayed on the side of the building, with the size of such signs to be determined by the side frontage feet of the
building. In no event will the total square footage of all signs displayed on the side of a building exceed 40 square feet.
(d) The maximum allowable size of off-premise commercial signs for a particular lot or parcel of land shall be determined on
the basis of the number of frontage feet of that lot or parcel of land and the following chart:
Frontage
(Feet of Lot or Parcel of Land)
Maximum Area of Sign Face
(Square Feet)
75-149 32
(e) Signs may not be erected closer than 300 feet apart on the same side of a street, avenue, or highway.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.101)
Sec. 3.858 Historic Districts
The following special restrictions shall apply in any historic district within the city:
(1) Exterior neon signs are prohibited.
(2) No sign shall be displayed from the parapet or roof of any building.
(3) No sign shall be erected, constructed, emplaced, attached, located or displayed unless the sign relates to or
advertises a bona fide business conducted in or on the premises to which the sign adjoins.
(4) Interior illumination of any sign is prohibited.
(5) The light source for exterior illumination shall be a steady light concealed by a hood or other acceptable method
of indirect lighting approved by the city building official.
(6) Signs resting upon the sidewalk or curb are prohibited, if not properly anchored or weighted against wind.
(7) The total of all signage including the sandwich signs must not exceed the regulated amount of signage per street
frontage regulation as set forth in Section 3.857. The intent is not to allow clutter.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.102)
Secs. 3.859 - 3.860 Reserved
Division 7. Administration and Enforcement
Sec. 3.861 Sign Inspection
(a) The building official shall inspect annually, or at such other times as he deems necessary, each sign regulated by this article
for the purpose of ascertaining whether the same is secure or insecure, whether it still serves a useful purpose and whether it is in
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/414
need of removal or repair.
(b) The city building official and his duly authorized inspectors shall have the right to visit any site where a sign is being
erected, during reasonable hours, in the discharge of their official duties, for the purpose of making any sign inspection necessary.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.115)
Sec. 3.862 Sign Control Board
(a) Creation and Composition. There is hereby established a sign control board consisting of five members and two alternate
members appointed by the city council. Members and alternates may participate, except that only members will vote. In the event
of a member's absence, the alternate will fulfill those duties.
(b) Terms of Members. Members of the sign control board shall be appointed for a period of two years. In the event of a
vacancy, the city council shall appoint a member to serve the unexpired term. In the event a replacement or reappointment has not
been made at the end of a member's designated term, such member will continue to serve until reappointed or replaced.
(c) Compensation. Members of the sign control board shall serve without compensation.
(d) Officers. The sign control board shall designate the following officers and their term as an officer shall run concurrent with
their term of appointment to the board.
(1) Chairperson. The chairperson shall preside at all meetings where he or she is present. The chairperson shall
implement or cause to have implemented any practice or procedure in the calling of meetings, conduct of meetings or
reporting of activities that he or she considers in the best interest of the board and shall so inform the city council or
consult with the city council when requested and at such times when it appears necessary or desirable.
(2) Vice-Chairperson. The vice-chairperson shall assist the chairperson in directing the total affairs of the board. In
the absence of the chairperson, the vice-chairperson shall assume all duties of the chairperson.
(e) Temporary Chairperson; Quorum. In the event of the absence of the chairperson and vice-chairperson of the sign control
board, the three members constituting the quorum shall elect, for that meeting, a member to preside as acting chairperson and
assume all duties of the chairperson. All motions shall be decided by a simple majority of the members present. A tie vote shall
constitute failure of the motion.
(f) Meetings. The sign control board shall establish one stated meeting per calendar quarter and shall call special meetings as
required to conduct its duties. All stated meetings shall be open to the public. The board shall establish the date, time and place of
the meetings.
(g) Records. All proceedings of the sign control board shall be recorded in minutes of meetings and such minutes shall be
approved and made a matter of public record.
(h) Powers and Duties. The sign control board shall have the following powers and perform the following duties:
(1) The city council authorizes the sign control board to sit as a board of appeals in public hearings for purposes of
this article. In considering the requests for variation to requirements of this article, the sign control board shall
consider, but not be limited to, the degree of variance, the reasons for variance requested, the location of variance
requested, the duration of the requested variance, the effect on public safety, protection of neighborhood property, the
degree of hardship or injustice involved, and the effect of the variance on the general plan for signing within the city.
The sign control board shall grant the variance requested, grant a variance of a greater or lesser nature than requested,
or deny a variance request.
(2) All action on variance requests shall be submitted to the city council for review, and such decisions of the board
shall become final unless reversed or modified by the city council at the second city council meeting following the
sign control board meeting at which formal action was taken by the board. In reviewing the action of the board, or
variance request, the city council shall consider the records made at the hearing before the sign control board.
(3) The sign control board shall conduct continuing studies of sign ordinances in neighboring municipalities as well
as other cities where such study will assist in upgrading the function of signing within the city and make
recommendations to the city council where appropriate.
(4) The sign control board will conduct a continual review of all nonconforming signs and all variances granted and
determine their desirability and effects upon the neighborhood and city and make recommendations to the city council
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/414
where appropriate.
(5) The sign control board will evaluate new signing techniques as such are developed and recommend to the city
council their benefits or disadvantages in the city.
(6) The sign control board may discuss the planning of signing in new or existing developments upon request of the
developer.
(7) The sign control board shall conduct studies, prepare opinions and general plans as requested by the city council.
(8) The sign control board shall perform any duties specified elsewhere in this article.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XV, Chapter 155, Section 155.116)
CHAPTER 4
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 4.100 CABLE TELEVISION*
Division 1. General Provisions
Sec. 4.101 Short Title
This article shall be known and may be cited as the “City of Gonzales Cable Television Regulations.” (1995 Code of Ordinances,
Title IX, Chapter 93, Section 93.01)
Sec. 4.102 Intent and Purpose
It is the intent of the city to:
(1) Promote the public health, safety, and general welfare by providing for the grant of one or more franchises for
the construction and operation of a cable system;
(2) Provide for the regulation of each cable system by the city;
(3) Provide for the payment of fees and other valuable consideration by a franchisee to the city for the privilege of
using the public rights-of-way for construction and operating a cable system;
(4) Promote the availability of cable service to city residents;
(5) Encourage the development of cable as a means of communication between and among the members of the
public and public institutions;
(6) Encourage the development of competitive cable services; and
(7) Encourage the provision of diverse information to the community over cable.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93, Section 93.02)
Sec. 4.103 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following words and their derivations have the meanings defined below. Words not defined are
given their meaning in Section 602 of the Cable Act, 47 USC § 522, and, if none, their common and ordinary meaning, when not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/414
number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The words “must” or “shall” are mandatory, and the word
“may” is permissive.
Access Channel. Any channel set aside for public use, educational use, or governmental use without a charge by the franchisee for
channel usage.
Application. A proposal to construct and operate a cable system within the city, transfer a franchise, renew a franchise, or modify
a franchise. An application includes the initial proposal plus all subsequent amendments or supplements to the proposal and
relevant correspondence.
Cable Act. The cable communications policy act of 1934, 47 USC §§521 et seq.
Cable System. A facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple
subscribers within the city. Such term does not include a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or
more television broadcast stations; a facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple unit dwellings under common
ownership, control, or management, unless such facility uses any public right-of-way; a facility of a common carrier that is
subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1984, 47 USC §201 et. seq., except that
such a facility will be considered a cable system to the extent it is used in the transmission of video programming directly to
subscribers; or any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems.
Cable Service. The one-way transmission of video or other programming service to subscribers together with any subscriber
interaction provided in connection with such service.
Control of a Franchise or Applicant. The legal or practical ability to direct the affairs of the franchisee or applicant either directly
or indirectly, whether by contractual agreement or majority ownership of an economic interest.
City. The city in its present incorporated form or in any form which may subsequently be adopted.
FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
Franchise. The right granted by the city to a franchisee to construct, maintain and operate a cable system over, on, or under
streets, roads and all other public ways, easements and rights-of-way within all or specified areas of the city. The term does not
include any license or permit that may be required by other laws, ordinances or regulations of the city for the privilege of
transacting and carrying on a business within the city or for disturbing the surface of any street or public thoroughfare.
Franchise Agreement. A contract entered into in accordance with the provisions of this article between the city and a franchisee
that sets forth the terms and conditions under which the franchise will be exercised.
Franchisee. Any person granted a franchise pursuant to this article.
Gross Revenues. All revenues derived by a franchisee from the operation of its cable system within the city, including, but not
limited to, revenues derived from cable service, home shopping channels, institutional services, rental or lease of equipment,
installation fees or ancillary services.
Person. Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, joint venture or organization of any kind and the lawful trustee,
successor, assignee, transferee or personal representative thereof.
Subscriber. Any person who legally receives any one or more of the services provided by the cable system.
System Malfunction. An equipment or facility failure that results in the loss of satisfactory service on one or more channels. A
malfunction is major if it affects eleven (11) or more subscribers.
Transfer of a Franchise. Any transaction in which an ownership of other interest in a franchisee is transferred from one person or
group of persons to another person or group of persons so that control of the franchisee is transferred, or the rights held by the
franchisee under a franchise agreement are transferred or assigned to another person or group of persons.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93, Section 93.03)
Secs. 4.104 - 4.105 Reserved
Division 2. Franchise Standards
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/414
Sec. 4.106 Grant of Authority; Franchise Required
The city may grant one or more franchises in accordance with this article. No person may construct or operate a cable system in
the city without a current and valid franchise granted by the city. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93, Section 93.15)
Sec. 4.107 Franchise Characteristics
(a) A franchise authorizes use of the public rights-of-way for installing and maintaining cables, wires, lines, and other facilities
to operate a cable system within the city, but does not expressly or implicitly authorize the franchisee to provide service to, install
cables, wires, lines, or any other equipment or facilities upon private property without owner consent (except for use of
compatible easements pursuant to 47 USC § 541(X)(2)), or to use publicly or privately owned utility poles or conduits without a
separate agreement with the owners.
(b) A franchise is nonexclusive and will not expressly or implicitly preclude the issuance of other franchises to operate cable
systems within the city or affect the city's right to authorize use of public rights-of-way to other persons as it determines
appropriate.
(c) A franchise conveys no property right to the franchisee or right to renewal other than as may be required by state or federal
law.
(d) A franchise agreement constitutes a contract between the franchisee and the city once it is accepted by the franchisee. A
franchisee contractually commits itself to comply with the terms, conditions and provisions of the franchise agreement and with
all applicable laws, ordinances, codes, rules, regulations, and orders.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93, Section 93.16)
Sec. 4.108 Franchise Subject to Other Laws, Police Power
(a) A franchisee is subject to and must comply with all applicable local, city, state and federal laws, ordinances, codes, rules,
regulations, and orders. A franchisee is also subject to the city's police power in accordance with state law. Where the city has
granted multiple franchises so as to establish the provision of cable service on a competitive basis, it shall be the obligation of
each franchisee to operate its system so as to compete fairly.
(b) A franchisee or other person may not be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions at this article or a
franchise agreement by any failure of the city, upon one or more occasions, to require compliance or performance.
(c) The city may, on its own motion or at the request of an applicant or franchisee for good cause shown, waive any
requirement of this article.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93, Section 93.17)
Sec. 4.109 Interpretation of Franchise Terms
(a) The provisions of this article will apply to a franchise agreement as if fully set forth in the franchise agreement. The express
terms of this article will prevail over conflicting or inconsistent provisions in a franchise agreement unless such agreement predated
the effective date of this article.
(b) The provisions of a franchise agreement will be liberally construed in order to effectuate its purposes and objectives
consistent with this article and the public interest.
(c) A franchise agreement will be governed by and construed in accordance with state laws.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93, Section 93.18)
Sec. 4.110 Applications for Grant, Renewal, Modification or Transfer of Franchises
(a) An application must be filed with the city for grant of a new franchise, renewal of a franchise under either the formal or
informal procedures in accordance with Section 626 of the Cable Act, 47 USC §546, modification of a franchise agreement, or a
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/414
transfer of a franchise. An applicant has the burden to demonstrate compliance with all requirements of this article and of federal
law.
(b) To be acceptable for filing, an application must be submitted in the number of copies required by the city, be accompanied
by the application filing fee where required, conform to any applicable request for proposals, and contain all required information.
All applications must include the names and addresses of persons authorized to act on behalf of the applicant with respect to the
application.
(c) All applications accepted for filing must be made available by the city for public inspection. The city shall advertise the
receipt of all accepted applications in accordance with standard procedure.
(d) An application for the grant of a new franchise may be filed only in response to a request for proposals issued by the city
and publicly advertised. A person that desires to file an application may file a request with the city to issue a request for
proposals. Such a request should indicate the nature of that person's interest and why it is believed that the issuance of a new
franchise would serve the public interest. An application which does not conform to the requirements of a request for proposals
may be considered nonresponsive and returned.
(e) An application for the grant of a new franchise must contain at minimum the following information:
(1) Name and address of the applicant and the identification of the ownership and control of the applicant,
including: the names and addresses of the ten largest holders of an ownership interest in the applicant, and all known
persons with 5% or more ownership interest; the persons who control the applicant; all officers and directors of the
applicant; and any other business affiliation and cable system ownership interest of each named person;
(2) An indication of whether the applicant, or any person controlling the applicant, or any officer or major
stockholder of the applicant, has been adjudged bankrupt, and had a cable franchise revoked, or not renewed, or been
found guilty by any court or administrative agency of a violation of a security or antitrust law, or a felony, or any
crime involving moral turpitude; and if so, identification of any such person or entity and a full explanation of the
circumstances;
(3) A demonstration of the applicant's technical, legal and financial ability to construct and operate the proposed
cable facility, including identification of key personnel;
(4) A description of applicant's prior experience in cable or similar operations and identification of any other
communities in which the applicant or its principals have, or had, a cable franchise or an interest therein, including the
identification of any litigation involving any such franchisees and their franchising authorities;
(5) Identification of the area to be served by the cable system if the entire city is not being served;
(6) A detailed description of the physical facility proposed, including channel capacity, technical, technical design,
performance characteristics, headend, and any access facilities to be provided;
(7) A description of the construction of the proposed system, including an estimate of above-ground and belowground
mileage and its location, the proposed construction schedule, a description, where appropriate, of how services
will be converted from existing facilities to new facilities, and information on the availability of space on poles and
conduits including, where appropriate, an estimate of the cost of rearrangement of facilities to accommodate such use;
(8) A description of the services to be provided initially;
(9) The proposed rate structure including charges for each service tier, installation, converters, and other equipment
or services;
(10) A demonstration of how the proposal will reasonably meet the future cable-related needs and interests of the
community, including a description of how the proposal will meet the needs described in any recent community needs
assessment conducted for the city;
(11) Pro forma financial projections for the first five years of the franchise term, including statement of income,
balance sheets, sources and uses of funds, and schedule of capital additions, with all significant assumptions explained
in notes or supporting schedules;
(12) An affidavit of the applicant or authorized officer certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the
application, and acknowledging the enforceability of application commitments, and certifying that the proposal meets
all federal and state requirements; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/414
(13) Any other information necessary to conform with the requirements of a request for proposals and information
that the city may request of the applicant.
(f) An application for modification of a franchise must include, at minimum, the following information:
(1) The specific modification requested;
(2) The justification for the requested modification, including the impact of the requested modification on
subscribers and others, and the impact on the applicant if the modification is not approved;
(3) A statement whether the modification is sought pursuant to Section 625 of the Cable Act, 47 USC §545, and, if
so, a demonstration that the requested modification meets the legal standards of 47 USC § 545; and
(4) Any other information necessary for the city to make a determination.
(g) An application for renewal of a franchise must comply with the requirements of Section 4.124.
(h) An application for approval of a transfer of a franchise must comply with Section 4.125.
(i) To be acceptable for filing an application must be accompanied by a filing fee in the following amount, as appropriate:
(1) For a new franchise: $7,500.00.
(2) For a renewal of a franchise: $7,500.00.
(3) For a transfer of a franchise: $2,500.00.
(4) For modification of a franchise pursuant to 47 USC §545: $2,000.00.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93, Section 93.19)
Sec. 4.111 Grant of Franchise
(a) The city may grant a franchise for a period of time which the city council determines in its to discretion to best serve the
public interest but not in excess of ten years.
(b) The city may make the grant of a franchise conditioned upon the completion of construction within a prescribed time or
upon the performance of other specific obligations, specifying in the franchise agreement that failure to timely comply with the
condition will cause the franchise to become null and void without further action by the city.
(c) In evaluating an application for a new franchise, the city shall consider the applicant's character; the applicant's technical,
financial, and legal qualifications to construct and operate the proposed system; the nature of the proposed facilities, equipment,
and services; the applicant's record in other communities, if any; and whether the proposal will meet anticipated community needs
and serve the public interest.
(d) Based upon the application, the written and oral testimony and other material presented at a public hearing before the
council, and any other information relevant to the application, the council shall decide whether to grant or deny a franchise
application. If two or more competing applications are filed in response to a request for proposals, the council shall grant the
application which it considers to represent the highest and best bid in terms of the overall public interest. However, the council is
not obligated to grant any application if it considers that the public interest is not served thereby.
(e) If the council grants a franchise application, the council and the applicant must agree on the terms of a franchise agreement
within 90 calendar days from the date of the resolution making the grant. This period may be extended for a good cause by the
council. If agreement is not reached with the council within 90 calendar days or if the period is not extended, the franchise grant
will be null and void without further action by the city.
(f) The text of a proposed franchise agreement must be consistent with the requirements of this article and be made available by
the city to the public and advertised as required by city procedure.
(g) After complying with the requirements of subsections (c) through (f) above, the council shall, follow a public hearing
approve or disapprove the proposed franchise agreement by resolution.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/414
(h) The grant of an initial franchise or a renewed franchise may be subject to a franchise acceptance fee in an amount not to
exceed the city's out-of-pocket costs in considering the application, less the amount of the filing fee. Within 30 calendar days of
the date of the resolution approving the franchise agreement, the city must notify the approved applicant of the amount of any
franchise acceptance fee and its method of calculation. If the franchise acceptance fee is not paid within 60 calendar days of the
date of the council resolution approving the franchise agreement, the grant will be null and void. Prior to the franchise becoming
effective, the approved applicant must demonstrate compliance with the surety, insurance and similar provisions of the franchise
agreement.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93, Section 93.20)
Sec. 4.112 Municipal Cable Operation
(a) If the city grants a franchise to a municipal entity to provide cable service within the city, the provisions of this section shall
also apply to such a franchisee.
(b) A municipal franchise entity shall be a corporate entity established under state law.
(c) A franchise agreement with a municipal entity shall not contain terms and conditions which, when considered in their
totality, are unreasonably more favorable or less burdensome than those contained in an agreement between the city and a
privately owned competitor. However, this provision is not intended to preclude the city from enforcing less favorable or more
burdensome terms of a franchise agreement with a privately owned cable operator if those terms were freely and voluntarily
agreed to by the private operator at the time the franchise agreement was executed.
(d) A municipal entity which provides utility service in addition to cable service shall take all reasonable precautions to ensure
that its cable operations are not cross-subsidized by its utility operations. Among other things, the cable operations shall be
conducted by a separate department which shall have its own books of account that carefully segregate all costs and revenues
from utility operations. All costs directly attributed to cable operations, including any shared building and personnel costs, shall
be borne by the cable department. The cable department shall also bear a fair share of all general overhead and indirect costs of
the municipal entity according to an equitable formula.
(e) Relative to the television signals to be carried on the system of a municipal entity, that entity shall establish an independent
citizens' advisory committee which shall be responsible for selecting the identity of the signals. However, the municipal
franchisee shall have the right to establish the selection parameters, such as the number of signals to be carried of each general
type, and impose cost limits.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93, Section 93.21)
Sec. 4.113 Insurance; Surety; Indemnification
(a) Unless a franchise agreement specifies otherwise, the following insurance coverage shall be in force at all times during the
franchise period: workman's compensation insurance to meet all state requirements, and general comprehensive liability
insurance with respect to the construction, operation and maintenance of a cable system, including the operation of motor
vehicles, in the following minimum amounts:
(1) For bodily injury, including death, $1,000,000.00 for any one person, and $2,000,000.00 for any one accident;
(2) For property damage $1,000,000.00; and
(3) For damages resulting from a liability of any nature that may arise from or be occasioned by the operation of the
cable system, including any communication over the cable system, excepting programming on government channels,
$2,000,000.00.
(b) All insurance policies must be with sureties qualified to do business in Texas and in a form approved by the city attorney.
The city may require in a franchise agreement coverage and amounts in excess of the above minimum.
(c) A franchise must, at its sole cost and expense, indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the city, its officials, boards,
commissions, agents and employees, against any and all claims, suits, causes of action, proceedings and judgments for damages
or equitable relief arising out of the construction, maintenance or operation of its cable system regardless of whether the act or
omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by the franchise. This provision includes, but is not limited to, claims
arising out of copyright infringements or a failure by the franchisee to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors, or
licensees of programs to be delivered by the cable system.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/414
(d) The franchise agreement may require the franchisee to have in force at all times a performance bond or an irrevocable letter
of credit in an amount as necessary to ensure the faithful performance by the franchisee of its obligation under the franchise
agreement. Such surety instruments must be provided by an entity qualified to do business in the state and in a form approved by
the city attorney.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93, Section 93.22)
Sec. 4.114 Security Fund
(a) Prior to the franchise becoming effective, the city may require a franchisee to post a cash security deposit as specified in the
franchise agreement to be used as a security and to ensure the faithful performance of all provisions of law and the franchise
agreement and compliance with all orders, permits and directions of the city, and the payment by the franchisee of any claims,
liens or taxes due the city which arise by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the system.
(b) The city shall place any such security deposit in an interest bearing account. The interest will accrue to the benefit of the
franchisee but may not be withdrawn; all interest will be added to and become part of the original security fund during the term of
the franchise.
(c) If a franchisee fails to pay the city any fees or taxes due, liquidated damages, damages, or costs or expenses incurred by the
city by reason of any act or default of the franchisee, or if the franchisee fails to comply with any provision of the franchise
agreement that the city reasonably determines can be remedied by an expenditure of the security fund, the city may, after ten
calendar days notice to the franchisee, withdraw the amount with any interest from the security fund. Upon such withdrawal, the
city shall notify the franchisee of the amount and date of the withdrawal.
(d) Within 30 calendar days after notice to it that an amount has been withdrawn by the city from the security fund, the
franchisee must deposit a sum of money sufficient to restore the security fund to the original amount. If the franchisee fails to
restore the security fund to the original amount within 30 calendar days, the entire security fund remaining may be forfeited,
and/or such failure may be considered a material breach of this article and may be used as ground for revocation of the franchise.
(e) The security fund will become the property of the city in the event the franchise is revoked. The franchises is entitled to the
return of the security fund that remains following termination of the franchise, less any outstanding default or unpaid amounts
owed to the city by the franchisee.
(f) The rights reserved to the city with respect to the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the city whether reserved
by this article or authorized by other law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such security fund will
affect any other right the city may have.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93, Section 93.23)
Sec. 4.115 Minimum Facilities and Service
(a) The following minimum requirements for facilities and services apply to all franchises. The city may require that a
franchise exceed these minimum requirements:
(1) A cable system franchised or refranchised after the effective date of this article must have a minimum capacity
of 65 video channels available for immediate or potential use and have the capability for two-way communications.
(2) A cable system may be required to provide one or more access channels for public, educational or governmental
access or reserve channels for future access use.
(3) A cable system must provide leased access channels as required by federal law.
(4) Service to public buildings may be required without charge as set forth in the franchise agreement.
(5) A cable system must provide an emergency override capability to allow city officials to transmit information to
viewers on all channels in the event of a public emergency.
(b) The city may waive minimum requirements of this section where, in the judgment of the city, such waiver is justified in the
public interest.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93, Section 93.24)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/414
Sec. 4.116 Franchise Fee
(a) Unless a franchise agreement provides otherwise, a franchisee, in consideration of the privilege granted under a franchise
for the use of public rights-of-way to construct and operate a cable system, must pay to the city a maximum of 5% or a maximum
allowed by law of the franchisee's gross revenues derived from the operation of its cable system within the city during the period
of its franchise. Franchisee fees are payable quarterly. A franchisee must pay the franchise fee due to the city for the preceding
quarter within 30 calendar days of the end of that quarter.
(b) Any payment of franchise fees to adjust for a shortfall in the quarterly payments for the preceding year must be made no
later than the filing date for the annual financial statements. Adjustments for any overpayment will be credited to subsequent
quarterly payments.
(c) Unless a franchise agreement provides otherwise, franchisee fee payments shall be accompanied by a financial statement
showing the gross revenues received by the franchisee, with separate subtotals for each type of service for which a separate
charge is made, during the period covered by the payments and the number of subscribers served, with subtotals reflecting the
number for each type of service, at the end of the period.
(d) A franchisee must file within three months of the end of its fiscal year the franchisee's annual financial statements for the
preceding year audited by a certified public accountant or certified as accurate by the franchisee's chief financial officer. The
franchisee will bear the cost of the preparation of such financial statements.
(e) The city may inspect and audit any and all books and records of the franchisee, and recompute any amounts determined to
be payable under the franchise. The cost of the audit will be borne by the franchisee if the annual payment to the city is increased
by more than 5% as result of the audit.
(f) In the event that a franchise payment is not received by the city on or before the due date, interest will be charged from the
due date at an interest rate of 1½% per month. In addition the franchisee will pay a late charge of 5% of the amount of such
payment. Interest and late charges will not be imposed for any payment necessary as a result of the yearly adjustment provided
for in subsection (b) above, if the payment to correct for a shortfall does not exceed 10% of the total payments made during the
year. In the event such payment exceeds 10% of the total payments made during the year, the franchisee will be liable for interest
and late charges for the entire amount due.
(g) When a franchise terminates for whatever reason, the franchisee must file with the city within 90 calendar days of the date
its operations cease, a financial statement, audited by a CPA or certified by the franchisee's chief financial officer, showing the
gross revenues received by the franchisee since the end of the previous fiscal year. Adjustments will be made at the time for
franchise fees due to the date that the franchisee's operations ceased.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93, Section 93.25)
Sec. 4.117 Reports and Records
(a) Within three months of the close of its fiscal year, a franchisee must file with the city an annual report that includes the
following information:
(1) A summary of the previous calendar year's activities in development of the system.
(2) A financial statement, including a statement of income, a balance sheet, and the number of subscribers it served
at the end of the year. The statement shall include notes that specify all significant accounting policies and practices
upon which it is based.
(3) A copy of updated maps depicting the location of all trunks where there was construction in the year of the
report.
(4) If the franchisee is a corporation, a list of officers and members of the board and the officers and board members
of any parent corporation; and where a parent corporation's stock is publicly traded, a copy of its most recent annual
report.
(5) A list of all partners or stockholders holding 5% or more ownership interest in the franchisee and any parent
corporation. However, when any such entity has fewer than ten persons holding 5% ownership interest, the ten largest
such holders.
(6) A copy of all the franchisee's rules and regulations applicable to subscribers and users of the cable system.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/414
(b) A franchisee must maintain a complete set of books and records available for inspection upon reasonable prior notice by the
city during normal business hours.
(c) Upon written request of the franchisee and approval by the city attorney, information of a proprietary nature submitted to
the city pursuant to this article or a franchise agreement will not be made available for public inspection, unless otherwise
required to be made available pursuant to applicable law.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93, Section 93.26)
Sec. 4.118 Customer Service Requirements
(a) A franchisee must maintain in the city a business office open during normal business hours with a listed local telephone
number and employ a sufficient number of telephone lines to allow reasonable access by subscribers and members of the public.
When the business office is closed, an answering machine or service capable of receiving service complaints and inquires must be
employed.
(b) A franchisee must have available at all times personnel, equipment and procedures capable of locating and correcting major
system malfunctions. Major system malfunctions must be corrected without delay. Corrective action for all other malfunctions
must be initiated not later than the next business day after the subscriber service call is received, and must be completed as
promptly as possible.
(c) A franchisee must provide each subscriber at the time cable service is installed written instructions for placing a service call,
filing a complaint, or requesting an adjustment. Each subscriber must also be provided with a schedule of the subscriber's rates
and charges, a copy of the service contract, delinquent subscriber disconnect and reconnect procedures, and a description of any
other of the franchisee's policies in connection with its subscribers.
(d) A franchisee must maintain a complete record of service complaints received and action taken. These records must be open
to the city for inspection during normal business hours. Such records must be retained for not less than two years.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93, Section 93.27)
Sec. 4.119 Discrimination Prohibited
(a) Unless approved by the city and to the extent consistent with federal law, no franchisee may in its rates or charges, or in the
availability of the services or facilities of its system, or in any other respect, make or grant undue preferences or advantages to
any subscriber or potential subscriber to the system, including preferences based on the geographic location of the subscriber, or
to any user or potential user of the system, nor subject any such persons to any undue prejudice or any disadvantage.
(b) A franchisee must not deny cable service to any potential subscribers because of the income of the residents of the area in
which the subscribers reside.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93, Section 93.28)
Sec. 4.120 Use of Rights-of-Way
(a) A franchisee must utilize, with the owner's permission, existing poles, conduits or such other facilities whenever possible.
Copies of agreements for use of poles, conduits or other facilities must be filed with the city upon city request.
(b) All transmission lines, equipment and structures must be installed and located to cause minimum interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners. The city may from time to time issue such reasonable rules and regulations
concerning the installation and maintenance of the cable system installed in the public rights-of-way as may be consistent with
this article and the franchise agreement.
(c) Suitable safety devices and practices as required by local, city, state and federal laws, ordinances, regulations and permits
must be used during construction, maintenance and repair of a cable system.
(d) A franchisee must remove, replace or modify at its own expense the installation of any of its facilities within any public
right-of-way when required to do so by the city to allow it to change, maintain, repair or improve a public thoroughfare.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/414
(e) On streets and roads where electrical and telephone utility wiring are located underground, either at the time of initial
construction or subsequently, the cable must also be located underground at the franchisee's expense. Between a street or road and
a subscriber's residence, the cable must be located underground if the electrical and telephone utility wiring are located
underground. If either electric or telephone utility wiring is aerial, a franchisee may install aerial cable except where a property
owner or resident requests underground installation and agrees to bear the additional cost over aerial installation.
(f) A franchisee must obtain any required permits before causing any damage or disturbance to public thoroughfares or private
property as a result of its construction or operations and must restore to their former condition such private property and public
thoroughfares, the latter in a manner approved by the city. If such restoration is not satisfactorily performed within a reasonable
time, the city, or the property owner in the cases of private property, may, after prior notice to the franchisee, cause the repairs to
be made at the expense of the franchisee.
(g) A franchisee may trim trees within public rights-of-way at its own expense as necessary to protect its wires and facilities,
subject to any direction that may be provided by the city. Trees on private property may be trimmed with the consent of the
property owner.
(h) At the request of any person holding a valid building moving permit and upon sufficient notice, the franchisee must
temporarily raise, lower or cut its wires as necessary to facilitate such move upon not less than 72 hours advance notice. The
direct expense of such temporary changes, including standby time, must be paid by the permit holder and the franchisee may
require payment in advance.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93, Section 93.29)
Sec. 4.121 Subscriber Privacy and Unauthorized Reception
(a) A franchisee must protect the privacy of all subscribers pursuant to the provisions of Section 631 of the Cable Act, 47 USC
§551. A franchisee must not condition subscriber service on the subscriber's grant of permission to disclose information which,
pursuant to federal law, cannot be disclosed without the subscriber's explicit consent.
(b) It is unlawful for any person to intercept or use any video, voice, or data signal transmissions over a cable system, unless
such interception or use is authorized by the franchisee or other person having the lawful right to authorize the reception or use.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93, Section 93.30)
Sec. 4.122 Technical Standards
(a) Any cable system constructed within the city must meet or exceed technical standards consistent with this article, the
franchise agreement, and the franchisee's application. The system must meet all FCC technical standards and be capable of
delivering all National Television Systems Committee (NTSC) color and monochrome standards signals and designed to provide
superior picture quality and reliability. All television signals transmitted on a cable system must include any closed captioning
information for the hearing impaired. Antennas, supporting structures, and outside plant used in the system must be designed to
comply with the recommendations of the Electronics Industries Association on tower structures and outside plant.
(b) All construction, installation and maintenance must comply with the National Electric Code, and all state and local
regulations, and good and accepted industry practices.
(c) At the stages of any construction specified in the franchise agreement, the franchisee must perform at its expense, proof of
performance test designed to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this article, the franchise agreement, and FCC
requirements. The franchisee must provide the proof of performance test results promptly to the city.
(d) The city may require periodic proof of performance tests to be performed at the expense of the franchisee. The franchisee
must provide the test results promptly to the city.
(e) The franchisee must advise the city when a proof of performance test is scheduled so that the city may have an observer
present if it desires.
(f) A franchisee must not design, install or operate its facilities in a manner that will interfere with the signals of any broadcast
station, the electrical system located in any building, the cable system of another franchisee, or individual or master antennas used
for receiving television or other broadcast signals.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93, Section 93.31)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/414
Sec. 4.123 Enforcement Remedies
(a) The city has the right to apply any one or combination of the following remedies in the event a franchisee violates any
provision of the law or its franchise agreement:
(1) Impose liquidated damages in such amount, whether per day, incident, or other measure of violation, as provided
in the franchise agreement. Payment of liquidated damages by the franchisee will not relieve the franchisee of its
obligation to meet the franchise requirements.
(2) Reduce the duration of the franchise on such basis as the city determines is reasonable pursuant to the process
specified in Section 4.126.
(3) Revoke the franchise as provided for in Section 4.126.
(b) In determining which remedy or remedies are appropriate, the city must take into consideration the nature of the violation,
the person or persons bearing the impact of the violation, the nature of the remedy required in order to prevent further violations,
and such other matters as the city determines are appropriate.
(c) In addition to or instead of any other remedy, the city may seek legal or equitable relief from any court or competent
jurisdiction.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93, Section 93.32)
Sec. 4.124 Renewal of Franchise
(a) If a franchisee decides to initiate a formal franchise renewal process in accordance with Sections 626(a) through (g) of the
Cable Act, being 47 USC §§ 546(a) through (g), it must notify the city within 30 to 36 months of the franchise expiration date.
Upon such notification, or at the city's own initiative, the city must commence the following process:
(1) The city shall review and evaluate the future cable-related community needs and interests and the franchisee's
past performance. The review and evaluation process must include opportunity for public comment.
(2) Immediately upon completion of the review and evaluation process, the city must provide a copy of its findings
to the franchisee and provide notice that the franchisee may file a renewal application. Such notice must specify the
information to be included in the renewal application and the deadline for filing the application, which must be no
earlier than 30 calendar days following the date of the notice. If the franchisee does not submit a renewal application
by the specified date, it will be deemed not to be seeking renewal of its franchise.
(3) Upon receipt of the renewal application, the city shall publish notice of its receipt and may schedule one or more
public meetings or implement other procedures under which comments from the public on the application may be
received.
(b) In considering a renewal application, the city must consider whether:
(1) The cable operator has substantially complied with the material terms of the existing franchise and with
applicable law;
(2) The quality of the cable operator's service, including signal quality, response to consumer complaints, and billing
practices (but without regard to the mix, quality, or level of cable services or other services provided over the system)
has been reasonable in light of community needs;
(3) The cable operator has the financial, legal and technical ability to provide the services, facilities, and equipment
set forth in its proposal; and
(4) The cable operator's proposal is reasonable to meet the future cable-related community needs and interests,
taking into account the cost of meeting such needs and interests.
(c) The city council shall hold at least one public hearing to consider the application. An advisory committee or a committee of
the council may make recommendations to the council prior to its consideration, a copy of which recommendations shall be made
available to the franchisee in advance of the council's consideration. Following the public hearing on the renewal application, the
council must either:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/414
(1) Pass a resolution agreeing to renew the franchise, subject to the negotiation of a franchise agreement satisfactory
to the city and the franchisee; or
(2) Pass a resolution that makes a preliminary assessment that the franchise should not be renewed.
(d) The council's action under subsection (c) above must be taken within four months of the date of the renewal application
notice to the franchisee required in subsection (a)(2) above.
(e) If a preliminary assessment is made that a franchise should not be renewed, at the request of the franchisee or on its own
initiative, the city must commence an administrative proceeding in accordance with Section 626(c) of the Cable Act, 47 USC §
546(c).
(f) The city shall commence an administrative proceeding, initiated by a hearing order which establishes the issues to be
addressed in the hearing and the procedures to be followed and appoints a presiding officer for the hearing. Upon the completion
of the hearing, the presiding officer shall issue a recommended decision. Parties to the hearing and the public shall have calendar
days to comment on the recommended decision after its issuance.
(g) Based on the recommended decision, the comment and arguments presented, and other evidence of record, the council,
following a public hearing, shall make a final determination on whether to grant or deny the renewal application. The council
shall issue a written decision setting forth the reasons for its decision.
(h) The provisions of subsections (a) through (g) above notwithstanding, a franchisee may submit a proposal for renewal of a
franchise in conformance with 47 USC §546(h). Before taking any action on such an informal proposal, the city must hold one or
more public hearings or implement other procedures under which comments on the proposal from the public may be received.
Following such public hearings or other procedures, the council shall determine whether the franchise should be renewed and the
terms and conditions of any renewal. In making its determination the council shall not consider the pendency of any other
application for a franchise.
(i) Once the council grants a renewal application, the city and the franchisee must agree on a franchise agreement, pursuant to
the procedures specified in Section 4.111(e) through (h), before the renewal becomes effective.
(j) If renewal of a franchise is denied, the city may require the former franchisee to remove its facilities and equipment. If the
former franchisee fails to do so within a reasonable period of time, the city may have the removal done at the former franchisees
and/or surety's expense.
(k) Notwithstanding 47 USC §546(a) through (h), any lawful action to revoke a cable operator's franchise for cause shall not be
negated by the subsequent initiation of renewal proceedings by the cable operator under this section. [47 USC §546(i)].
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93, Section 93.33)
Sec. 4.125 Transfers
(a) A transfer of a franchise must not occur without prior approval of the city.
(b) An application to transfer a franchise must meet the requirements of Section 4.110 and provide complete information on the
proposed transaction, including details on the legal, character, financial, technical and other pertinent qualifications of the
transferee, and on the potential impact of the transfer on subscriber rates. At minimum, the information required in Section
4.110(e)(1)through (4) must be provided by the proposed transferee. The information required in Section 4.110(e)(5) through (10)
must also be provided whenever the proposed transferee expects material changes to occur in those areas.
(c) Final action on an application for transfer of a franchise must be taken by the city council. In making a determination on
such an application, the council will consider the legal, financial, technical and character qualifications of the transferee to operate
the system and whether operation by the transferee would adversely affect the cable service to subscribers or otherwise be
contrary to the public interest.
(d) Approval by the city of a transfer of a franchise does not constitute a waiver or release of any of the rights of the city under
this article or the franchise agreement.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93, Section 93.34)
Sec. 4.126 Revocation or Termination of Franchise
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/414
(a) A franchise may be revoked by the city council for failure to construct as required, operate or maintain the cable system as
required by this article or the franchise agreement or for other material breach of this article or the franchise agreement, including,
but not limited to, a finding in a court of law that the franchisee has engaged in practices within the city that are in violation of
federal or state antitrust laws. However, where the city has issued a franchise specifically conditioned upon the completion of
construction or other specific obligation by a specified date pursuant to Section 4.111(b), failure of the franchisee to complete
construction or comply with other specific obligation as required will result in the automatic forfeiture of the franchise without
further action by the city, unless the city, at its discretion and for good cause demonstrated by the franchisee, grants an extension
of time. If within 30 calendar days following written notice from the city to the franchisee that it is in material breach of this
article of the franchise agreement, the franchisee has not taken corrective action or corrective action is not being actively and
expeditiously pursued, the council, acting on its own motion or upon the recommendation of the city manager, may give written
notice to the franchisee of its intent to consider revocation of the franchise or reducing its term, stating its reasons.
(b) Before final action can be taken, the council shall hold a public hearing at which time the franchisee and members of the
public must be given an opportunity to present evidence and make argument. Following the public hearing, the council shall
determine whether or not to revoke the franchise or reduce its term based on any recommended decision, the evidence and
argument presented at the hearing, and other evidence of record. The council's determination shall be reflected in a written
opinion setting forth the reasons for its decision.
(c) Any franchise may, at the option of the city, be revoked 120 calendar days after as assignment for the benefit of creditors or
the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over the business of the franchisee, whether in a receivership, reorganization,
bankruptcy assignment for the benefit of creditors, or other action or proceeding, unless within that 120-day period:
(1) Such assignment, receivership or trusteeship has been vacated; or
(2) Such assignee, receiver or trustee has fully complied with the terms and conditions of this article and the
franchise agreement and has executed an agreement, approved by the court, having jurisdiction, assuming and
agreeing to be bound by the terms, and conditions of the franchise.
(d) In the event of foreclosure or other judicial sale of any of the facilities, equipment or property of a franchisee, the city may
revoke the franchise by serving notice upon the franchisee and the successful bidder at the sale, in which event the franchise and
all rights and privileges of the franchise will be revoked 30 calendar days after serving such notice, unless:
(1) The city has approved the transfer of the franchise to the successful bidder; and
(2) The successful bidder has covenanted and agreed with the city to assume and be bound by the terms and
conditions of the franchise.
(e) If the city revokes a franchise, or if for any other reason a franchisee abandons, terminates or fails to operate or maintain
service to its subscribers, the following procedures and rights are effective:
(1) The city may require the former franchisee to remove its facilities and equipment. If the former franchisee fails
to do so with a reasonable period of time, the city may have the removal done at the franchisee's and/or surety's
expense.
(2) If a cable system is abandoned by a franchisee, the city may sell, assign or transfer all or part of the assets of the
system.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93, Section 93.35)
Sec. 4.127 Continuity of Service Mandatory
(a) It is the right of all subscribers to receive all available services from the franchisee as long as their financial and other
obligations to the franchisee are satisfied.
(b) In the event of a termination or transfer of the franchise for whatever reason, the franchisee must do everything in its power
to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service through the existing facilities unless the subscribers can
reasonably be served by a competing cable operator. Where necessary, the franchisee must cooperate with the city to operate the
system for a temporary period following termination or transfer as required to maintain continuity of service to all subscribers.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93, Section 93.36)
Sec. 4.128 Unlawful Solicitation or Acceptance of Gifts
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/414
It is unlawful for any person to offer any gift, favor, loan, service, promise, employment or anything of value to a city official or
employee, or for a city official or employee to solicit or accept any such thing of value, for the purpose of influencing the grant,
modification, renewal, transfer, or any other matter affecting a franchise or the administration or enforcement of this article.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93, Section 93.37)
Sec. 4.129 Rate Regulation
(a) Authority. The authority for the regulation of basic service by the city is the Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act of 1992 (“Cable Act of 1992”).
(b) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to implement the rate regulation provisions of the Cable Act of 1992 and to
administer Federal Communications Commission (FCC) requirements. Should the FCC modify the provisions of their rules and
regulations, the city shall comply with and administer the modified rules and regulations.
(c) Rate Regulation Process.
(1) The cable operator has 30 days from the date of notification to submit schedules and supporting information.
Justification will be provided on FCC form 193 (benchmark calculation). The cable operator may invoke a cost of
service review on the grounds that its costs require higher rates than the benchmark allow.
(2) The city shall, within 30 days of receipt of the filing of the request, issue a written order that:
(A) Allows the proposed rates to take effect.
(B) Disallows the proposed rates.
(C) Extends the time to make a decision.
(i) If the cable operator is using benchmark rates, the extended time shall be 90 days.
(ii) If the cable operator is using cost of service, the extended time shall be 120 days.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93, Section 93.38)
Sec. 4.130 Access Facilities
(a) If requested by the city, applications for a franchise or franchise renewal shall include proposals for the provision of access
channels sufficient to meet community needs during term of franchise as determined by city, and shall specify what grants, if any,
it is willing to make for equipment and facilities to be used for local program production by cable access users.
(b) Any access channel operations must conform to the following minimum requirements:
(1) Access channels shall be carried on the franchisee's lowest priced service offering.
(2) The franchisee shall have no control over the content of any programming carried on access channels. The city
may require a franchisee, or select a nonprofit corporation or other entity, to manage the access program and to
establish reasonable rules for the use of access channels consistent with the requirements of this article, the franchise
agreement and the intended purpose of such channels. Such rules shall be subject to review and approval by the city.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93, Section 93.39)
Sec. 4.131 Line Extension
Unless a franchise agreement specifies otherwise, it shall be the obligation of a franchisee to serve every area of the city and
provide service to all residents who reasonably request service. In the event that the city limits are extended, a franchisee shall
within six months thereof expand its system so as to serve the annexed area that has a minimum housing density of 30 dwelling
units per cable mile that is not otherwise provided service by a cable system. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93,
Section 93.40)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/414
Sec. 4.132 City Purchase of Cable System; Eminent Domain
(a) The city may, upon the approval of the city council, acquire ownership of, and operate a cable system on behalf of itself or a
municipal entity.
(b) If the city exercises its right to purchase a cable system pursuant to this article or a franchise agreement and the city and
franchisee are unable to agree on a price for the purchase of the system, the price may be determined by arbitration. Upon written
notice by either the city or the franchisee to the other, the dispute must immediately be put to arbitration consistent with the rules
and procedures of the American Arbitration Association. The city and the franchisee will each select a qualified arbitrator. The
two persons selected must select a third qualified arbitrator, and the three arbitrators will constitute a panel whose decision is
binding on both parties. The fees of the last two arbitrators must be paid by the party selecting such person, and the third person
must be compensated one-half by the city and one-half by the franchisee. The general costs of the proceeding must be shared
equally by the city and the franchisee.
(c) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the city reserves the right to exercise the power of eminent domain to
acquire the property of any cable system of any franchisee and to purchase, own and/or operate such system so acquired
consistent with state and federal law.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93, Section 93.41)
Sec. 4.133 Performance Evaluation
(a) The city may periodically evaluate the performance of a franchisee during the franchise term, including an evaluation of the
picture quality and reliability of service rendered. A franchisee shall cooperate fully with this evaluation and supply the city with
all relevant information requested and perform, if requested, any tests reasonably necessary to the evaluation of the system's
technical performance. If the city desires to implement a survey of subscribers in connection with its evaluation of service, a
franchisee shall distribute the city's questionnaire to its subscribers. Any meetings between the city and the franchisee for the
purpose of evaluation shall be publicized in advance and open to the public.
(b) If evaluation indicates the need for modification to the franchise agreement, the city shall attempt to negotiate the necessary
changes. The city shall issue a report to the council of the results of the performance evaluation and any recommended changes to
the franchise agreement as negotiated with the franchisee.
(c) The council may hold a public hearing on any performance evaluation reports. Any franchise agreement modifications must
be approved by the council before they become effective.
(d) If a performance evaluation results in a report that the performance of a franchisee is in material violation of its obligations
under this article or the franchise agreement and the franchisee has failed to undertake adequate corrective measures, the city may
initiate enforcement remedies pursuant to Section 4.123.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93, Section 93.42)
Secs. 4.134 - 4.135 Reserved
Division 3. Administration and Enforcement
Sec. 4.136 Cable Advisory Commission
(a) Purpose and Intent. It is the purpose and intent of the city council to create a permanent cable commission to serve as an
advisory commission to the city council on cable television issues, and to coordinate and promote the use of access channels.
(b) Creation and Composition.
(1) There is hereby created and established the cable commission which shall consist of not more than five citizens
of the city who shall be appointed by the city council.
(2) Members shall be broadly representative of the community interests in cable communications. The cable
commission may elect from its membership such officers and committees as it may determine necessary for the proper
performance of its duties.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/414
(c) Duties. The city cable commission shall advise the city council and make recommendations on all cable related issues,
including but not limited to the following areas:
(1) Oversee compliance with this article, franchise agreements, and FCC rules.
(2) Review and advise council on reports and fillings submitted by TCI and other cable operators.
(3) Participate in the evaluation sessions of the cable operator's performance, including development of criteria to be
used for evaluations.
(4) Review basic rates and requests for increases in rates.
(5) Encourage regular communications and cooperation between two cable operators and subscribers and users of
access channels.
(6) Keep up with technology, FCC rules, and laws affecting telecommunications and cable television.
(d) Administrative Service. The city council may provide contractual, personal and professional service to aid this commission
in performing their requirements to this article and FCC Regulations. All Commission activities in relationship to the city should
be conducted through city staff.
(e) Termination. The commission may be terminated by the city council at any time.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93, Section 93.55)
Sec. 4.137 Responsibility of City Manager
The city manager shall have the responsibility for overseeing the day-to-day administration of cable communication operations
within the city as governed by this article and the applicable franchise agreement. The city manager shall be empowered to take
all administrative actions on behalf of the city except for those actions specified herein which are reserved to the city council or
other named entity. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93, Section 93.56)
Sec. 4.138 Authority of Council to Grant Franchises
The city council has the sole authority to grant franchises, authorize the execution of franchise agreements, modify franchise
agreements, renew franchises, revoke franchises, and authorize the transfer of franchises. Where this article or a franchise
agreement specifies that a certain action will be taken by the city council or other named city entity, that action is reserved to the
named entity. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93, Section 93.57)
Sec. 4.139 Reports
All filings and reports required of franchisees or applicants pursuant to this article or a franchise agreement shall be made with the
city manager unless otherwise specified. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 93, Section 93.58)
Sec. 4.140 Application of Provisions
This article, or an amendment thereto, shall be applicable to all cable franchises issued by the city, whether or not such franchises
were issued prior to the effective date of this article or an amendment thereto. However, this article shall not act to unilaterally
abrogate prior contractual commitments of the city as contained in any franchise agreement. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX,
Chapter 93, Section 93.59)
ARTICLE 4.200 ABOVEGROUND REGULATION OF SURFACE ACTIVITY RELATED TO OIL AND GAS WELL
DRILLING AND PRODUCTION*
Sec. 4.201 Purpose
The exploration, development, and production of oil and gas in the city are activities that necessitate reasonable regulation to
ensure that all property owners, mineral and otherwise, have the right to peaceably enjoy their property and its benefits and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/414
revenues. It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this article to establish reasonable and uniform limitations, safeguards and
regulations for present and future aboveground activity related to oil and gas operation including the exploring, drilling,
developing, producing, transporting and storing of oil and gas and other substances produced in association with oil and gas
within the city to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the public; minimize the potential impact to property and
mineral rights owners, protect the quality of the environment and encourage the orderly production of available mineral resources.
Sec. 4.202 Definitions
All technical industry words or phrases related to the drilling and production of oil and gas wells not specifically defined in this
article shall have the meanings customarily attributable thereto by prudent and reasonable oil and gas industry operators. The
following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Abandonment. As defined by the Texas Railroad Commission and includes the plugging of the well and the restoration of any
drill site as required by this article.
Aboveground Activity. Oil and gas operations that occur at or above the surface of the ground, as defined by HB 40.
Agent. A person designated or appointed by an operator to sign the application for a permit and other documents on behalf of the
operator.
Ambient Noise Level. The all-encompassing noise level associated with a given environment, being a composite of sound from all
sources at the location, constituting the normal or existing level of environment noise at a given location.
Building or Habitable Building. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. The term
“building” shall be construed as if followed by the words “or portions thereof.”
City. The City of Gonzales.
City Code. The Code of Ordinances of the City of Gonzales.
City Attorney. The city attorney of the City of Gonzales.
Closed Loop Mud System. A system utilized while drilling so that reserve pits are not used and instead steel bins are used to
collect all drilling waste.
Commission. The Texas Railroad Commission.
Daylight. The period from sunup to sundown as established for the Gonzales, Texas area by NOAA Solar Calculator, adjusted for
daylight savings as necessary.
Decible (DB). A unit of measuring the intensity of a sound/noise and is equal to 10 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio
of the measured sound pressure squared to a reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals.
Derrick. Any portable framework, tower, mast and/or structure, which is required or used in connection with drilling or reworking
a well for the production of oil and gas.
Drill Site. The premises used during the drilling or re-working of a well or wells located there and subsequent life of a well or
wells or any associated operations.
Drilling. Digging or boring a new well for the purpose of exploring for, developing or producing oil, gas or other hydrocarbons,
or for the purpose of injecting gas, water or any other fluid or substance into the earth.
Drilling Operations. Drilling with drill pipe and pit, running casing, circulating mud and fluids, tripping tools and setting
production casing/tubing.
Drought Contingency Plan. The City of Gonzales Drought Contingency Plan.
Exploration. Geologic or geophysical activities, including seismic surveys, related to the search for oil, gas or other subsurface
hydrocarbons.
Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ). The extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Gonzales as defined by state law.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/414
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA). A separate administration within the United States Department of
Transportation (USDOT), established on January 1, 2000 pursuant to the Motor Carrier Safety Improvement Act of 1999,
dedicated to improving the safety of commercial motor vehicles (CMV) and saving lives.
Fee Schedule. The list of fees found in appendix A [sic] of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Gonzales.
Fire Department. The fire department of the City of Gonzales.
Firewall, Berm and/or Secondary Containment. The rules and regulations of the commission and other state or federal agencies
describing the methods used to contain spills from storage tanks.
Flowback. The process of flowing a completed/fractured well for the purpose of recovering water and residual sand from the gas
stream prior to sending gas down a sales line.
Fracture or Fracturing. The process of breaking up/fracture stimulation fracture of a rock formation.
Gas. Any fluid, either combustible or noncombustible, which is produced in a natural state from the earth and which maintains a
gaseous or rarefied state at standard temperature and pressure conditions and/or the gaseous components or vapors occurring in or
derived from petroleum or natural gas.
Inspector. The city inspector or inspectors designated by the city manager of Gonzales, including city staff or technical advisory
consultants.
Nighttime. The period between sundown to sunup as established for the Gonzales, Texas area by the NOAA Solar Calendar,
adjusted for daylight savings as necessary.
Oil and Gas Well. Any well drilled, to be drilled, or used for the intended or actual production of oil or natural gas. The terms
“oil” or “gas” used in this article shall be interchangeable and shall mean either an oil well or gas well operation.
Operation Site. The area used for development and production and all operational activities associated with oil or gas after
drilling activities are complete.
Operator. For each well, the person listed on the railroad commission form W-1 or form P-4 for an oil or gas well that is, or will
be, actually in charge and in control of drilling, maintaining, operating, pumping or controlling any well, including, without
limitation, a unit operator. If the operator, as herein defined, is not the lessee under an oil or gas lease of any premises affected by
the provisions of this article, then such lessee shall also be deemed to be an operator. In the event that there is no oil or gas lease
relating to any premises affected by this article, the owner of the fee mineral estate in the premises shall be deemed an operator.
Pad Site. The operations area containing the well or wells and accessory building and equipment.
Permit. The surface permit required by the city for any proposed drill site.
Person. Both the singular and the plural and means a natural person, a corporation, association, guardian, partnership, receiver,
trustee, administrator, executor, and fiduciary or representative of any kind.
Protected Use. A habitable building, including but not limited to, a residence, religious institution, public building, hospital
building, school or public park. Structures such as equipment buildings, pump houses and agricultural barns that are occupied on
a daily basis for less than four (4) hours each day shall not be considered a protected use.
Public Building. All buildings used or designed to and intended to be used for the purpose of assembly of persons for such
purposes as deliberation, entertainment, amusement, or health care. Public buildings include, but shall not be limited to, churches,
schools, theaters, assembly halls, auditoriums, armories, mortuary chapels, dance halls, exhibition halls, museums, gymnasiums,
bowling lanes, libraries, skating rinks, courtrooms, restaurants, hospitals.
Public Park. Any land area dedicated to and/or maintained by the city for traditional park-like recreational purpose.
Religious Institution. Any building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship and activities intended primarily for
purposes connected with such worship or for propagating a particular form of religious belief.
Residence. A house, duplex, apartment, townhouse, condominium, manufactured home or other building designed for dwelling
purposes, including those for which a building permit has been issued on the date the application for an surface permit is filed
with the city secretary.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/414
Rights-of-Way. Public rights-of-way including streets, easements and other property within the city and which is dedicated to the
use and benefit of the public.
Safety Data Sheet (SDS). Formerly known as MSDS or material safety data sheets to communicate the hazards of hazardous
chemical products.
School. Any public and private, primary and secondary educational facilities providing education up through and including the
twelfth grade level and any licensed day-care centers, meaning a facility licensed by the state or by the city that provides care,
training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for more than six children under 14 years of age, and less than 24 hours per
day.
Street. Any street, highway, sidewalk, alley, avenue, recessed parking area or other public right-of-way, including the entire rightof-
way.
Surface Permit. The permit required by the city signifying the city regulation of the aboveground activity related to an approved
commission permit to drill an oil or gas well.
Tank. A container, covered or uncovered, used in conjunction with the drilling or production of oil, gas or other hydrocarbons for
holding or storing fluids.
Technical Advisor. Such person(s) familiar with and educated in the oil or gas industry or the law as it relates to oil or gas matters
who may be retained from time to time by the city.
Well. A hole or holes, bore or bores, to any horizon, formation, or strata for the purpose of producing gas, liquid hydrocarbon,
brine water or sulphur water, or for use as an injection well for secondary recovery, disposal or production of gas, or other
hydrocarbons from the earth.
Sec. 4.203 City Inspector
(a) Authority to Issue Orders. The city inspector shall the authority to issue any orders or directives required to carry out the
intent and purpose of this article and its particular provisions. Failure of any person to comply with any such order or directive
shall constitute a violation of this article. The city inspector may be a city staff member or may be a third-party consultant
retained by the city.
(b) Authority to Enter and Inspect. The city inspector shall have the authority upon notice to the operator to enter and inspect
any premises covered by the provisions of this article to determine compliance with the provisions of this article and all
applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards or directives of the state. Failure of any person to permit access to the city inspector
shall constitute a violation of this article. The city inspector shall conduct periodic inspections at least once a year of all permitted
drill sites in the city to determine that the drill sites are operating in accordance with proper safety parameters as set out in this
article and all regulations of the commission.
(c) Authority to Request Records. The city inspector shall have the authority to request and receive any records, including any
records sent to the commission, logs, reports, and the like, relating to the status or condition of any permitted well necessary to
establish and determine compliance with the applicable surface permit. Failure of any person to provide any such requested
material shall be deemed a violation of this article.
(d) Report Violations. The city inspector will report any perceived violation of commission rules and regulations (i.e. spillage)
to the commission within twenty-four (24) hours after observation or after confirming a report from a citizen.
Sec. 4.204 Operator's Agent
Every operator of any well shall designate an agent, who is a resident of the state, upon whom all orders and notices provided in
this article may be served in person or by registered or certified mail. Every operator so designating such agent shall within one
business week notify the city inspector in writing of any change in such agent or such mailing address unless operations within
the city are discontinued.
Sec. 4.205 Surface Permit Required
(a) Permit Required. A person wanting to engage in and operate in oil and gas production activities shall apply for and obtain a
surface permit from the city after receiving the approved commission permit to drill. The permit shall be for all aboveground
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/414
activity related to oil and gas operation. It shall be unlawful for any person acting either for himself or acting as agent, employee,
independent contractor, or servant for any person to drill any well, assist in any way in the site preparation, reworking, fracturing
or operation of any such well or to conduct any activity related to the production of oil or gas without first obtaining a surface
permit issued by the city in accordance with the article. Such activities include, but not limited to reworking, initial site
preparation, drilling, operation, construction of rigs or tank batteries, fracturing and pressurizing.
(b) No Blanket Permits. The operator must apply for and obtain a surface permit for each drill site. Each proposed drill site
shall require a separate permit and shall not be permitted on a “blanket” basis.
(c) Permit Required to Re-Enter Abandoned Well. A surface permit shall not constitute authority for the re-entering and drilling
of an abandoned well. An operator shall obtain a new surface permit in accordance with the provision of this article if the operator
is re-entering and/or drilling an abandoned well.
(d) Permit Expiration Date. A surface permit shall automatically terminate, unless extended for one additional period, if drilling
is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) calendar days from the date of the issuance of the surface permit. Drilling
must commence within one hundred eighty (180) calendar days from the date of the issuance of the surface permit in order to
maintain the validity of the surface permit. The city inspector may extend a surface permit for an additional one hundred eighty
(180) calendar days upon request by the operator and proof that the engineering site plan for the requested surface permit for such
location has not changed.
(e) Other Permits May be Necessary. The surface permits required by this article are in addition to and are not in lieu of any
permit, which may be required by any other provision of this code or by any other governmental agency.
(f) No Additional Permits or Fees. No additional surface permit or filing fees shall be required for:
(1) Existing Wells. Any wells, existing, previously permitted or approved by the city, within the corporate limits of
the city on the effective date of this article;
(2) Drilling Commenced on Effective Date of Article. Any wells which drilling has commenced on the effective
date of this article;
(3) Land Annexed After Effective Date of Article. Any wells in existence or on any wells on which drilling has
commenced on land annexed into the city after the effective date of this article; or
(4) Application Filed Prior to Annexation. Any well that was planned for the land before the ninetieth (90th)
calendar day before the effective date of its annexation and one or more licenses, certificates, permits, approvals, or
other forms of authorization by a governmental entity were required by law for such well and the completed
application for the initial authorization was filed before the date the annexation proceedings were instituted.
(g) No Permit Issued in Floodway. No surface permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled within any floodway as defined
by the most current FEMA map.
(h) Permit in Floodplains. Surface permits may be issued on property located in a floodplains, provided that all water and
drilling materials must be in steel containers except for the concrete pad. An engineer's certificate shall be provided showing no
negative impact on water flow in the floodplains.
(i) City-Owned Property. No surface permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled on city-owned property without the prior
consent of the city council.
(j) Operator Agrees to Comply with Article. By acceptance of any surface permit issued pursuant to this article, the operator
expressly stipulates and agrees to be bound by and comply with the provisions of this article. The terms of this article shall be
deemed to be incorporated in any surface permit issued pursuant to this article with the same force and effect as if this article was
set forth verbatim in such surface permit.
Sec. 4.206 Surface Permit Application and Filing Fees
(a) The surface permit may only be issued subsequent to a commission-approved permit associated with exploration, drilling,
production and transportation.
(b) Application in Writing. Every application for a surface permit issued pursuant to this article shall be in writing signed by
the operator, or an appointed agent duly authorized to sign on his behalf, and filed with the city secretary of the city. As soon as
practical, city secretary shall have the application delivered to the city inspector.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/414
(c) Application Accompanied by Permit Fee. Every application shall be accompanied by a permit fee for each drill site as set
forth in the fee schedule.
(d) Application Shall Include. An application for a surface permit shall include all the requirements of this section of this article
as well as impacted vegetation, creeks and other topographic features, adjacent building and other structures and the measured
distance from the well site to these buildings and structures, temporary and permanent fencing and landscaping. The application
shall include the following information:
(1) Date. The date of the application for a surface permit.
(2) Legal Description. An accurate legal description of the lease property to be used for the oil or gas operation.
Property recorded by plat should reference subdivision, block and lot numbers.
(3) Map. Map showing proposed transportation route and road for equipment, chemicals or waste products used or
produced by the oil or gas operation and the number of truck trips, truck types and weight, loaded and unloaded,
turning movements associated with truck and vehicle traffic, proposed access points and proposed traffic-control
devices.
(4) Well Name. Proposed well name.
(5) Surface Owner Name. Surface owner name(s) and address(es) of the lease property.
(6) Name Mineral Lessee. Mineral lessee name and address.
(7) Name Operator. Operator/applicant name and address and if the operator is a corporation, the state of
incorporation, and if the operator is a partnership, the names and address of the general partners.
(8) Person to Receive Reports. Name and address of individual designated to receive notice.
(9) Supervisory Authority. Name of representative with supervisory authority over all oil or gas operation site
activities and a 24-hour phone number.
(10) Location of Improvements. Location and description of all improvements and structures within three hundred
(300') feet of the well.
(11) Owners. Owner and address of each parcel of property within three hundred (300') feet of the proposed drill
site.
(12) Site Plan. A site plan of the proposed operation site showing the location of all improvements and equipment,
including the location of the proposed well(s) and other facilities, including, but not limited to, tanks, pipelines,
compressors, separators and storage sheds. The site plan shall include all existing utilities, public roadways, driveways
alleys, all public access points, floodways and floodplains.
(13) Emergency Contact Person. The name, address and 24-hour phone number of the person to be notified in case
of an emergency.
(14) Road Maintenance Agreement. An original executed citywide road maintenance agreement signed and
approved by city must be filed with the city secretary that provides that the operator shall repair, at his own expense,
damage to roads or streets caused by the use of heavy vehicles for any activity associated with the preparation,
drilling, production, transportation and operation of oil and or gas wells, in accordance with the rights of the city to
regulate aboveground activity. City shall determine degree of damage and dollar amount owed. Failure of operator to
reimburse city within 30 days of billing may result in forfeiture of security bond.
(15) Public Utilities. A description of public utilities required during drilling and operation.
(16) Water Source. A description of the water source to be used during drilling.
(17) Fees. All required application and surface permit fees.
(18) Noise Management Plan. A noise management plan complying with all requirements of the city. The noise
management plan shall address the following:
(A) Description of proposed equipment and potential noise impacts. This analysis must include a comparison
of the potential noise generation with the applicable noise standards;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/414
(B) Identify all noise mitigation techniques that will be implemented on the site including blankets/curtains,
sound walls, and mufflers for generators and motors, if any;
(C) Best management practices used to reduce the impact of noisier operations such as pipe deliveries and use
of horns for communication; and
(D) Maximum noise levels anticipated at the drill site.
(19) Screening. A screening, fencing and landscape plan detailing compliance with all and escape and screening
requirements required by this article, including a proposed schedule detailing the timing of all landscaping, screening
and fencing to be installed.
(20) Irrigation Plan. A landscape irrigation plan as designed by a state-licensed professional detailing the
appropriate type of irrigation for the site; measures to be taken to adequately irrigate all landscaping, including
indicating the water source for irrigation and the proposed efforts to replace dead or dying screening vegetation. All
trees on site shall be irrigated by a bubbler system.
(21) Encroachment Agreement. A copy of all applicable right-of-way encroachment agreements.
(22) Dust Mitigation Plan. A dust mitigation plan detailing measures to be implemented to mitigate and suppress
dust generated at the drill site and the private vehicle access route, including a mud shaker for vehicles exiting the site.
(23) Waste. A waste management plan that addresses human, solid and drilling production waste.
(24) Third-Party Contracts. Copies of all third-party contracts related to:
(A) Emergency services, including firefighting and control of well;
(B) Site operations and maintenance; and
(C) Well monitoring and testing.
(25) Commission Permit Required. A copy of the approved commission permit to drill together with attachments
and survey plats which are applicable to the drill and operation sites.
(26) Stormwater Pollution. A copy of the stormwater pollution prevention plan as required by the Environmental
Protection Agency. A copy of the notice of intent shall be submitted to the city five (5) calendar days prior to the
commencement of any onsite activity.
(27) Depth of Usable Water. A copy of the determination by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
(TCEQ) of the depth of usable quality groundwater.
(28) Insurance and Security. Evidence of insurance and security requirements under this article.
(29) Sworn Statement. A statement, under oath, signed by the operator, or designated representative, that the
information submitted with the application is, to the best knowledge and belief of the operator or designated
representative, true and correct.
Sec. 4.207 Surface Permits; Procedure
(a) Permit Required. A surface permit shall be required for all proposed drill sites.
(b) Setback. Any application that has proposed a drill site that is three hundred feed (300') or less from a protected use shall be
rejected. This provision applies to any existing building, including but not limited to, a residence, religious institution, public
building, hospital building, school or public park or for which a building permit has been issued on the date the application for a
permit is filed with the city secretary. Drill sites located more than three hundred feet (300') from such properties, may be
approved by the city inspector. For the purpose of such surface permit, the measurement of the three hundred feet (300') distance
shall be made from the well bore, in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest exterior point
of the building.
(c) Notice and Sign. Upon notification by the city inspector that the permit application is complete, within ten (10) days,
operator/applicant shall publish notice in local newspaper for two consecutive weeks that a permit application has been submitted
to the city. Notice shall contain location of proposed well, name of operator/applicant, mineral lessee name and contact
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/414
information for operator/applicant and city inspector. Notice shall direct questions to operator/applicant and concerns to city
inspector. In addition, within the ten (10) days, a sign will be erected on the drill site or the nearest public right-of-way, if the sign
would not be visible from the drill site. Sign shall indicate that an oil or gas well is proposed for the site, name of
operator/applicant and contact information for operator/applicant and the city inspector.
(d) Permitting Procedure. After a complete permit application is submitted, the city inspector shall evaluate the public impact
of the proposed activity. The city inspector shall consider the proposed site and the proposed aboveground activity related to oil
and gas operation or drilling program and shall identify restrictions or conditions, including minimum separation distance for
drilling or other operation, special safety equipment and procedures, noise reduction levels, screening and any other requirements
the city inspector deems appropriate. If the proposed drill site is located more than three hundred feet (300') from a protected use
for which a building permit has been issued on the date the application for a permit is filed with the city, the inspector may,
consistent with state law, accept or reject the application in the interest of securing compliance with this article, this code and/or
to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community. An applicant may appeal a decision of the city inspector through the
city manager to the city council.
(e) Well and Tank Battery Setbacks for Surface Permit.
(1) Setback From Parks. Tank batteries, storage tanks, facilities and equipment, other than the well itself, shall be
located at least three hundred feet (300') from any public park or from any protected use (unless prior consent is
obtained through the city manager). The distance shall be calculated from the closest tank batteries, facilities and/or
equipment, in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest exterior point of the
building, or to the closest property line of the park.
(2) Landscape Buffer. There will be a minimum twenty-five feet (25') landscape buffer on all sides of the area
adjacent to and outside of the fencing on any pad site.
(f) Fencing for Surface Permit.
(1) Fencing. Fences shall not be required on drill sites during initial drilling, completion or re-working operations as
long as 24-hour on-site supervision is provided. Within thirty (30) calendar days after production has been established,
the operation site shall be completely enclosed by an opaque fence or separate opaque fences may be installed to
enclose individual facilities on drill site, such as pump jack, storage tanks or other production related facilities. The
fences shall be a minimum height of five feet (5') and not higher than eight feet (8'). All shall be built in a manner that
is safe enough to protect children in accordance with the attractive nuisance doctrine. In addition to fences, a secured
entrance gate shall be required. All gates are to be kept locked when the operator or his employees are not within the
enclosure.
(2) Gate Specification. The gate shall meet the following specifications:
(A) Each gate shall be not less than twelve feet (12') wide and the height of the fence and be composed of two
(2) gates, each of which is not less than six feet (6') wide, or one sliding gate not less than twelve feet (12') wide.
If two gates are used, gates shall latch and lock in the center of the span. If fencing is intended to protect pump
jack, storage tanks or other production related facilities and no trucks will be inside enclosure, city inspector may
specify a reasonable size walk through gate;
(B) The gates shall be of metal frame construction that meets the applicable specifications, or of other
approved material;
(C) The gates shall be provided with a combination catch and locking attachment device for a combination
padlock, and shall be kept locked except when being used for access to the site;
(D) Operator must provide the fire department chief and the city inspector with a “Knox Padlock” or “Knox
Box with a key” to access the drill site to be used only in case of an emergency. The fire chief shall determine the
type. In the event a key is not provided or the lock is inoperable, the fire department shall be authorized to cut a
lock or chain to gain access.
(g) Landscaping. A plan for landscaping and irrigation shall be provided with the surface permit application. Landscaping and
irrigation shall be required as determined by city manager or designee along all sides of the drill site with suitable screening done
via combination of trees and shrubs that complement the natural character of the surrounding neighborhood. A three feet (3')
separation should be maintained between the fence and vegetative screening. Care should be taken when selecting trees and
shrubs to anticipate the ultimate size of the plant so that the tree or shrub maintains a three feet (3') separation from the fence at
maturity. Measures should be in place to cease irrigation once the tree and shrubs are established and shall not be less than two (2)
years, unless the city implements the drought contingency plan, in which case the irrigation will be in accordance with said plan.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/414
The landscaping within ten years should characterize a natural screening of the pad site within one hundred feet (100') from all
sides. The site should be well kept and mowed at all times. The following tree preservation and planting measures are required:
(1) Tree Spacing. A minimum twenty-five feet (25') landscape buffer outside the operation site shall contain a tree
for every forty feet (40') linear feet with no more than ten percent (10%) of the trees of a small canopy and no more
than fifteen percent (15%) of the trees of a medium canopy as identified on the following table. Existing trees within
the buffer may be counted as part of the required plantings. The following requirements apply to all surface permits.
(A) A minimum retention of twenty-five percent (25%) of the existing trees will be required as with other land
uses unless removal is necessary for location of equipment as determined by the city inspector.
(B) No more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the same species may be planted at one (1) site.
(C) A minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the planted trees must be an evergreen species.
(D) The minimum size of tree planted will be three inches (3") in diameter measured one foot aboveground
level. If the tree is multi trunk, the main stem will be given full credit for its diameter and all other stems will
receive one-half (1/2) credit. The total of all must be three inches (3") or greater.
(E) All trees that die within two years of the date of project completion will be replaced by another
replacement tree. The replacement tree carries the same two-year replacement requirement. A replacement tree
that dies within two years of planting will be replaced by the operator or agent, and a new two-year guarantee
will begin at the time of replacement.
(F) All other interpretations of the regulations will be made by the city.
(2) Desirable Trees. The following list of trees is considered desirable and adapted for the city area. Planting of trees
from this list is acceptable. Other trees will be considered by the city and granted on a case-by-case basis. The
approval of additional species will be judged on adaptability, long-term health and growing characteristic of the tree
type.
Common Name Scientific Name Canopy Size
Redbud Cercis Canadensis Small
Mexican Plum Prunus Mexicana Small
Cherry Laurel Prunus Caroliniana Medium
Eve's Necklace Sophora Affinis Medium
Crab Apple Malus Angustifolia Medium
Golden Raintree Koelrueteria Paniculata Medium
Cado Maple Acer Saccharum Large
Red Maple Acer Rubrum Large
Bigtooth Maple Acer Grandidentatum Large
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/414
Bur Oak Quercus Macrocrapa Large
Chinquapin Oak Quercus Muhlenbergii Large
Live Oak Quercus Virginiana Large
Shumard Red Oak Quercus Shumardii Large
Texas Red Oak Quercus Texana Large
Post Oak Quercus Stallata Large
Blackjack Oak Quercus Marilandica Large
Pecan Carya Illinoinensis Large
Lacebark Elm Ulmus Parvifolia Large
Cedar Elm Ulmus Crassifolia Large
American Elm Ulmus Americana Large
Bald Cypress Taxodium Distichum Large
Black Walnut Jugluns Nigra/J. Microcarpa Large
Green Ash Fraxinus Pennsylvanica Large
Texas Ash Fraxinus Texensis Large
Southern Magnolia Magnolia Grandiflora Large
(3) Clear Cut Prohibition. The clear cutting of trees is prohibited within the city. Cutting of trees, grading and land
clearing may be done, for oil or gas well drilling pad sites, in accordance with the approved site plan. The remainder
of the site beyond the pad and the landscape buffer shall not be disturbed without approval in the permit.
(h) Vehicle Routes for Surface Permit.
(1) Routes. Vehicles associated with drilling and/or production in excess of three tons shall be restricted to such
streets designated as either state highway, farm to market, or truck routes or commercial delivery routes by the city
wherever capable of being used. The vehicles shall be operated on a commercial delivery route only when it is not
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/414
possible to use a state highway, farm to market, or truck route to fulfill the purpose for which such vehicle is then
being operated. Commercial delivery route means any street or highway so designated by the city council for the use
by any commercial motor vehicle, truck-tractor, trailer, semi-trailer, or any combination thereof. All vehicles shall
comply with Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA) regulations.
(2) Road Maintenance Agreement. A citywide road maintenance agreement will be required for the aboveground
activity associated with any gas or oil well drilling operation that uses city maintained streets for access to their well
site, whether the wells are within the city limits or outside the city limits. City shall determine the degree of damage,
the amount owed and shall bill the operator annually. Failure of the operator to pay the amount owed within thirty days
may result in forfeiture of bond or letter of credit.
(3) Streets Free From Debris. The operator shall keep thoroughfares throughout the city free from dirt, dust, mud or
other debris deposited by vehicles involved in the well drilling or servicing or pipeline installation process. The
operator shall eliminate dirt, dust, mud or other debris accumulations within two (2) hours of notification by the city. If
for safety or other reasons, the city elects to perform the removal, the cost of such removal shall be paid by the
operator.
(i) Work Hours for Surface Permit. Site development, other than drilling, shall be conducted only during daylight hours. Truck
deliveries of equipment and materials associated with drilling and/or production, well servicing, site preparation and other related
work conducted on the drill site shall be limited to daylight hours except in cases of fires, blowouts, explosions and any other
emergencies or where the delivery of equipment is necessary to prevent the cessation of drilling or production. All formation
fracture stimulation operations shall be conducted during daylight hours as defined by this article. “Flowback” operations to
recover fluids used during fracture stimulation shall be exempt from work hour restrictions, subject to compliance with noise
restrictions contained in this article. All workover operations shall be restricted to daylight hours.
(j) Noise Restrictions for Surface Permit. In no case shall any drilling, producing or other operations produce a sound level
greater than 78 decibles (dB) when measured at a distance of three hundred feet (300') from the production equipment in
question. If ambient noise level exceeds 78 dB, that ambient level will be the maximum allowable noise level under all
circumstances.
(1) Noise Management Plan. Prior to the issuance of a surface permit and the commencement of operations, the
operator shall submit a noise management plan, approved by the city, detailing how the equipment used in the drilling,
completion, transportation, or production of a well complies with the maximum permissible noise levels of this
section. The noise management must:
(A) Identify operation noise impacts;
(B) Provide documentation establishing the ambient noise level prior to construction of any wellhead,
compressor or compression facility; and
(C) Detail how the impacts will be mitigated. In determining noise mitigation, specific site characteristics shall
be considered, including but not limited to the following:
(i) Nature and proximity of adjacent development, location, and type;
(ii) Seasonal and prevailing weather patterns, including wind directions;
(iii) Vegetative cover on or adjacent to the site; and
(iv) Topography.
The operator shall be responsible for verifying compliance with this section and the noise management plan
after the installation of the noise generation equipment.
(2) Noise Level. No well shall be drilled, re-drilled or any equipment operated at any location within the city in such
a manner so as to create any noise which causes the exterior noise level when measured at the protected use
receiver's/receptor's property line or from the closest exterior point of the protected use structure or inside the
protected use structure if access to the property is granted by the receiver/receptor, that:
(A) Exceeds the ambient noise level by more than (5) dB during daytime hours and more than three (3) dB
during nighttime hours;
(B) Exceeds the ambient noise level by more than ten (10) dB over the daytime average ambient noise level
during fracturing operations during daytime hours. No fracturing shall be allowed during nighttime hours except
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/414
for flowback operations related to fracturing as provided in subsection (C) below;
(C) Exceeds the ambient noise level by more than three (3) dB during flowback operations during nighttime
hours.
(3) Predrilling Noise Level. The operator shall be responsible for establishing and reporting to the city a continuous
seventy-two (72) hour predrilling ambient noise level prior to the issuance of a surface permit. The seventy-two (72)
hour time span shall include at least twenty-four (24) hour reading during either a Saturday or Sunday. The operator
shall use the prior established ambient noise level as the base for the installation of any new noise generation
equipment unless the operator can demonstrate that the increase in the ambient noise level is not associated with
drilling and production activities located either on or off-site.
(4) Citation for Violation. A citation may be issued immediately for failure to comply with the provisions of this
section. However, if the operator is in compliance with approved noise management plan, and a violation occurs, the
operator will be given twenty-four (24) hours form notice of noncompliance to correct the violation from an identified
source before a citation is issued. Additional extensions of twenty-four (24) hour periods may be granted in the event
that the source of the violation cannot be identified after reasonable diligence by the operator.
(k) Tank Specifications for a Surface Permit. The construction and installation of all tanks and permanent structures shall
conform to the requirements of the commission and any other local, state or federal agency. The top of the tanks shall be no
higher than fifteen feet (15'). All tanks shall be set back pursuant to the standards of the commission and the National Fire
Protection Association, but in all cases, shall be at least twenty-five feet (25') from any public right-of-way or property line. All
transport trucks shall be filled on site, not on public rights-of-way or streets.
(l) Inclusive of All Provisions. All other provisions outlined in this article shall be required.
Sec. 4.208 Issuance of Surface Permit
(a) Permit Approval or Denial. It is the responsibility of the city inspector to review and approve or disapprove based on the
criteria established by this article all applications for surface permits for drill sites located more than three hundred feet (300')
from a protected use for which a building permit has been issued on the date the application for a permit is filed with the city
inspector. City inspector, within thirty (30) calendar days of the receipt of a complete application, and remittance of all fees,
insurance and security per the requirements of this article for a surface permit, shall issue a surface permit for the drill site,
including the installation of the facilities.
(b) Building Permits Issued on Date of Filing Application. The provisions of this article shall apply to any dwellings or
buildings for which an application for a building permit has been submitted on the date the application for surface permit is filed
with the city inspector.
(c) Notice of Denial. If the city inspector denies a surface permit application, he shall notify the operator in writing of such
denial stating the reasons for the denial. Within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of the written decision of the city inspector to
deny the surface permit, the operator may:
(1) Cure the Reason(s) for Denial. Cure those conditions that caused the denial and resubmit the application to the
city inspector for approval and issuance of the surface permit; or
(2) Appeal. File an appeal through the city manager to the city council under the provisions outlined in this article.
Sec. 4.209 Amended Surface Permits
An operator may request to amend a surface permit, to relocate a drill site or operation site that was shown on the application,
provided the distance from a protected use is not less than three hundred feed (300').
Sec. 4.210 Transfer of Surface Permit
(a) Written Request. A surface permit may be transferred upon written request by the operator with the consent of the city:
(1) Transferee Agreement. If the transferee agrees to be bound by the terms and conditions of the current surface
permit and citywide road maintenance agreement;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/414
(2) Update Information. If all information previously provided to the city as part of the current surface permit
application is updated to reflect any changes; and
(3) Insurance and Security. If the transferee provides the insurance and security required by this article.
(b) Insurance and Security. The insurance and security provided by the transferor shall be released if a copy of the written
transfer is provided to the city. The transfer shall not relieve the transferor from any liability to the city arising out of the activities
conducted prior to the transfer.
(c) Transfer Fee. Applications for the transfer of surface permits shall be filed with the city secretary. The application fee for
the transfer as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A [sic] and shall accompany each surface permit transfer application.
Sec. 4.211 Suspension or Revocation of Surface Permit; Effects
(a) Suspension or Revocation. If an operator (or its officers, employees, agents, contractors, or representatives) fails to comply
with any requirement of a surface permit (including any requirement incorporated by reference as part of the surface permit), the
city inspector shall give written notice to the operator specifying the nature of the failure and giving the operator a reasonable
time to cure, taking into consideration the nature and extent of the failure, the extent of the efforts required to cure, and the
potential impact on the health, safety, and welfare of the community. In no event, however, shall the cure periods be less than
thirty (30) calendar days unless the failure presents a risk of imminent destruction of property or injury to persons or unless the
failure involves the operator's failure to provide periodic reports as required by this article.
(b) Failure to Correct. If the operator fails to correct the noncompliance within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the
notice, the city inspector may suspend or revoke the surface permit pursuant to the provisions of this article.
(c) Appeal. operator may, within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of the decision of the city inspector in writing to suspend
or revoke a surface permit, file an appeal through the city manager to the city council under the provisions outlined in this article.
(d) No Work Performed During Suspension or Revocation. No person shall carry on any operations performed under the terms
of the surface permit issued under this article during any period of any surface permit suspension or revocation or pending a
review of the decision or order of the city in suspending or revoking the surface permit. Nothing contained herein shall be
construed to prevent the necessary, diligent and bona fide efforts to cure and remedy the default or violation for which the
suspension or revocation of the surface permit was ordered for the safety of persons or as required by the city council.
Sec. 4.212 Periodic Reports
(a) Report Timing. The operator shall notify the city inspector of any changes to the following information within one business
week after the change occurs:
(1) Name. The name, address, and phone number of the operator;
(2) Name of Person to Receive Notice. The name, address, and phone number of the person designated to receive
notices from the city (which person must be a resident of the state that can be served in person or by registered or
certified mail); and
(3) Emergency Action Response Plan. The operator's emergency action response plan (including “drive-to-maps”
from public right-of-way to each drill site).
(b) Contact Information for Person with Supervisory Authority. The operator shall notify the city inspector of any change to the
name, address, and 24-hour phone number of the phone numbers of the person(s) with supervisory authority over drilling or
operations activities within one business day.
(c) Incident Reports. The operator shall provide a copy to the city of any “incident reports” or written complaints submitted to
the commission within thirty (30) calendar days after the operator has notice of the existence of such reports or complaints.
(d) Annual Report. Beginning on December 31st after each well is completed, and continuing on each December 31st
thereafter, until the operator notifies the city inspector that the well has been abandoned and the site restored, the operator shall
submit a written report to the city inspector identifying any changes to the information that was included in the application for the
applicable surface permit that have not been previously reported to the city.
(e) Annual Site Inspection. The city inspector upon notice to operator shall perform an annual site inspection to insure that the
operator is conducting operations in compliance with the surface permit and the provisions of this article and to verify the
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/414
accuracy of the information reported pursuant to this section. The operator shall pay an Annual Inspection Fee in an amount set
forth in the fee schedule. The annual inspection fee shall be paid no later than May 30th of each year.
(f) Follow Up Inspection. Incidents requiring notification to the commission shall require a follow up inspection by the city
inspector. The fee for said follow up inspection as set forth in the fee schedule. Fee shall be paid within thirty (30) calendar days
of being notified of the need for a follow up inspection.
Sec. 4.213 Bond, Irrevocable Letter of Credit, Indemnity, Insurance
(a) General Requirements. The operator shall be required to perform the items listed below:
(1) Comply with Terms of Article. Comply with the terms and conditions of this article and the surface permit
issued hereunder.
(2) Restore to Conditions Existing Prior to Operation. Promptly clear drill and operation sites of all litter, trash,
waste and other substances used, allowed, or occurring in the operations, and after abandonment or completion grade,
level and restore such property to the same surface conditions as nearly as possible as existed before operations.
(3) Indemnify and Hold Harmless. Indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents, and employees from
and against any and all claims, losses, damages, causes of action, suits and liability of every kind, including all
expenses of litigation, court costs, and attorney's fees, for injury to or death of any person or for damage to any
property arising out of or in connection with the work done by operator under a surface permit:
(A) Where such injuries, death or damages are caused by operator's sole negligence or the joint negligence of
operator and any other person or entity; and
(B) Regardless of whether such injuries, death or damages are caused in whole or in part by the negligence of
operator.
(4) Pay Fines. Promptly pay all fines, penalties and other assessments, including but not limited to road damage,
imposed due to breach of any terms of the surface permit; and
(5) Restore to Former Condition. Promptly restore to its former condition any public property damaged by the oil or
gas operation.
(b) Bond. Prior to the issuance of a surface permit the operator shall provide the city secretary with a security instrument in the
form of a bond. The bond shall be executed by a reliable bonding or insurance institution authorized to do business in the state,
acceptable to the city. The bond shall become effective on or before the date the surface permit is issued and shall remain in force
and effect for at least a period of six (6) months after the expiration of the surface permit term or until the well is plugged and
abandoned and the site is restored, whichever occurs first. The operator shall be listed as principal and the instrument shall run to
the city, as obligee, and shall be conditioned that the operator will comply with the terms and regulations of this article and the
city. The city shall be authorized to draw upon such bond to recover any fines, penalties or road damages assessed under this
article. The original bond shall be submitted to the city secretary with a copy of the same provided to the city inspector.
(c) Letter of Credit. In lieu of a bond, the operator may choose to provide, an irrevocable letter of credit which shall be issued
by a reliable bank authorized to do business in the state and shall become effective on or before the date the surface permit is
issued. The letter of credit shall remain in force and effect for at least a period of six (6) months after the expiration of the surface
permit term. The city shall be authorized to draw upon such letter of credit to recover any fines or penalties or road damages
assessed under this article. Evidence of the execution of a letter of credit shall be submitted to the city secretary by submitting an
original signed letter of credit from the banking institution, with a copy of the same provided to the city inspector.
(d) Security Amount. The principal amount of any security instrument shall be fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for any
singe well. If, after completion of a well, the applicant/operator, who initially posted a fifty thousand dollar ($50,000.00) bond or
irrevocable letter of credit has complied with all of the provisions of this article and whose well is in the producing stage and all
drilling operations have ceased, may submit a request to the city secretary to reduce the existing bond or irrevocable letter of
credit to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for the remainder of the time the well produces without reworking. During reworking
operations, the amount of the bond or irrevocable letter of credit shall be maintained at fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). An
operator drilling or reworking between one and five wells at any given time may elect to provide a blanket bond or irrevocable
letter of credit in the principal minimum amount of one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00). If the operator drills or
reworks more than five wells at a time, the blanket bond or irrevocable letter of credit shall be increased in increments of fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per each additional well. Once the wells are in the producing stage and all drilling operations have
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/414
ceased, the operator may elect to provide a blanket bond or irrevocable letter of credit for the remainder of the time the well
produces, without reworking, as follows:
Number of Producing Wells Blanket Bond or Irrevocable Letter of Credit Amount Required
Up to 10 Wells $100,000.00
Up to 50 Wells $150,000.00
More than 50 Wells $200,000.00
(e) City Council to Determine Sufficiency of Security. If at any time after no less than a fifteen (15) day written notice to the
operator and a public hearing, the city council shall deem any operator's bond or irrevocable letter of credit to be insufficient, it
may require the operator to increase the amount of the bond or irrevocable letter of credit up to a maximum of two hundred fifty
thousand dollars ($250,000.00) per well.
(f) Written Notice of Default. Whenever the city inspector finds that a default has occurred in the performance of any
requirement or condition imposed by this article, a written notice shall be given to the operator. Such notice shall specify the work
to be done and the period of time deemed by the city inspector to be reasonably necessary for the completion of such work. After
receipt of such notice, the operator shall provide the estimated cost and, within the time therein specified, either cause or require
the work to be performed, or failing to do so, shall pay over to the city one hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of the estimated
cost of doing the work. In no event, however, shall the cure period be less than thirty (30) calendar days, unless the failure
presents a risk of imminent destruction of property or injury to persons or unless the failure involves the operator's failure to
provide periodic reports as required by this article. The maximum cure period shall not exceed forty-five (45) calendar days. The
city shall be authorized to draw against any bond or irrevocable letter of credit to recover such amount due from the operator.
Upon receipt of such monies, the city shall proceed by such mode as deemed convenient to cause the required work to be
performed and completed, but no liability shall be incurred other than for the expenditure of said sum in hand. In the event that
the well has not been properly abandoned under the regulations of the commission and/or this article, such additional money may
be demanded from the operator as is necessary to properly plug and abandon the well and restore the drill site in conformity with
the regulations of this article.
(g) Other Legal Action. In the event the operator does not cause the work to be performed and fails or refuses to pay over the
city the estimated cost of work to be done, or the issuer of the security instrument refuses to honor any draft by the city against
the bond or irrevocable letter of credit, the city may proceed to obtain compliance and abate the default by way of civil action
against the operator, or by criminal action against the operator, or by both such methods.
(h) Termination of Securities. When the well or wells covered by said bond or irrevocable letter of credit have been properly
abandoned in conformity with all regulations of this article, and in conformity with all regulations of the commission and notice
to that effect has been received by the city, or upon receipt of a satisfactory substitute, the bond or irrevocable letter of credit
issued in compliance with these regulations shall be terminated and cancelled.
(i) Insurance. In addition to the bond or irrevocable letter of credit required pursuant to this article, the operator shall carry a
policy or policies of insurance issued by an insurance company or companies authorized to do business in the state. In the event
such insurance policy or policies are cancelled, the surface permit shall be suspended on such date of cancellation and the
operator's right to operate under such surface permit shall immediately cease until the operator files additional insurance as
provided herein.
(1) General Requirements Applicable to All Policies.
(A) The city, its officials, employees, agents and officers shall be endorsed as an “additional insured” to all
polices except employer's liability coverage under the operator's workers compensation policy.
(B) All policies shall be written on an occurrence basis except for Environmental Pollution Liability (seepage
and pollution coverage) and excess or umbrella liability, which may be on a claims-made basis.
(C) All policies shall be written by an insurer with an A-: VIII or better rating by the most current version of
the A.M. Best Key Rating Guide or with other financially sound insurance carriers acceptable to the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/414
(D) Deductibles shall be listed on the certificate of insurance and shall be on a “per occurrence” basis unless
otherwise stipulated herein.
(E) Certificates of insurance shall be delivered to the City of Gonzales, City Secretary, 820 North St. Joseph,
Gonzales, Texas 78629, evidencing all the required coverage's, including endorsements, prior to the issuance of a
surface permit.
(F) All policies shall be endorsed with a waiver of subrogation providing rights of recovery in favor of the city.
(G) Any failure on part of the city to request required insurance documentation shall not constitute a waiver of
the insurance requirement specified herein.
(H) Each policy shall be endorsed to provide the city a minimum thirty (30) calendar day notice of
cancellation, nonrenewal, and/or material change in policy terms or coverage. A ten (10) calendar days notice
shall be acceptable in the event of nonpayment of premium.
(I) During the term of the surface permit, the operator shall report, in a timely manner, to the city secretary any
known loss occurrence which could give rise to a liability claim or lawsuit or which could result in a property
loss.
(J) Upon request, certified copies of all insurance policies shall be furnished to the city.
(2) Standard Commercial General Liability Policy. This coverage must include premises, operations, blowout or
explosion, products, completed operations, sudden and accidental pollution, blanket contractual liability, underground
resources damage, broad form property damage, independent contractors' protective liability and personal injury. This
coverage shall be a minimum combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence for bodily
injury and property damage.
(3) Excess or Umbrella Liability.
(A) Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) excess, if the operator has a stand-alone Environmental Pollution
Liability (EPL) policy. Ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00) excess, if the operator does not have a stand-alone
EPL policy.
(B) Coverage must include an endorsement for sudden or accidental pollution. If seepage and pollution
coverage is written on a “claims made” basis, the operator must maintain continuous coverage and purchase
extended coverage period insurance when necessary.
(4) Environmental Pollution Liability Coverage.
(A) Operator shall purchase and maintain in force for the duration of the surface permit, insurance for
environmental pollution liability applicable to bodily injury, property damage, including loss of use of damaged
property or of property that has not been physically injured or destroyed; cleanup costs; and defense, including
costs and expenses incurred in the investigation, defense or settlement of claims; all in connection with any loss
arising from the insured site. Coverage shall be maintained in an amount of at least one million dollars
$1,000,000.00) per loss, with an annual aggregate of at least five million dollars ($5,000,000.00).
(B) Coverage shall apply to sudden accidental pollution conditions resulting from the escape or release of
smoke, vapors, fumes, acids, alkalis, toxic chemicals, liquids or gases, waste material or other irritants,
contaminants or pollutants.
(C) The operator shall maintain continuous coverage and shall purchase extended coverage period insurance
when necessary. The extended coverage period insurance must provide that any retroactive date applicable to
coverage under the policy precedes the effective date of the issuance of the permit by the city.
(5) Control of Well.
(A) The policy shall cover the cost of controlling a well that is out of control, redrilling or restoration
expenses, seepage and pollution damage as first party recovery for the operator and related expenses, including,
but not limited to, loss of equipment, experts and evacuation of residents.
(B) One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence/no aggregate, if available, otherwise an aggregate of
five million dollars ($5,000,000.00). Five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) sub-limit endorsement may be
added for damage to property for which the operator has care, custody and control.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/414
(6) Workers Compensation and Employers Liability Insurance.
(A) Workers compensation benefits shall be state statutory limits.
(B) Employers liability shall be a minimum of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per accident.
(C) Such coverage shall include a waiver of subrogation in favor of the city and provide coverage in
accordance with applicable state and federal laws.
(7) Automobile Liability Insurance.
(A) Combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence for bodily injury and
property damage.
(B) Coverage must include all owned, hired and not-owned automobiles.
(8) Certificates of Insurance.
(A) The company must be admitted or approved to do business in the state, unless a Surplus lines insurer
writes the coverage.
(B) The insurance set forth by the insurance company must be underwritten on forms that have been approved
by the state board of insurance or ISO, or an equivalent policy form acceptable to the city, with the exception of
environmental pollution liability and control of well coverage.
(C) Sets forth all endorsements and insurance coverage according to requirements and instructions contained
herein.
(D) Shall specifically set forth the notice of cancellation, termination, or change in coverage provisions to the
city. All policies shall be endorsed to read:
“THIS POLICY WILL NOT BE CANCELLED OR NONRENEWED WIHTOUT THIRTY (30)
CALENDAR DAYS ADVANCED WRITTEN NOTICE TO THE OWNER AND THE CITY EXCEPT
WHEN THIS POLICY IS BEING CANCELLED FOR NONPAYMENT OF PREMIUM, IN WHICH
CASE TEN (10) DAYS ADVANCE WRITTEN NOTICE IS REQUIRED.”
(E) Original endorsements affecting coverage required by this section shall be furnished with the certificates
of insurance.
(9) Indemnification and Express Negligence Provisions. Each surface permit issued by the city inspector shall
include the following language:
“Operator does hereby expressly release and discharge, all claims, demands, actions, judgments, and executions
which it ever had, or now has or may have, or assigns may have, or claim to have, against the City of Gonzales,
Texas, and/or its departments, agents, officers, servants, successors, assigns, sponsors, volunteers, or employees,
created by, or arising out of personal injuries, known or unknown, and injuries to property, real or personal, or in
any way incidental to or in connection with the performance of the work performed by the operator under a
surface permit. The operator shall fully defend, protect, indemnify, and hold harmless the City of Gonzales,
Texas, its departments, agents, officers, servants, employees, successors, assigns, sponsors, or volunteers from
and against each and every claim, demand, or cause of action and any and all liability, damages, obligations,
judgments, losses, fines, penalties, costs, fees, and expenses incurred in defense of the City of Gonzales, Texas,
its departments, agents, officers, servants, or employees, including, without limitation, personal injuries and
death in connection therewith which may be made or asserted by operator, its agents, assigns, or any third parties
on account of, arising out of, or in any way incidental to or in connection with the performance of the work
performed by the operator under a surface permit. The operator agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the City
of Gonzales, Texas, its departments, it officers, agents, servants, employees, successors, assigns, sponsors, or
volunteers from any liabilities or damages suffered as a result of claims, demands, costs, or judgments against
the city, its departments, it officers, agents, servants, or employees, created by, or arising out of the acts or
omissions of the City of Gonzales occurring on the drill site or operation site in the course and scope of
inspecting and permitting the surface of the Oil or Gas Wells INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, CLAIMS
AND DAMAGES ARISING IN WHOLE OR IN PART FROM THE NEGLIGENCE OF THE CITY OF
GONZALES OCCURRING ON THE DRILL SITE OR OPERATION SITE IN THE COURSE AND SCOPE
OF INSPECTING AND PERMITTING THE ABOVEGROUND ACTIVITY RELATED TO OPERATIONS OF
THE OIL AND GAS WELLS. IT IS UNDERSTOOD AND AGREED THAT THE INDEMNITY PROVIDED
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/414
FOR IN THIS SECTION IS AN INDEMNITY EXTENDED BY THE OPERATOR TO INDEMNIFY AND
PROTECT THE CITY OF GONZALES, TEXAS AND/OR ITS DEPARTMENTS, AGENTS, OFFICERS,
SERVANTS, OR EMPLOYEES FROM THE CONSEQUENCES OF THE NEGLIGENCE OF THE CITY OF
GONZALES, TEXAS AND/OR ITS DEPARTMENTS, AGENTS, OFFICERS, SERVANTS, OR
EMPLOYEES, WHETHER THAT NEGLIGENCE IS THE SOLE OR CONTRIBUTING CAUSE OF THE
RESULTANT INJURY, DEATH, AND/OR DAMAGE.”
(10) Notice. The individual designated to receive notice shall be a resident of the state upon whom all orders and
notices provided in this article may be served in person or by registered or certified mail. Every operator shall within
one business week notify the city secretary in writing of any change in such agent or mailing address unless operations
in the city are discontinued and abandonment is complete.
Sec. 4.214 Technical Regulations
(a) Onsite Requirements.
(1) Abandoned Wells. All wells shall be abandoned in accordance with the rules of the commission. No structures
shall be built over an abandoned well.
(2) Compliance. Operator shall comply at all times with all applicable federal, state and city requirements.
(3) Discharge. No person shall place, deposit, discharge, or cause or permit to be placed, deposited or discharged,
any oil, naphtha, petroleum, asphalt, tar, hydrocarbon substances or any refuse including wastewater or brine from any
oil or gas operation or the contents of any container used in connection with any oil or gas operation in, into, or upon
any public right-of-way, alleys, streets, lots, storm drain, pit, ditch or sewer, sanitary drain or any body of water or
watercourse that may ultimately enter into waters of the city, state or United States.
(4) Dust, Vibration, Odors. All drilling and production operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to
minimize, so far as practicable, dust, vibration, or noxious odors, and shall be in accordance with the best accepted
practices incident to drilling for the production of oil, gas and other hydrocarbon substances in urban areas. All
equipment used shall be so constructed and operated so that, vibrations, dust, odor or other harmful or annoying
substances or effect will be minimized by the operations carried on at any drilling or production site or from anything
incident thereto, to the injury or annoyance of persons living in the vicinity; nor shall the site or structures thereon be
permitted to become dilapidated, unsightly or unsafe. Proven technological improvements in industry standards of
drilling and production in this area shall be adopted as they become available if capable of reducing factors of dust,
vibration and odor.
(5) Electric Lines. All electric lines to production facilities shall be located underground. When electric utility lines
are located within three hundred feet (300') of the pad site are determined to be sufficient for operations, the operator
may use fuel-powered generators only as a backup in the event of a power failure.
(6) Emergency Response Plan. Prior to the commencement of any oil, gas or other hydrocarbons production
activities, operator shall submit to the city secretary an emergency response plan establishing written procedures to
minimize any hazard resulting from drilling, completion or producing of oil or gas wells. Said plan shall use existing
guidelines established by the commission, and any other local, state or federal agency.
(7) Fire Prevention; Sources of Ignition. Firefighting apparatus and supplies as approved by the fire department and
required by any applicable federal, state, or local law shall be provided by the operator, at the operator's cost, and shall
be maintained on the drilling site at all times during drilling and production operations. Operators must identify sites
with Hydrogen Sulfide (H2S) producing wells and provide wind direction socks for those sites at the operator's sole
cost. The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of equipment required herein. Each well shall
be equipped with an automated valve that closes the well in the event of an abnormal change in operating pressure. All
wellheads shall contain an emergency shut off valve to the well distribution line as required by the commission.
(8) Freshwater Wells. It shall be unlawful to drill any oil or gas well, the center of which, at the surface of the
ground, is located within one thousand (1,000') feet to any fresh water well, except for fresh water wells used solely
for operation of the oil or gas operation. The measurement shall be in a direct line from the closest well bore to the
fresh water well bore.
(9) Oil or Gas Emission or Burning Restricted. At no time shall the well be allowed to flow or vent directly to the
atmosphere without first directing the flow through separation equipment or into a portable tank. Venting operations
shall be required to comply with the noise regulations contained in this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/414
(10) Grass, Weeds, Trash. All drill and operation sites shall be kept clear of high grass, weeds, and trash. All
landscaping shall be continuously maintained in an acceptable manner.
(11) Hazardous Plan. hazardous materials management plan shall be on file with the fire marshal, city secretary and
the city inspector. A safety data sheet (SDS) will be maintained at each location and shall be readily available for fire
personnel to review in the event of an emergency. Additionally, any hazardous materials protected as “trade secret”
shall be disclosed to fire personnel in the event of an emergency, in accordance with commission rules.
(12) Lights. No person shall permit any lights located on any drill or operation site to be directed in such a manner
so that they shine directly on public roads, adjacent property or property in the general vicinity of the operation site.
To the extent practicable, and taking into account safety considerations, site lighting shall be directed downward and
internally so as to avoid glare on public roads and adjacent dwellings and buildings within three hundred feet (300').
(13) Closed Loop Mud Systems. A closed loop mud system shall be used in conjunction with all drilling and
reworking operations for all surface permits, unless specifically waived by the city council.
(14) Private Roads and Drill Sites. Prior to the commencement of any drilling operations, all private roads used for
access to the drill site and the operation site itself shall be at least ten feet (10') wide, have an overhead clearance of
fourteen feet (14') and shall be surfaced with crushed rock, gravel or ore and maintained to prevent dust and mud.
Further, an ample supply of dust suppressant shall be maintained on any private road used for access to the drill site so
as to prevent dust during the lifetime use of the road. In particular cases these requirements governing surfacing of
private roads may be altered at the discretion of the city inspector after consideration of all circumstances including,
but not limited to, the following: distance from public streets and highways; distances from adjoining and nearby
property owners whose surface rights are not leased by the operation; the purpose for which the property of such
owners is or may be used; topographical features; nature of the soil; and exposure to wind.
(15) Signs.
(A) A sign shall be immediately and prominently displayed adjacent to the public right-of-way at the gate on
the temporary and permanent site fencing erected pursuant to this article. Such sign shall be durable material,
maintained in good condition and, unless otherwise required by the commission, shall have a surface area of not
less than two (2) square feet nor more than four (4) square feet and shall be lettered with the following:
(i) Well name and number;
(ii) Name of operator;
(iii) The emergency 911 number; and
(iv) Telephone numbers of two (2) persons responsible for the well who may be contacted in case of
emergency.
(B) Permanent weatherproof signs reading “danger no smoking allowed” shall be posted immediately upon
completion of the drill site fencing at the entrance of each drill site and tank battery or in any other location
approved or designated by the fire marshal of the city. Sign letter shall be four inches (4") in height and shall be
red on a white background or white on a red background. Each sign shall include the emergency notification
numbers of the fire department and the operator, well and lease designations required by the commission.
(16) Storage of Equipment.
(A) Onsite storage is prohibited on the operation site. No equipment shall be stored on the drilling or
production operation site, unless it is necessary to the everyday operation of the well. Lumber, pipes, tubing and
casing shall not be left on the operation site except when drilling or well servicing operations are being
conducted on the site.
(B) No vehicle or item of machinery shall be parked or stored on any street, right-of-way or in any driveway,
alley or upon any operation site which constitutes a fire hazard or any obstruction to or interference with fighting
or controlling fires except that equipment which is necessary for drilling or production operations on the site.
The fire department shall be the entity that determines whether equipment on the site shall constitute a fire
hazard. Vehicles containing hazardous materials shall be placarded according to National Fire Protection
Association requirements.
(17) Storage Tanks.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/414
(A) All storage tanks shall be equipped with firewalls, berms or secondary containment system including
lining with an impervious material. The firewall, berms or secondary containment system shall be in accordance
with the rules of the commission and any other local, state or federal agency. Drip pots shall be provided at the
pump out connection to contain the liquids from the storage tank.
(B) All tanks shall be set back pursuant to the standards of the commission and the National Fire Protection
Association, but in all cases, shall be at least twenty-five feet (25') from any public right-of-way or property line.
Each storage tank shall be equipped with a level control device that will automatically activate a valve to close
the well in the event of access liquid accumulation in the tank.
(C) No meters, storage tanks, separation facilities, or other aboveground facilities, other than the wellhead and
flow lines, shall be placed within any floodway as defined by the most current FEMA map, without the prior
consent of the city council.
(D) To the extent that it is technically feasible, all storage tanks, separators and compressors serving multiple
wells shall be kept as a group on a single site.
(18) Tank Battery Facilities. Tank battery facilities and/or storage tanks shall be equipped with a remote foam line
and a lightning arrestor system.
(19) Valves. Each well must have a shutoff valve to terminate the well's production. The fire department shall have
access to the drill site to enable it to close the shut-off valve in an emergency.
(20) Waste Disposal. Unless otherwise directed by the commission, all tanks used for storage shall conform to the
following:
(A) Operator must use portable closed steel storage tanks for storing liquid hydrocarbons. Tanks must meet the
American Petroleum Institute standards. All tanks must have a vent line, flame arrester and pressure relief valve.
A fence applicable to the issued permit classification must enclose all tanks. No tank battery/storage tank shall be
within three hundred feet (300') of any dwelling or other combustible structure.
(B) Drilling mud, cuttings, liquid hydrocarbons and all other field waste derived or resulting from or
connected with the drilling, reworking or deepening of any well shall be processed through a closed loop mud
system. All disposals must be in accordance with the rules of the commission and any other appropriate local,
state or federal agency.
(C) Unless otherwise directed by the commission, waste materials shall be removed from the site and
transported to an offsite disposal facility not less often than every thirty (30) calendar days. Water stored in
onsite tanks shall be removed as necessary.
(D) All waste shall be disposed of in such a manner as to comply with the air and water pollution control
regulations of the state, and any other appropriate local, state or federal agency.
(21) Watchman. The operator must keep a watchman or security personnel on-site during the drilling or reworking
of a well when other workmen are not on the premises.
(22) Painting. All production equipment shall be painted and maintained at all times, including wellheads, pumping
units, tanks and secondary containment. When requiring painting of such facilities, the city inspector shall consider the
deterioration of the quality of the material of which such facility or structure is constructed, the degree of rust, and its
appearance. Paint shall be of a neutral color, compatible with surrounding uses. Neutral colors shall include sand, gray
and unobtrusive shades of green, blue, black and brown, or other neutral colors approved by the city inspector. The
color of all tanks, fixed equipment and painted surfaces, including fences, shall be the same throughout the pad site.
(23) Hydrogen sulfide. If a gas or oil field is identified as a hydrogen sulfide (H2S) field under RRC, TCEQ, or EPA
regulations, or if a well is producing hydrogen sulfide (H2S) gas over applicable commission, and any other
appropriate, state or federal agency standards, the operator shall immediately stabilize and cease any additional oil or
gas operations of that well or facility.
(24) Saltwater Wells. No saltwater wells, or disposal wells shall be located within the city.
(b) Well Setbacks. Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful to drill any well, the center of which, at the
surface of the ground, is located:
(1) Boundary of drill site. Within twenty-five feet (25') from the boundary of the drill/operation site;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/414
(2) Storage tank. Within twenty-five feet (25') from any storage tank, or source of ignition;
(3) Public street. Within seventy-five feet (75') of any public street, road, highway or future street, right-of-way or
property line, or railroad right-of-way;
(4) Protected use. Within three hundred feet (300') from any protected use;
(5) Accessory building. Within one hundred feet (100') of any building accessory to, but not necessary to the
operation of the well; or
(6) Freshwater well. Within one thousand feet (1,000') to any fresh water well. The measurement shall be in a direct
line from the closest well bore to the freshwater well bore.
(c) General Information. The distance shall be calculated from the well bore, in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, to the closest exterior point of any object listed in subsections (b)(1) through (6) above.
(1) There will be a minimum of twenty-five feet (25') landscape buffer on all sides of the area adjacent to and
outside of the fence of the operation site.
(2) The distance set out in subsection (b)(1), (3) or (6) of this section may be reduced at the discretion of the city
council. The reduction of the distance requirement for fresh water wells is subject to the commission regulations and
any other appropriate local, state or federal agency.
(d) Installation of Pipelines on, Under or Across Public Property.
(1) Franchise. The operator shall apply to the city for a franchise agreement on, over, under, along or across the city
streets, sidewalks, alleys and other city property for the purpose of constructing, laying, maintaining, operating,
repairing, replacing and removing pipelines so long as production or operations may be continued under a surface
permit issued pursuant to this article. Operator shall:
(A) Not interfere with or damage existing water, sewer or gas lines or the facilities of public utilities located
on, under or across the course of such right-of-way.
(B) Furnish to the city inspector of the city a plat showing the location of such pipelines.
(C) Construct such lines out of pipe in accordance with the city codes and regulations properly cased and
vented if under a street.
(D) Grade, level and restore such property to the same surface condition, as nearly as practicable, as existed
when operations for the drilling of the well were first commenced.
(2) Drilling in Streets Prohibited. No surface permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled within any of the
streets or alleys of the city and/or projected streets or alleys and no street or alley shall be blocked or encumbered or
closed due to any exploration, drilling or production operations unless prior consent is obtained from the city council.
Any consent shall be temporary in nature and state the number of hours and/or days that any street or alley must be
blocked, encumbered or closed. The decision to authorize a license agreement in accordance with this section shall in
the sole discretion of the city council.
Sec. 4.215 Cleanup and Maintenance
This section applies to new surface permits as well as oil and gas wells that are in existence at the time of adoption of this article.
All drill sites shall be maintained to this cleanup and maintenance standard.
(1) Cleanup After Well Servicing. After the well has been completed or plugged and abandoned, the operator shall
clean the drill site or operation site, complete restoration activities and repair all damage to public property caused by
such operations within sixty (60) calendar days.
(2) Cleanup After Spills, Leaks and Malfunctions. After any spill, leak or malfunction, the operator shall remove or
cause to be removed to the satisfaction of the city inspector all waste materials from any public or private property
affected by such spill, leak or malfunction. Cleanup operations must begin immediately. If the owner fails to begin site
cleanup within twenty-four (24) hours, the city shall have the right to contact commission in order to facilitate the
removal of all waste materials from the property affected by such spill, leak or malfunction.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/414
(3) Free From Debris. The property on which a drill site is located shall at all times be kept free of debris, pools of
water or other liquids, contaminated soil, weeds, brush, trash or other waste material.
(4) Painting. All production equipment shall be painted and maintained at all times, including wellheads, pumping
units, tanks, and buildings or structures. When requiring painting of such facilities, the city inspector shall consider the
deterioration of the quality of material of which such facility or structure is constructed, the degree of rust, and its
appearance. Paint shall be of a neutral color, compatible with surrounding uses. Neutral colors shall include sand, gray
and unobtrusive shades of green, blue, black and brown, or other neutral colors approved by the city inspector.
(5) Blowouts. In the event of the loss of control of any well, operator shall immediately take all reasonable steps to
regain control regardless of any other provision of this article and shall notify the city inspector as soon as practicable.
The city inspector shall certify in writing, briefly describing the same to the city manager. If the city inspector, in his
opinion believes that danger to persons and property exists because of such loss of well control and that the operator is
not taking or is unable to take all reasonable and necessary steps to regain control of such well, the city inspector may
then employ any well control expert or experts or other contractors or suppliers of special services, or may incur any
other expenses for labor and material which the city inspector deems necessary to regain control of such well. The city
shall then have a valid lien against the interest in the well of all working interest owners to secure payment of any
expenditure made by the city pursuant to such action of the city inspector in gaining control of said well.
(6) Secondary Containment. All storage tanks shall be equipped with a firewall, berm or secondary containment
system including lining with an impervious material. The firewall, berm or secondary containment system shall be in
accordance with the rules of the commission and any other local, state or federal agency. Drip pots shall be provided at
the pump out connection to contain liquids from the storage tank.
Sec. 4.216 Plugged and Abandoned Wells
(a) Surface Requirements for Plugged and Abandoned Well. Whenever abandonment occurs pursuant to the requirements of
the commission, the operator so abandoning shall be responsible for the restoration of the drill site to its original condition as
nearly as practicable, in conformity with the regulations of this article.
(b) Abandonment. Abandonment shall be approved by the city inspector after restoration of the drill site has been accomplished
in conformity with the following requirements at the discretion of the city inspector:
(1) Derrick. The derrick and all appurtenant equipment thereto shall be removed from drill site;
(2) Tanks. All tanks, towers, and other surface installations shall be removed from the drill site;
(3) Concrete Foundations. All concrete foundations, piping, wood, guy anchors and other foreign materials
regardless of depth, except surface casing, shall be removed from the site, unless otherwise directed by the
commission;
(4) Holes and Depressions. All holes and depressions shall be filled with clean, compactable soil;
(5) Waste. All waste, refuse or waste material shall be removed from the drill site;
(6) Compliance. During abandonment, operator shall comply with all applicable sections in this article; and
(7) Permanent Marker. A permanent abandonment marker pipe, with well identity and location permanently
inscribed shall be welded to casing and shall be at least four inches (4") in diameter with a length of four feet (4')
visible aboveground level.
(c) Abandoned Well Requirement. The operator shall furnish the following at the discretion of the city inspector:
(1) Commission Approval. A copy of the approval of the commission confirming compliance with all abandonment
proceedings under the state law; and
(2) Notice. A notice of intention to abandon under the provisions of this section and stating the date such work will
be commenced. Abandonment may then be commenced on or subsequent to the date so stated.
(d) Abandonment Requirements Prior to New Construction. All abandoned or deserted wells or drill sites shall meet the most
current abandonment requirements of the commission prior to the issuance of any building permit for development of the
property. No structure shall be built over an abandoned well.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/414
Sec. 4.217 Technical Advisor
The city may from time to time employ a technical advisor or advisors who are experienced and educated in the oil or gas
industry or the law as it pertains to oil or gas matters. The function of such advisor(s) shall be to advise, counsel or represent the
city on such matters relating to oil or gas operations within the city as the city may want or require and the effect thereof, both
present and future, on the health, welfare, comfort and safety of the citizens of the city.
Sec. 4.218 Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ)
(a) Site Plan Required. All wells drilled, redrilled/reworked after the passage of this article that are located within the ETJ of
the city shall file a site plan with the city secretary showing the property boundaries and location of said well and associated
equipment. No fee shall be charged by the city for said filing.
(b) Road Maintenance Agreement. Any oil or gas well to be drilled or being drilled in the ETJ on the effective date of this
article, using trucks larger than 3 tons, that will be traveling on city maintained streets during drilling, production, transportation
or any other related activity must sign a citywide road maintenance agreement. The agreement shall provide that the operator
shall repair, at his own expense, damage to roads or streets caused by the use of heavy vehicles for any activity associated with
the preparation, drilling, production, transportation and operation of oil and or gas wells. City shall determine degree of damage,
dollar amount owed and bill annually. operator shall provide the number of truck trips, truck types and weights, loaded and
unloaded. Agreement may also contain provisions to protect the health, welfare and safety of the citizens along the streets being
used, such as, speed limits, other traffic control devices, days and times of usage, turning movements, noise limitations, etc.
Failure to sign and abide by the citywide road maintenance agreement will result in the loss of the privilege to use city streets.
Sec. 4.219 Platting Requirements for Certain Residential Developments Adjacent to Oil or Gas Wells
(a) The provisions of this section apply to land in the city:
(1) Zoning. That is subject to any zoning designation which allows for a single-family dwelling;
(2) Distance. Where any portion of the boundary of the land is located within three hundred feet (300') of the
boundary of an existing drill site; and
(3) Plat. Whose developer is required to have a final plat prepared and approved pursuant to the subdivision
ordinance of the city.
(b) Plat Note. The owner of land meeting the criteria set forth in this section shall, at the time of platting, include on the face of
the plat, framed in a bold line so that to be distinctly visible, in capital letters and in a minimum type font size of fourteen (14)
point, the following note: “Lots are located within 300 feet of an approved oil and gas well site.” The owner of the property shall
complete the blank in the plat note to indicate the lots subject to this section.
(c) Final plat. For the purposes of this section the terms “developer” and “final plat” shall have the meanings ascribed to them
by the subdivision ordinance of the city.
Sec. 4.220 Appeals
(a) Failure to Cure. If the operator does not cure the noncompliance within the time specified in this article, the inspector, upon
written notice to the operator, may suspend or revoke the surface permit.
(b) File Appeal. Operator may, within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of the decision of the inspector in writing to suspend
or revoke a surface permit, file an appeal through the city manager to the city council under the provisions outlined in this section.
(c) Council Appeal. The city council shall have and exercise the power to hear and determine appeals where it is alleged there
is error or abuse of discretion regarding the revocation or suspension of any surface permit issued by the inspector of a surface
well permit as provided by this article. Any person or entity whose permit is suspended or revoked or whose well or equipment is
deemed by the inspector to be abandoned may, within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of the written decision of the inspector
file an appeal to the city council in accordance with the following procedure:
(1) Appeal in Writing. An appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed in triplicate with the city secretary. The
grounds for appeal must be set forth specifically, and the error described, by the appellant.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/414
(2) City Council Agenda. Within thirty (30) calendar days of receipt of the records, the city secretary shall transmit
all papers involved in the proceeding, place the matter on the city council agenda for hearing and give notice by mail
of the time, place and purpose thereof to appellant and any other party who has requested in writing to be so notified.
No other notice need to be given.
(d) Fee. Appeal fees shall be required for every appeal and as set forth in the fee schedule.
(e) Decision Final. The decision of the city council shall be final.
Sec. 4.221 Takings Determination
(a) Taking Application. Any aggrieved person who believes that an action taken pursuant to this article by the city council or
any officer, employee or agent of the city would legally constitute a taking of property without just compensation under the state
or United States Constitution, must file an application with the city council to request a takings determination.
(b) File with City Secretary. The applicant seeking a takings determination from the city council shall file its application with
the office of the city secretary at least thirty (30) days prior to the next regularly scheduled city council meeting. The city
secretary shall then forward the takings determination application to the city council for consideration. The application fee as set
forth in the fee schedule shall accompany each filing.
(c) Evidence of Takings. The application shall state the reasons the applicant believes would support a finding that the city's
application of the provisions of this article to the applicant's property would legally constitute a taking under the state or United
States Constitution and shall include evidence substantiating the purported diminution in value of the applicant's property.
(d) Burden of Proof. At the takings determination hearing conducted by the city council, the applicant must present detailed
economic information and other evidence necessary to establish that the city's application of the provisions of this article to the
applicant's property would legally constitute a taking of the property without just compensation. The applicant has the burden of
proof in establishing that the city's application of the provisions of this article to the applicant's property legally constitutes a
taking of property without just compensation under the state or United States Constitution.
(e) Council Powers. The city council may administer oaths, compel the attendance of witnesses and require the disclosure of
financial information from the applicant that the city council determines is necessary to make a determination regarding whether
the city's application of the provisions if this article to the applicant's property legally constitutes a taking of property without just
compensation under the state or United States Constitution.
(f) Council Finding. If the council finds in favor of the applicant it may: (1) grant the relief requested; (2) direct the city
manager to rescind action taken by city staff or agent that formed the basis of the takings determination application; or (3) direct
the city manager to reconsider action taken by the city staff or agent that formed the basis of the takings determination
application. If the council denies the application, or after a favorable determination the city council fails to take action as
specified above, the applicant may appeal the decision or inaction of the city council to the county or district court of the county
in which the affected real property is located within thirty (30) calendar days of the date that the council issues its final decision.
Sec. 4.222 Penalty
(a) Unlawful. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to do the following:
(1) Activities Not Permitted. Engage in any activity not permitted by the terms of a surface permit issued under this
article;
(2) Failure to Comply. Failure to comply with any condition set forth in a surface permit issued under this article; or
(3) Violate Provision. Violate any provision or requirement set forth under this article.
(b) Punishment. Any violation of this article shall be punished by a fine of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per
day, subject to applicable state law. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. No notice of default
required by this article shall be a precondition to immediate criminal enforcement due to a violation of this article.
(Ordinance 2017-6 adopted 2/7/17)
ARTICLE 4.300 AMUSEMENT
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/414
Division 1. General Provisions
Sec. 4.301 Definition
For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
Public Amusement. All places and forms of amusement or recreation which are created, established, equipped or maintained for
the purpose of profit and gain, or to the end that profit or gain may accrue therefrom, or which are attached to or allied with, or
run in conjunction with any enterprise intended for profit or gain, which such amusements are not otherwise covered by
provisions of this article or this code.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 111, Section 111.01)
Sec. 4.302 Conformance to Laws and Regulations
All places of public amusement shall be operated and conducted in accordance with all applicable provisions of this code, state
law or city ordinances, rules and regulations. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 111, Section 111.02)
Sec. 4.303 Admittance of Police Officers
Any police officer shall have the right, at any time such police officer shall see fit, to enter and remain in any place of public
amusement. It shall be the duty of any owner, proprietor, manager or agent of such owner, proprietor or manager of any such
place of public amusement to admit thereto any police officer in the discharge of his duties without the payment of any admission
fee. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 111, Section 111.03)
Sec. 4.304 Conduct of Patrons; Presence of Police Officer
(a) It shall be the duty of the person owning, conducting or maintaining any place of public amusement and the employees of
such person to keep and preserve order and see that no lascivious, indecent or vulgar conduct is carried on among the persons
attending such place of public amusement.
(b) If, in the opinion of the chief of police, a police officer may be required to preserve order in such place of public
amusement, it shall be the duty of the owner, keeper or person conducting the same to make arrangements with the chief of police
to secure a member of the police force to be on duty at such place of amusement for the time prescribed and directed by the chief
of police. The owner, keeper, or person conducting such place of public amusement must pay for the services of such police
officer for the duration that he may be on duty at such place of amusement, which sum shall be paid to the chief of police before
such officer is furnished. The money so collected by the chief of police shall be immediately turned into the general fund of the
city.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 111, Section 111.04)
Sec. 4.305 Bond or Liability Insurance Required for Amusement Rides
No person shall conduct, operate, manage or sponsor any Ferris wheel, merry-go-round or other amusement ride operated for hire
or for the purpose of promoting or advertising any trade or business, without first filing with the city secretary a bond or
certificate of liability insurance, in the amount of at least $300,000.00, indemnifying the public against damages sustained by
reason of the operation of such ride. Such bond or certificate of insurance shall be subject to approval by the city attorney. This
section shall apply to all persons, whether or not a license is required by any other provisions of this article. (1995 Code of
Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 111, Section 111.05)
Secs. 4.306–4.310 Reserved
Division 2. Carnivals*
Sec. 4.311 Exemptions From Provisions
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/414
This article shall not apply to any show or exhibition supported and managed entirely by local operators for charitable and
benevolent purposes, and not for individual or personal profit to those managing and operating the same, regardless of whether
such local show or exhibition shall have some of the features of a carnival in connection with the same, nor shall it apply to Ferris
wheels, merry-go-rounds, rides and similar amusement devices sponsored by local merchants, service clubs or other organizations
and not operated in connection with any show per exhibition. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 111, Section 111.15)
Sec. 4.312 License Required
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to show or exhibit any carnival within the city limits without first obtaining a license so
to do from the city secretary.
(b) Any person showing or exhibiting, or in any manner connected with or taking part in the showing or exhibiting of a carnival
within the city limits without first applying for and obtaining such license shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 111, Section 111.16)
Sec. 4.313 Application for License
(a) Any person desiring to conduct or show a carnival within the city limits shall make application for a license to the city
secretary not less than two weeks prior to the time when it is desired to show or exhibit such carnival.
(b) Such application shall give the name and permanent address of the owner of the carnival, and if the carnival is owned by a
company or corporation, the application shall show such fact and shall also show the name of the manager or other officer in
charge of the carnival. In any event, the application shall show the person in active charge and control of showing and exhibiting
the carnival.
(c) The application shall further give a list of all shows, rides, booths and other businesses and attractions operated in
connection with the carnival, listing same by name and with a description of each show or attraction.
(d) Such applicant shall also submit with the application, in the form of affidavits and statements, evidence as to the solvency
and responsibility of the owner of the carnival, and as to the kind and character of shows and attractions exhibited by the carnival.
(e) In making such application, the person making same shall also state, at the end of the application, that he agrees to conduct
the carnival and each and all shows, attractions and exhibits therein in a decent, orderly and law abiding manner.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 111, Section 111.17)
Sec. 4.314 Action on Application
After an application is filed under this division, the city secretary shall consider the same, and if the city secretary is convinced
from the evidence submitted that the owner of the carnival is solvent and that he has in the past conducted the carnival in a
decent, law abiding and orderly manner, and proposes to while showing in the city, the city secretary shall approve the
application. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 111, Section 111.18)
Sec. 4.315 Fee for License
As a condition and requirement to the licensing of a carnival to show in the city, the applicant for such license shall pay to the city
secretary a license fee in the sum of $100.00. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 111, Section 111.19)
Sec. 4.316 Issuance of License
Upon approval of an application for a license under this division by the city secretary and payment of the fee prescribed by this
division, the city secretary shall issue a license to the applicant to show and exhibit the carnival in the city. (Ordinance 2014-19
adopted 7/8/14)
Sec. 4.317 Permitted Operations Under License
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/414
Any person obtaining a license to show and exhibit a carnival within the city limits shall have the right to show, maintain and
operate only such shows, rides, booths and other attractions as shall be under the direct charge and supervision of the owner or
operator of the carnival, and it shall not be lawful for any person to show or exhibit in connection with the carnival any show,
attraction or concession of any kind or, character independent of the carnival ownership and management, the license granted to
such carnival covering and permitting only such shows, attractions and concessions as are owned and operated by the person
applying for the license. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 111, Section 111.21)
Secs. 4.318–4.320 Reserved
Division 3. Circuses
Sec. 4.321 License Required
No circus, menagerie or other show of like character shall be allowed to parade upon or travel over any of the streets, avenues, or
highways of the city with any of their heavy wagons, personalities or equipment without first obtaining from the city secretary a
license therefor. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 111, Section 111.30)
Sec. 4.322 License Fee
The fee for any license required by the provisions of this division shall be the sum of $100.00 and shall be paid to the city at the
time the application for such license is made. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 111, Section 111.31)
Sec. 4.323 Issuance of Permit
When all provisions of this division are complied with, the city manager shall cause a license to be issued under the terms and
provisions hereof. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 111, Section 111.32)
Sec. 4.324 Duty of Police
The chief of police and the police officers of the city are hereby directed to abate as a nuisance any attempt to use the streets,
alleys and other ways in the city without such license by any such circus or menagerie, and to prevent any such encroachment
upon such streets or highways. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 111, Section 111.33)
Secs. 4.325–4.330 Reserved
Division 4. Coin-Operated Machines*
Sec. 4.331 Definitions
For the purpose of this division, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
Coin-Operated Machine. Every machine or device of any kind or character which is operated by or with coins, metal slugs,
tokens or checks, “music coin-operated machines” and “skill or pleasure coin-operated machines” as those terms are hereinafter
defined, shall be included in such terms.
Music Coin-Operated Machines. Every coin-operated machine of any kind or character, which dispenses or vends or which is
used or operated for dispensing or vending music and which is operated by or with coins or metal slugs, tokens or checks. The
following are expressly included within the term: phonographs, pianos, graphophones, radios and all other coin-operated
machines which dispense or vend music.
Operator. Any person, firm, company, association or corporation who exhibits, displays or permits to be exhibited or displayed,
in his or its place of business or upon premises under his or its control, any coin-operated machine in this city.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/414
Owner. Any person, individual, firm, company, association or corporation owning or having the care, control, management or
possession of any coin-operated machine in this city.
Service Coin-Operated Machines. Pay toilets, pay telephones and all other machines or devices which dispense service only and
not merchandise, music, skill or pleasure.
Skill or Pleasure Coin-Operated Machines. Every coin-operated machine of any kind or character whatsoever, when such
machine or machines dispense or are used or are capable of being used or operated for amusement or pleasure or when such
machines are operated for the purpose of dispensing or affording skill or pleasure, or for any other purpose other than the
dispensing or vending of merchandise or music or service, exclusively as those terms are defined herein. The following are
expressly included within the term: marble machines, marble table machines, marble shooting machines, miniature racetrack
machines, miniature football machines, miniature golf machines, miniature bowling machines, and all other coin-operated
machines which dispense or afford skill or pleasure. Provided that every machine or device of any kind or character which
dispenses or vends merchandise, commodities or confections or plays music in connection with or in addition to such games or
dispensing of skill or pleasure shall be considered as skill or pleasure machines and taxed at the higher rate fixed for such
machines.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 111, Section 111.45)
Sec. 4.332 Occupation Tax Levied
(a) Every person who owns, controls, exhibits, displays, or who permits to be exhibited or displayed in this city any coinoperated
machines, shall pay, and there is hereby levied on every coin-operated machine, except such as are exempted herein, an
annual occupation tax of one-fourth the tax charged and collected by the state.
(b) Provided that nothing herein shall prevent the operator of such machines from paying the tax levied in this division for the
account of the owner, but the payment of such tax by such operator or other person shall not relieve the owner from the
responsibility of complying with all provisions of this division.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 111, Section 111.46)
Sec. 4.333 Payment of Tax; Receipt to be Attached to Machine
(a) The occupation tax levied hereby shall be paid to the city tax assessor-collector who shall issue an occupation tax receipt.
(b) The occupation tax receipt shall be attached to the coin-operated machine mentioned in the receipt and shall bear the serial
number of the particular machine.
(c) It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to operate, exhibit or display any coin-operated machine in the city without
having attached thereto an occupation tax receipt and no occupation tax receipt issued for a certain coin-operated machine shall
be transferred to any other machine.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 111, Section 111.47)
Sec. 4.334 Nontaxed Machines Declared Nuisance; Seizure; Destruction
Every coin-operated machine subject to the payment of the tax levied herein, and upon which the tax has not been paid as
provided herein, is declared to be a public nuisance, and may be seized and destroyed by the chief of police and his agents, as in
such cases made and provided by law for the seizure and destruction of common nuisances. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XI,
Chapter 111, Section 111.48)
Sec. 4.335 Exemptions From Tax
Gas meters, pay telephones, pay toilets, food vending machines, confection vending machines, beverage vending machines,
merchandise vending machines and cigarette vending machines which are now subject to an occupation or gross receipts tax and
service coin-operated machines are expressly exempt from the tax levied herein, and the other provisions of this division. (1995
Code of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 111, Section 111.49)
Sec. 4.336 Application to Illegal Machines
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/414
Nothing herein shall be construed or have the effect to license, permit, authorize or legalize any machine, device, table or coinoperated
machine, the keeping, exhibition, operation, display or maintenance of which is now illegal or in violation of any article
of the penal code of the state or the constitution of the state. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 111, Section 111.50)
Sec. 4.337 Certain Coin-Operated Machines; Proximity to Schools
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit to be operated on premises under his control any skill or pleasure coinoperating
machine within 500 feet of any school ground in the city between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. of days in which
classes are taught in the public schools within the city. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 111, Section 111.51)
Secs. 4.338–4.340 Reserved
Division 5. Pool Halls, Billiard Parlors
Sec. 4.341 Definitions
For the purpose of this division, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
Billiard Table. Any table surrounded by a ledge or cushion with or without pockets upon which balls are impelled by a stick or
cue.
Licensee. Any person holding a pool hall license issued under the provisions of this division.
Pool Hall. Any place or establishment which is required by state law to pay an occupation tax to the state for owning and
operating one or more billiard tables.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 111, Section 111.60)
Sec. 4.342 Hours of Operation
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a pool hall between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and
between 1:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. on Sundays. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 111, Section 111.61)
Sec. 4.343 License Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a pool hall in the city without first obtaining a license therefor from the city
secretary. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 111, Section 111.62)
Sec. 4.344 Application
(a) Each person desiring to operate a pool hall in the city shall make an application in writing on forms provided by the city
requesting a license for such pool hall. Each application for a license shall be verified under oath and filed in triplicate with the
city secretary.
(b) Each application for a license to operate a pool hall shall contain the following information:
(1) The name, age, sex, race, marital status, address and telephone number of applicant.
(2) Location of the proposed pool hall.
(3) Number of persons to be employed by applicant, if any, and the nature of such employment.
(4) Whether the applicant has ever been charged with or convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude, any
violation of the liquor laws, or any offense involving lewd or indecent conduct or narcotics, or any other misdemeanor,
other than traffic violations, and full information concerning the conviction.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/414
(5) A statement that any violations of state law, this code or city ordinances which may occur at such establishment
will be reported promptly to the police department.
(6) A statement that no person will be allowed to work or perform duties at such establishment who has been
convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, or any offense involving immoral acts, lewd or indecent conduct, or
narcotics.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any applicant for a license under the provisions of this division to make any false statement while
making application therefor.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 111, Section 111.63)
Sec. 4.345 Fee
The fee to be charged and collected for any license issued under the provisions of this division shall be one-half the fee charged
by state law. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 111, Section 111.64)
Sec. 4.346 Denial of License
No license to operate a pool hall shall be issued under the provisions of this division if the applicant:
(1) Is not a person of good moral character as shown by the application of the applicant or by police investigation.
(2) Has had a license revoked during the past two years.
(3) Has had a license denied during the past 12 months.
(4) Has been convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude or any offense involving immoral acts, lewd or
indecent conduct or narcotics.
(5) Unless the premises to be used meets the sanitary provisions of this code, state law, city ordinances, rules and
regulations.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 111, Section 111.65)
Sec. 4.347 Revocation; Suspension
Any license issued under the provisions of this division may be revoked or suspended upon the violation by the licensee of any
applicable provision of this code, state law, city ordinance, rule or regulation by the licensee or any of his employees. (1995 Code
of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 111, Section 111.66)
Sec. 4.348 Display of License
All licenses issued under the provisions of this division shall be prominently displayed by the licensee at the pool hall. (1995
Code of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 111, Section 111.67)
Sec. 4.349 Inspections
Any pool hall within the city shall be subject to inspection by members of the health department and the police department at any
time. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 111, Section 111.68)
Secs. 4.350–4.360 Reserved
Division 6. Game Rooms and Amusement Redemption Machines
Sec. 4.361 Definitions
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/414
Amusement Redemption Machine. Any electronic, electromechanical, or mechanical contrivance that for a consideration affords
the player an opportunity to obtain anything of value, the award of which is determined solely or partially by chance, even though
accompanied by some skill, whether or not the prize is automatically paid by the contrivance, including but not limited to,
gambling device versions of bingo, keno, blackjack, lottery, sweepstakes, roulette, video poker, tic-tac-toe, eight liner or similar
electronic, electromechanical, or mechanical games, or facsimiles thereof, that operate by chance or partially so.
City Official. A code enforcement officer or building official of the city or any peace officer of the state.
Game Room. A building, facility or other place that is open to the public and that contains one or more operational amusement
redemption machines.
Game Room Owner. A person who has any ownership interest in a game room or an owner, director, or officer of a business
entity that has any ownership interest in a game room.
Operational Machine. A machine that is ready to be played and accessible to the public.
Sec. 4.362 Licensing
(a) Payment of Fee and Issuance of License. An owner, operator, or lessee of an amusement redemption machine game room
shall be required to secure a license annually. An amusement redemption machine game room shall be required to secure a license
by paying to the city an annual inspection and amusement redemption machine game room license fee of $250.00. Application
shall not be approved until a completed application has been submitted and found to meet all application requirements.
(b) Application. An applicant for a license or permit shall file with the city secretary a written application on a form provided
for that purpose, which shall be signed by the applicant, who shall be the owner, operator, or lessee of the amusement redemption
machine game room. Should an applicant maintain an amusement redemption machine game room at more than one location, a
separate application must be filed for each location. The following information is required in the application:
(1) Location, by address, of the proposed operation;
(2) A copy of the certificate of formation if the business is registered with the secretary of state, or the applicant's
d/b/a, if applicable;
(3) Name, address, telephone number and driver's license number of the following persons, if applicable:
(A) Applicant if a natural person;
(B) All persons who own 25 percent or more interest in the amusement redemption machine game room;
(C) All corporate officers, if any, of the business;
(D) If a partnership, each of the general and limited partners;
(E) The property owner; and
(F) The manager of the property and/or business.
(4) The previous occupation(s) of the applicant and, if applicable, all corporate officers and partners of the applicant
within the preceding five years;
(5) Whether a previous license or permit of applicant, or, if applicable, corporate or partner of applicant, has been
revoked within two years of filing of the application;
(6) Number of amusement redemption machines in the amusement redemption machine game room;
(7) An authorization to conduct a background check for all individuals included in subsection (b)(3). The license
will be denied if any individual has any convictions, guilty pleas, or deferred adjudications related to gambling or
organized crime or any felony;
(8) A sworn statement that:
(A) All the facts contained in the application are true and correct;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/414
(B) The location and operation of the amusement redemption machine game room will not violate any
applicable deed restrictions;
(C) The amusement redemption machine game room will be operated in accordance with all laws and city
ordinances, including chapter 47 of the Texas Penal Code; and
(D) Name, address and telephone number of an emergency contact person who can be reached after hours.
(c) Expiration and Renewal.
(1) Expiration. An annual amusement redemption machine game room license issued by the city shall automatically
expire on the thirty-first day of December following its issuance, except as otherwise stated herein. Such license shall
automatically expire if the licensee sells the property or the business, transfers equity to accomplish same, or otherwise
disposes of such devices. An amusement redemption machine game room license is not assignable or transferable. The
city shall not refund any portion of a license after the license is issued, nor shall it prorate or reduce in amount any fee
due to the city.
(2) Late Penalty. Upon the expiration of a license, the licensee shall obtain a renewal if the licensee wishes to
continue operating an amusement redemption machine game room. Failure to obtain the renewal within 30 days after
expiration will require such person to pay an additional late fee in an amount equal to 20 percent of the fee actually
due or 20 percent of the previous year's fee, whichever is greater, in order to obtain reinstatement of his license.
Nothing herein authorizes the licensee to operate after the expiration of a license and before a renewal is effective.
(d) Posting of License. The license shall be conspicuously posted inside the building.
(e) Restrictions, Regulations, Controls, and Limitations. The following restrictions, regulations, controls, and limitations shall
apply to all amusement redemption machine game rooms:
(1) Condition of Premises. All building and fire code standards must be met. A certificate of occupancy shall be
requested before license is issued. Game room must be located in an area zoned for that activity.
(2) Methods of Conduction of Business. Amusement redemption machines are not allowed outdoors.
(3) Hours of Operation. May only be operated between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m.
(4) Parking Requirements. One space for each two machines, plus one space per employee per shift.
(5) Alcoholic Beverages. No amusement redemption machine game room may be located on premises where
alcoholic beverages are sold or served, with the exception of any congressionally chartered, nonprofit organization.
(6) The owner, operator, or manager of the premises must be present to supervise the operation of the machines. The
machines shall not be left unattended.
(7) Machines must be situated within the premises as to be in full and open public view, which entails being visible
to all patrons of the establishment.
(8) A game room operator must be a person who is at least 18 years of age.
(9) Total number of machines in one establishment shall be limited to 50.
(10) All machines must be permitted according to the permitting requirements of Section 4.364 of these regulations.
Sec. 4.363 Occupation Tax Levied
There is levied an annual occupation tax equal to one fourth (1/4) of the amount levied by the state on all amusement redemption
machines. The occupation tax shall be levied upon the owner of such machine, save and except religious, charitable and
educational organizations authorized under the laws of the state; the tax levied herein shall be paid to the city secretary, who shall
issue an occupation tax receipt and, for each machine on which the occupation tax is paid, an occupation tax tag. The occupation
tax shall be due and payable on January 1st of each year. Such occupation tax receipt and tax tag shall specify the year for which
the tax receipt and tax tag are valid. The occupation tax tag shall be affixed to each machine.
Sec. 4.364 Permitting
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/414
(a) Permit Application. An owner, operator, or lessee of an amusement redemption machine game room shall be required to
obtain a permit for each amusement redemption machine. As part of the application, the owner, operator, or lessee must submit, at
their own expense, each amusement redemption machine, including hardware and software source code, to an independent
gaming compliance and testing laboratory approved in advance by the city to ensure that the machine does not generate the
resultant outcome independent of the skillful actions of the player.
(b) Permit. Following approval by the independent gaming compliance and testing laboratory, the city shall issue a permit that
will be permanently affixed to the approved machine. The permit shall include the name of the machine and the machine's serial
number.
(c) Sealing or Seizure. A person commits an offense if he or she owns an operational machine without a permit or with a
tampered permit. In addition to other criminal or civil remedies outlined in this article, the city shall have the authority to seal or
seize any coin-operated machine located in any amusement redemption machine for which a permit is not displayed. If any
amusement redemption machine is found with evidence of permit tampering of any kind, including a permit issued to a different
machine or a change in the game's hardware or software after the date of the permit issuance, the city shall have the authority to
seal or seize all amusement redemption machines in the game room for retesting at the owner's expense and/or to revoke the
owner's license to operate a game room.
(d) Nuisance Declared. Because of such businesses in the city are a potential for being an attractive nuisance to minors and the
questioned legality of such activities, the city council hereby finds such businesses constitute a nuisance to the health, safety and
welfare of the city. Accordingly, subsequent to the passage of this division, no license will be issued for any such establishment
within a 300-foot radius of a church, residence, school, daycare, hospital or another business entity operating under a license
issued under this division. Any businesses existing as of the time of the passage of this division shall be permitted to continue,
however, if they should cease operations, or violate any of the provisions of this division or any other applicable city, state or
federal law, their license shall be subject to revocation and such may not be renewed unless they meet all provisions of any
applicable law including the above spacing requirements.
Sec. 4.365 Unrestricted Access by City official
An owner, manager or employee of a game room or other person exercising control over a game room, a portion of a game room
or an operational amusement redemption machine, shall provide a city official with immediate unrestricted access during business
hours to all areas of the game room and to all operational amusement redemption machines located in the game room.
Sec. 4.366 Inspection by City Officials
(a) A city official may inspect a game room or an operational amusement redemption machine located within the incorporated
city limits to determine whether the game room or the operational amusement redemption machine complies with this code and
state law.
(b) An owner, manager or employee of a game room or other person who does not allow a city official to inspect a game room
or operational amusement redemption machine commits an offense.
Sec. 4.367 Transparent, Uncovered Windows Required
(a) Every game room shall have transparent unobstructed windows or open space on at least one (1) side so that the area is
open to view by the general public passing by on a public street or using a corridor, lobby or other room to which the public has
access and is admitted without charge. The owner, manager or employee of a game room shall not permit any obstruction of such
public view by the use of drawn shades, blinds, partitions, tinting, signs or other structures or obstructions.
(b) The requirements of subsection (a) above may be waived or modified by the building official if the game room owner can
demonstrate:
(1) The game room is located in a structure deemed a historic landmark, or the structure is within a historic district,
and deemed to have architectural or historic significance; and
(2) Compliance with the unobstructed view requirement shall require alterations to the structure that will have a
substantially detrimental effect on its historic or architectural features.
Sec. 4.368 Hours of Operations, Ingress and Egress
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/414
(a) All game rooms shall have their hours of operation clearly marked on every entrance.
(b) All game rooms shall have doors providing ingress and egress from the game room unlocked during the hours of operation.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, conduct or operate any game room for profit or to allow or permit any game
room to remain open for business or open to the public before the hour of 10:00 a.m. or after the hour of 12:00 a.m.
Sec. 4.369 Offense; Penalty
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or fail to comply therewith shall be deemed guilty of a class C
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not to exceed the maximum amount allowable by law. This offense is hereby
declared to be a strict liability offense and the culpable mental state required by chapter 6.02 of the Texas Penal Code is hereby
specifically negated and clearly dispensed with. Each day that the violation occurs shall constitute a distinct and separate offense.
(Ordinance 2012-03 adopted 1/10/12)
ARTICLE 4.400 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS *
Sec. 4.401 Definition
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in the article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except
when the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
Itinerant Merchant or Street Vendor. An individual or business including mobile food vendors, who desires to do business from a
fixed location without traveling from place to place, house to house, or street to street.
Peddler. Any person, whether a resident of this city or not, who shall go from house to house or from place to place in the city,
for the purpose of soliciting, selling or taking orders for offering to sell or take orders for any goods, wares, merchandise,
services, money, photographs, newspapers or magazines.
Solicitor. Any individual person, entity, firm or corporation who requests, solicits, collects or accepts donations, funds, pledges or
anything of value.
Sec. 4.402 Refusing to Leave Premises
Any peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant who enters upon premises owned or leased by another and willfully refuses to leave
the premises after having been notified by the owner or possessor of the premises, or his agents, to leave the same, shall be fined
as set forth in Section 4.416.
Sec. 4.403 Licensed Required
It shall be unlawful for any itinerant merchant, peddler or solicitor to engage in business or to solicit, collect or accept donations,
funds, pledges or any other thing of value within the city without first having applied for and obtained a license from the city
secretary.
Sec. 4.404 Hours and Days of Operation for Solicitors
Solicitors shall be limited to one license per year and limited to a three-day period consisting of Thursdays, Fridays and Saturdays
for no more than six (6) hours per day.
Sec. 4.405 Hours of Operation for Peddlers and Itinerant Merchant
It shall be unlawful for any peddler or itinerant merchant to engage in the business between the hours of one-half hour before
sunset and 9:00 a.m. the following morning, or at any time on Sundays except by specific appointment with or invitation from the
prospective customer.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/414
Sec. 4.406 Compliance with Provisions Prerequisite to Engaging in Business
All peddlers, solicitors and itinerant merchants must comply with the provisions of this article at least seven days prior to going
within the city for the purpose of engaging in business.
Sec. 4.407 License Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant within the city without first
having applied for and obtained a license from the city secretary.
Sec. 4.408 Application
Any person desiring a license to engage in business as a peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant within the city shall make written
application to the city, which such application shall show and contain the following:
(1) The name and address of the applicant;
(2) The name and address of the person, if any, that the applicant represents;
(3) The kind of goods or services offered for sale;
(4) Whether the applicant, upon any sale or order, shall demand, accept, or receive payment or deposit of money in
advance of final delivery;
(5) The period of time such applicant wishes to engage in such business within the city;
(6) Whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony, and if so, the complete circumstances thereof;
(7) The last five cities wherein the applicant has worked before coming to the city.
Sec. 4.409 Fee
Before any license shall be issued under the provisions of this article, the applicant therefor shall pay to the city a fee based upon
the length of time he desires such license as follows:
(1) For one year: $300.00.
(2) For six months: $200.00.
(3) For three months: $100.00.
(4) For one month: $60.00.
(5) For one week: $30.00.
(6) For one day: $15.00.
Sec. 4.410 Exemptions From Payment of Fee
No license shall be required of an organization or entity, or persons representing an organization of entity, which is locally based
in the county, and upon request can demonstrate it operates a nonprofit corporation, or is certified under state or federal statutes as
a tax exempt organization. Such locally based organization or entities shall include:
(1) Public or private schools including their attendant groups and organizations;
(2) Organized religious congregations;
(3) Local, state and federal governmental entities and their political subdivisions;
(4) Chartered civic, fraternal or sorority organizations;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/414
(5) Any locally based organization entitled to conduct operations under the Charitable Raffle Enabling Act.
Sec. 4.411 Issuance of License
No license shall be issued under the provisions of this article until the applicant shall have complied with all the provisions and
requirements of this article.
Sec. 4.412 Contents of License
Each license issued under the provisions of this article shall be signed by the city secretary, shall be dated as of the date of its
issuance, and shall state the duration or term of such license on the face thereof. Any license not dated and signed as herein
required, or which was issued in violation of this section shall be void.
Sec. 4.413 Duration of License
Every license issued under the provisions of this article shall be valid for the period of time stated therein.
Sec. 4.414 Display of License
Every peddler, solicitor or itinerant merchant licensed under the provisions of this article and doing business within the city shall
display his license upon the request of any person, and failure to so display such license shall be deemed a misdemeanor.
Sec. 4.415 Revocation
Any license issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked for the violation by the licensee of any applicable provision
of this code, state law or city ordinance, rule or regulation.
Sec. 4.416 Penalty
(a) A violation of any provisions of this article for which another penalty is not already herein provided, shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of Section 1.109 of this code.
(b) A violation of Section 4.402 shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in Section 1.109 of
this code.
(Ordinance 2012-17 adopted 5/1/12)
ARTICLE 4.500 TRANSPORTATION FOR HIRE
Division 1. Taxicabs*
Sec. 4.501 Definition
For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
Taxicab. Any motor vehicle used for the transportation of passengers for hire from point to point within the city, but shall not
include any bus or other motor vehicle engaged in the transportation of passengers from town to town, nor shall such term include
motor vehicles and buses run on a regular schedule over an established route.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 113, Section 113.01)
Sec. 4.502 License Tax
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/414
There is levied and assessed and ordered to be collected for the general fund of the city an annual license fee for the calendar year
on all persons operating taxicabs within the city of $50.00 and $10.00 fee for each and every taxicab operated by such person.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 113, Section 113.02; Ordinance 2014-1 adopted 12/3/13)
Sec. 4.503 Pro Rata Fee if Application Made After January 1
In the event an application for a license to operate a taxicab within the city shall be made after January 1 during any year, only the
pro rata part of annual license tax levied by this article shall be collected as the period of time between the date of such
application and the end of the calendar year bears to the calendar year. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 113, Section
113.03)
Sec. 4.504 Insurance Required
(a) Minimum requirements. The applicant must obtain, and keep in full force and effect, a policy of public liability and
property damage insurance issued by a casualty insurance company authorized to do business in the state, in the standard form
required pursuant to the laws of the state. The amount of recovery on each such vehicle shall be in limits of not less than the
following:
(1) For any one (1) person injured or killed in one (1) accident: $100,000.00.
(2) For any number of persons injured or killed in one (1) accident: $300,000.00.
(3) For property damage resulting from one (1) accident: $50,000.00.
(b) Policy cancellation. Such policy shall provide for notice to the city prior to cancellation, and should such policy be canceled
during the term of the license, such license shall automatically terminate therewith.
(Ordinance 2014-6 adopted 2/4/14)
Secs. 4.505–4.520 Reserved
Division 2. Horse-Drawn Carriages
Sec. 4.521 Applicability
Holders of annual permits to operate carriage services and drivers of horse-drawn carriages shall be governed by the provisions of
this article.
Sec. 4.522 Permit
(a) It shall be unlawful to operate a horse-drawn carriage or other touring vehicle employing the use of draft animals for
locomotion without first being issued a city carriage permit. The city secretary shall issue a carriage permit only if the following
requirements have been satisfied:
(1) The proposed route of the service does not operate on any hike-and-bike trail or footpath within the city.
(2) The carriages and equipment proposed to be used in the service are in safe and presentable condition.
(3) The applicant has agreed to operate only on a schedule and route and over the designated traffic lanes approved
by the city's police department and to park said carriages or vehicles only at such locations approved by the city's
police department.
(4) The carriage wheels shall have all steel or iron outer rims adequately sheathed in rubber or other synthetic
material to prevent damages to the street pavement.
(5) Documentation of current rabies vaccination shall be on file with the city secretary at all times.
(6) All horseshoes used shall be of a type approved by the city's police department.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/414
(7) The applicant has agreed to maintain all barns, stables, or other housing for horses and carriages in a safe and
sanitary condition, and has agreed to permit the city to inspect such facilities at any time.
(8) The applicant has agreed to keep all carriage routes clear and free of animal void and excrement and to maintain
all permitted stands in a clean and sanitary matter. Each animal shall wear a bag capable of holding animal feces or in
the alternative, the carriage shall be equipped with a shovel and receptacle and the carriage driver shall promptly
remove all feces from the ground.
(9) The applicant has agreed to post the fares for each ride or trip so that they are visible to the public. This section
shall not apply to the exclusive, one-time rental of the carriage by a party by separate agreement, entered into more
than 24 hours prior to such trip.
(10) Lanterns shall be affixed to either side of the carriage and must be illuminated after dusk in addition to the
“slow moving vehicle” markings required by the Transportation Code.
(11) The applicant has agreed that in order to protect the health and well-being of each animal employed in this
service, the applicant shall specifically covenant and agree:
(A) Each animal shall be inspected and certified as to its good health annually by a permitted veterinarian. The
applicant will provide the city with Coggins paperwork, showing a negative result, upon request.
(B) No animal shall be worked longer than four continuous hours without feeding and rest.
(C) Each animal shall be provided water at each carriage stand.
(D) Animals shall not be whipped unless necessary for the safety of the animal or carriage passengers.
(E) Animals shall not be overworked.
(F) Each animal shall be provided with its own custom fit harness.
(G) No animal with an open sore or wound, or any animal which is lame or has any other ailment shall be
worked without specific written authorization from a veterinarian that such work will not endanger the health or
well-being of the animal.
(H) Each animal shall be groomed daily.
(I) No animal shall be allowed to pull more than seven people, including the driver.
(J) No animal shall be worked during time when the combined temperature and humidity index exceeds a
numerical value of 150.
(12) The applicant has paid a nonrefundable permit fee of $50.00 per carriage to defray the expense of carrying out
the provisions of this article.
(13) The application shall include a sworn statement by the applicant that all information provided in the application
is true and correct and shall further state that the applicant has conducted the annual background check required by this
chapter for each driver authorized to operate a horse-drawn carriage on their behalf.
(b) Upon finding that the applicant meets the qualifications stated herein, the city secretary shall issue the carriage permit. The
permit expires at the end of the calendar year, unless the application is for a new permit and is filed after September 30th, in
which case it is valid through the end of the following calendar year.
(c) A driver of a horse-drawn carriage must be at least 16 years of age and possess a valid driver's license for motor vehicles.
Sec. 4.523 Insurance
(a) Any applicant for a carriage permit under this article shall, before the permit can be issued, deliver to the city secretary a
certificate of insurance reflecting insurance coverage as herein prescribed. Said applicant shall keep in full force and effect during
the term of the carriage permit a policy of public liability insurance, issued by an insurance company fully authorized to do
business in this state and performable in this county, ensuring the public against any loss or damage that may result to any person
or property from the operation of such vehicle or vehicles.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/414
(b) General liability insurance shall be maintained in the amount of combined single limit of not less than $500,000.00 per
occurrence, with an aggregate amount of not less than $1,000,000.00, covering property damage, bodily injury and personal
injury; to secure payment of all lawful and proper claims arising out of the operations of the vehicle for hire service authorized
hereunder. The permit holder shall continually maintain insurance coverage during the term of the permit. If insurance lapses, is
cancelled, or is non-renewed and evidence of new insurance is not provided before the cancellation date, the permit shall be
automatically revoked.
Sec. 4.524 Revocation or Suspension of Permit
Operation of a carriage permit shall be conditioned upon continued compliance by the permittee with each of the requirements of
this article. The city's police department is hereby authorized and empowered to revoke or suspend any permit issued hereunder
upon a finding that any carriage permit holder has violated any of the provisions of this article. Such revocation or suspension
shall take effect upon delivery of written notice thereof to the carriage permit holder, with such delivery being made in person or
by certified mail through the United States Postal Service; provided, however, that the carriage permit holder shall have the right
to appeal to the city council, from any such action of the city's police department by delivering such appeal to the city secretary,
with a copy delivered to the city's police department, not more than five (5) business days after receiving notice of revocation or
suspension. In the event the carriage permit holder shall fail to deliver such notice to the city secretary within the time prescribed,
the action of the city's police department in revoking or suspending the permit shall be final. If the carriage permit holder timely
delivers the notice to the city secretary, the city council shall hear the appeal at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city
council after the filing of the notice of appeal with the city secretary.
(Ordinance 2017-25 adopted 12/5/17)
ARTICLE 4.600 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES*
Sec. 4.601 Purpose and Intent
(a) Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and
general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform licensing regulations to ensure sexually
oriented businesses are operated by persons and in a manner that prevents casual high-risk sexual activity, prostitution, drug use,
other criminal activity, or logistical difficulties and risk of physical endangerment to police officers responsible for policing such
businesses.
(b) Intent. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content
of any materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented
materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access to sexually oriented entertainment.
Sec. 4.602 Definitions
For the purposes of this article the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows:
Applicant. Any person, including any spouse of an individual owner, or any other entity required to submit any documentation
and/or receive any approvals for operating sexually oriented business or working within a sexually oriented business within the
city.
Bathhouse, Sexually Oriented. An enterprise where a portion of its business is offering baths and/or showers with other persons
present who are nude or displaying specified anatomical areas.
Body Painting Studio, Sexually Oriented. An establishment where a portion of its business is the application of paint or other
substance to or on the human body by any means of application, technique or process when the subject's body displays for the
patron's view specified anatomical areas.
Business License, Sexually Oriented. Any license applied for under the sexually oriented business licensing article establishing
licensing requirements for sexually oriented business.
Business, Sexually Oriented. Any of the following businesses: sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub; sexually oriented
entertainment; sexually oriented motion-picture theater; sexually oriented video viewing kiosk, booth or arcade; sexually oriented
encounter center; sexually oriented media store; sexually oriented bathhouse; sexually oriented massage business; sexually
oriented retail establishment; sexually oriented body painting studio; sexually oriented lingerie or swimwear modeling studio;
sexually oriented modeling/photography studio; sexually oriented escort business; or any other such business establishment
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/414
whose purpose is offering sexually oriented entertainment, media or merchandise. Signs, advertisements or an establishment
name including verbal or pictorial allusions to sexual stimulation or gratification or by references to “adult,” “XXX” or similar
terms, shall be considered evidence that the establishment holds itself out to the public as a sexually oriented business. Each such
business is considered a separate land use for purposes of these regulations. For the purpose of the article, a business is not a
sexually oriented business if its inventory, square footage, and product value devoted to sexually oriented merchandise (including
media) is 10% or less and it offers no on-site sexually oriented entertainment.
Cabaret or Nightclub, Sexually Oriented. A building or portion of a building which provides or allows the provision of live
sexually oriented entertainment to its customers or which holds itself out to the public as an establishment where sexually
oriented entertainment is available, but such definition shall not include any sexually oriented use prohibited by this section.
Signs, advertisements or an establishment name including verbal or pictorial allusions to sexual stimulation or gratification or by
references to “adult entertainment,” “strippers,” “showgirls,” “exotic dancers,” “gentlemen's club,” “XXX” or similar terms, shall
be considered evidence that the establishment holds itself out to the public as a sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub.
Chief of Police. The chief of police for the City of Gonzales, Texas, or a designated agent.
Child Care Facility, Licensed. A facility licensed by the state providing supervision for children 13 years of age or younger or for
any individual who is deemed mentally challenged.
Civic Center Building. A building or complex of buildings that house municipal offices and service, and which may include
cultural, recreational, athletic, convention or entertainment facilities owned and/or operated by a municipality.
Customer. A person who:
(1) Enters a business in return for the payment of an admission fee or any other form of consideration or gratuity;
(2) Enters a business and purchases, rents, or otherwise partakes of any material, merchandise, goods,
entertainment, or other services offered therein; or
(3) Enters a business other than as an employee, vendor, service person, or delivery person.
Display Publicly. The act of exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting, or in any fashion displaying in any location, whether public or
private, an item or activity in such a manner that it may be readily seen and its content or character distinguished by normal
unaided vision from a street, highway, or public sidewalk, or from the property of others or from any portion of the premises
where items and materials other than sexually oriented media or merchandise are offered for sale or rent to the public.
Educational Facility. A public or private kindergarten, primary, secondary and postsecondary educational facilities offering
instruction in the branches of learning and study required to be taught by the Texas Education Agency; and such federally-funded
educational programs for preschool children as the Head Start Program.
Employee. Any person who renders any service whatsoever for or to the customers of an establishment subject to this article or
who works in or about an establishment subject to this article.
Encounter Center, Sexually Oriented. A business or enterprise that offers physical contact between two or more persons when one
or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity, for the purpose of engaging in specified sexually activity or touching
specified anatomical areas, but not including sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub.
Entertainer, Sexually Oriented. Any person paid by some form to provide entertainment to customers at a sexually oriented
business; entertainment may consist of dancing, signing, modeling, acting, other forms of performing, or individual conversations
with customer whereby the entertainer is paid any form of remuneration directly or indirectly for such conversations.
Entertainment, Sexually Oriented. Any of the following activities, when performed by a sexually oriented entertainer at a sexually
oriented business; dancing, singing, talking, touching, modeling (including lingerie or photographic), gymnastics, acting, other
forms of performing, or individual conversations with customer.
Escort Business, Sexually Oriented. A business or person that advertises or solicits in any way to prospective clients for the
provision of sexually oriented escorts that will provide sexually oriented entertainment, companionship or conduct or employs, or
contracts with a sexually oriented escort, or refers or provides to a client a sexually oriented escort.
Escort, Sexually Oriented. A person who offers to provide, for some form of remuneration, acts of sexually oriented
entertainment or conduct to a client.
Floor Area, Gross. The total area of the building accessible or visible to a person, including showrooms, theaters including stage
area, service areas (but not including restrooms), behind-counter areas, areas used for storage of sexually oriented media or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/414
merchandise, and aisles, hallways, and entryways serving such areas.
Frequently. Two or more times per month.
Library, Public. A publicly owned facility in which literary and artistic materials, such as books, periodicals, newspapers,
pamphlets, prints, records, tapes, are kept for reading, reference, or lending.
Licensee. Anyone issued a license under this article sexually oriented business licensing.
Lingerie or Swimwear Modeling Studio, Sexually Oriented. An establishment or business that provides the service of live models
modeling lingerie, bathing suits, or similar wear to individuals, couples, or small groups.
Manager. Any person designated by the owner or operator of a sexually oriented business to be responsible for the operation of
such business at a particular location at a particular time; when the owner, proprietor, or other principal in the business is present,
such person may be considered the manager.
Massage. The act of touching, stroking, kneading, stretching, friction, percussion, and vibration, and includes holding,
positioning, causing movement of the soft tissues and applying manual touch and pressure to the body.
Massage Business, Sexually Oriented. Any business in which massages are offered as one of the business's services by a person
who is not licensed as a massage therapist under the Texas State Statutes, title 3, chapter 455: Massage Therapy; or any business
which provides massage for the purpose of sexual stimulation.
Massage Therapist. A person licensed as a massage therapist in accordance with the provision of the state department of state
health services in accordance with the Texas State Statutes, title 3, chapter 455: Massage Therapist.
Massage Therapy. The profession in which a massage therapist licensed under the Texas State Statutes, title 3, chapter 455:
Massage Therapy, applies massage techniques with the intent of positively affecting the health and well-being of the client.
Media. Anything printed or written, or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion-picture, film, videotape or videotape production,
or pictorial representation, or any electrical or electronic reproduction of anything that is or may be used as a means of
communication. Media includes but shall not necessarily be limited to books, newspapers, magazines, movies, videos, sound
recordings, CD-ROMS, DVD's, other magnetic media, and undeveloped pictures.
Media, Sexually Oriented. Media which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or
relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
Media Store Sexually Oriented. A store with sexually oriented media for sale and/or rent, and to which any of the following
applies:
(1) The sale and/or rental of sexually oriented media, whether alone or in conjunction with the sale and/or rental of
sexually oriented merchandise, constitutes a principal business of the establishment, taking into consideration any of
the following:
(A) The value realized from the sale and/or rental of sexually oriented media and/or merchandise;
(B) The floor area devoted to sexually oriented media and/or sexually oriented merchandise;
(C) The amount of inventory constituting sexually oriented media and/or sexually oriented merchandise; or
(2) The business advertised or holds itself out in any forum as a “XXX” “adult” or “sexually oriented” media and/or
merchandise business.
Merchandise, Sexually Oriented. This term includes any of the following categories of merchandise: lingerie presented in
combination with other merchandise contained within this definition; leather goods marketed or presented in a context to suggest
their use for sadomasochistic practices; condoms or sexual lubricants presented in combination with other merchandise contained
within this definition; sexually oriented novelties; and sexually oriented media which is separately defined in this section.
Modeling/Photography Studio, Sexually Oriented. Any place where a person who appears nude or semi-nude or in a state of
nudity or semi-nudity and is to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other
persons. A sexually oriented modeling/photography studio does not include educational classes in conjunction with a private or
public college, junior college, or university or that of an individual artist studio established solely for conduct of the artist.
Motel, Sexually Oriented. A hotel, motel, or similar commercial lodging establishment that:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/414
(1) Provides as its business accommodations to the public for any form of consideration for the purpose of viewing
sexually oriented media or sexually oriented entertainment. This definition does not include lodging facilities that
offer sexually oriented media via cable or satellite services on room televisions as ancillary television programming;
(2) Is marketed as or offered as “adult,” “XXX,” “couples,” or “sexually oriented” lodging facility; or
(3) Offers a sleeping room for a period of less than 10 hours or allows a tenant or occupant to rent the room for a
period of time of less than 10 hours or allows the tenant to have a weekly or monthly rental of the room for the
purposes of providing sexually oriented entertainment.
Motion-picture Theater, Sexually Oriented. An establishment where, for any form of consideration, sexually oriented media are
frequently shown that are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas” or that is marketed as or offered as “adult,” “XXX,” or sexually oriented. Frequently shown media as characterized herein
do not include sexually oriented speech and expressions that take place inside the context of some larger form of expression. This
definition does not include any type of facility that would meet the definition of a sexually oriented video viewing kiosk, booth or
arcade.
Novelties, Sexually Oriented. Instruments, devices, toys, or paraphernalia either designed as representation of human genital
organs or female breasts or designed or marketed primarily for use in sexually oriented stimulation of specified anatomical areas.
Nudity or State of Nudity. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with
less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. See, also, semi-nude.
Operates. To cause to function, maintain or create or to put or keep in operation a sexually oriented business whether or not that
person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business.
Operator. See “manager.”
Owner. The individual owner of an establishment, or if the legal owner is a corporation, partnership, or limited liability company,
the term shall include all general partners, any limited partner with a financial interest of ten percent (10%) or more, all corporate
officers and directors, and any shareholder or member with a financial interest of ten percent (10%) or more. “Owner” includes
the spouse(s) of any of the above persons.
Person. An individual, licensee, operating owner, manager, sexually oriented entertainer, firm, partnership, joint-venture,
association, independent contractor, corporation (domestic or foreign), limited liability company, trust, estate, assignee, receiver
or any other group or combination acting as a unit.
Premises. The physical location at which a business is located; as used in this section, the term shall include all parts of that
physical location, both interior and exterior, which are under the control of the subject business, through ownership, lease or other
arrangement.
Protected Land Use. A licensed child care facility, civic center building, educational facility, public library, recreational facility,
or religious facility.
Public Area. A portion of a sexually oriented business that is accessible to the customer, excluding restrooms, while the business
is open for business.
Recreational Facility. A permanent facility devoted to recreational purposes such as parks, play fields, or community recreation
buildings.
Religious Facility. A permanent facility exclusively used on a regular basis for religious assembly such as customarily occurs in a
synagogue, temple, mosque, or church or convent or monastery.
Retail Store, Sexually Oriented. A store with sexually oriented merchandise for sale and/or rent, and to which any of the
following applies:
(1) The sale and/or rental of sexually oriented merchandise, whether alone or in conjunction with the sale and/or
rental of sexually oriented media, constitutes a principal business of the establishment, taking into consideration any of
the following:
(A) The value realized from the sale and/or rental of sexually oriented merchandise and/or media;
(B) The floor area devoted to sexually oriented merchandise and/or sexually oriented media;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/414
(C) The amount of inventory constituting sexually oriented merchandise and/or sexually oriented media; or
(2) The business advertises or holds itself out in any forum as a “XXX,” “adult” or “sexually oriented” merchandise
business and/or media business.
Sadomasochistic Practices. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clothed or naked, or the condition of being fettered, bound,
or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed or naked.
Semi-Nude or in a State of Semi-Nudity. The showing of the female areola or nipple with less than fully opaque covering.
Showing of any other part of the anatomy defined under nude or state of nudity shall constitute being nude or in a state of nudity.
Simulated Nudity. A state of dress in which any device or covering, exposed to view, is worn that simulates any part of the
genitals, pubic region, or areola of the female breast.
Specified Anatomical Areas. Areas that include:
(1) Less than completely and opaquely covered human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, or anal cleft
or the human female areola or nipple; or
(2) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
Specified Criminal Act. Any of the following offenses as defined by the Texas Penal Code enumerated below or any other state or
federal laws addressing similar or related offenses below:
(1) Chapter 21, Sexual Offenses:
(A) Public lewdness;
(B) Indecent exposure;
(C) Indecency with a child;
(D) Improper photography or visual recording.
(2) Chapter 22, Assaultive Offenses:
(A) Sexual assault;
(B) Aggravated sexual assault.
(3) Chapter 25, Offenses Against the Family: Prohibited sexual conduct.
(4) Chapter 43, Public Indecency:
(A) Prostitution;
(B) Promotion of prostitution;
(C) Aggravated promotion of prostitution;
(D) Compelling prostitution;
(E) Obscenity;
(F) Sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to minor;
(G) Sexual performance by a child;
(H) Possession of child pornography;
(5) Criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the above offenses.
Specified Sexual Activities. Sex acts normal or perverted, actual or simulated, of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or
sodomy. These activities include, but are not limited to the following: bestiality, erotic or sexual stimulation with objects or
mechanical devises, acts of human analingus, cunnilingus, fellatio, flagellation, masturbation, sadism, sadomasochism, sexual
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/414
intercourse, sodomy, or any excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth above with any
person of the premises. This definition shall include apparent sexual stimulation of another person's genitals whether clothed or
unclothed.
Transfer of Ownership or Control of a Sexually Oriented Business. This means and includes any of the following:
(1) The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
(2) The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or
similar means; or
(3) The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal devices which transfers the ownership or control of the
business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of the law upon the death of the person possessing the
ownership or control.
Video, Sexually Oriented. This definition is used to refer to any motion pictures, movies, films, videotapes, CD-ROMS, DVD's,
computer images, slides, sound recordings, other magnetic media or electrical or electronic reproductions of anything that is or
may be used as a means of communication that is distinguished or characterized by it emphasis on matters depicting, describing,
or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
Video Viewing Arcade, Sexually Oriented. A building or any portion of a building wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or for
any other form of consideration, electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion-picture machines,
projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images of “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
Video Viewing Kiosk or Booth, Sexually Oriented. Any kiosk, booth, cubicle, stall or compartment that is designed, constructed,
or used to hold or seat customers and is used for presenting videos or viewing publications by any photographic, electronic,
magnetic, digital, or other means or medium (including, but not limited to, film, video or magnetic tape, laser disc, CD-ROMs,
books, DVD's, magazines or periodicals) to show images of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” for
observation by customers therein. The term “booth,” “arcade booth,” “preview booth,” and “video arcade booth” shall be
synonymous with the term sexually oriented video viewing kiosk or booth.
Sec. 4.603 Location
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated a sexually oriented business within one thousand
(1,000) feet of:
(1) A church;
(2) A public, private, or parochial elementary or secondary school;
(3) A lot devoted to residential use;
(4) Another sexually oriented business; or
(5) A public park.
(b) For the purposes of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
objects, from the nearest property line of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property
line of the premises of a church, elementary or secondary school, residential lot, other sexually oriented business, or public park.
Sec. 4.604 License Required
(a) A license for a sexually oriented business shall be required for the following sexually oriented business uses, or conversion
of an existing business to one which is a sexually oriented business:
(1) Sexually oriented media store.
(2) Sexually oriented retail store.
(3) Sexually oriented motion-picture theatre.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/414
(4) Sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub.
(b) No other type of sexually oriented business shall be granted a license to operate within the city.
(c) It shall be unlawful for a person to establish or operate a sexually oriented business:
(1) Without having obtained a sexually oriented business license under the provisions of this chapter;
(2) During such time as a sexually oriented business license has expired or has been suspended or revoked; or
(3) In violation of any provision of this article.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person to manage or provide entertainment within a sexually oriented business:
(1) Without having obtained a sexually oriented business manager or entertainer license as provided under this
article;
(2) During such time as a sexually oriented business manager or entertainer license has expired or has been
suspended or revoked; or
(3) In violation of any provision of this article.
(e) It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any work, service or entertainment directly related to the operation of an
unlicensed sexually oriented business.
(f) It shall be prima facie evidence that a sexually oriented business has not obtained a sexually oriented business license if
such business fails to post the license in the manner required herein.
(g) It shall be prima facie evidence that any person who performs any business, service or entertainment in a sexually oriented
business had knowledge that such business license is not posted in the manner required herein.
(h) A license issued under this article shall be issued for only one sexually oriented use or position and to only the person listed
on the application. Any change in the type of sexually oriented business use or position shall invalidate the license and require the
licensee to obtain a new license for the change in use or position.
Sec. 4.605 License Application Fees
(a) The following are the approved license application fees for licenses required under this article:
(1) The application fee for a new sexually oriented business license shall be $1,500.00;
(2) The application fee for renewal of a sexually oriented business license shall be $750.00;
(3) The application fee for a new manager or entertainer license shall be $150.00; and
(4) The application fee for a renewal of a manager or entertainer license shall be $75.00.
(b) No application shall be processed without the required application fee paid in full at the time of application submission.
Sec. 4.606 Issuance of a License
(a) All applications for a sexually oriented business license shall be made with the city secretary.
(b) All completed applications for a sexually oriented business license shall provide the following information:
(1) A diagram of the business's interior premises configuration, noting specific use of each space, square footages,
walls or partitions, and total floor area of the building, drawn to a measurable scale of one (1) inch equals four (4) feet
with all dimensions notated;
(2) The name of the sexually oriented business and identification of the type of sexually oriented business proposed
(sexually oriented media store, sexually oriented retail store, sexually oriented motion-picture theatre, or sexually
oriented cabaret or nightclub);
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/414
(3) If the property owner is other than the applicant, the name of the property owner and statement signed by the
property owner stating that applicant has entered into a contract to acquire, lease or otherwise control the site or
structure for use as a sexually oriented business;
(4) The applicant's name, any aliases, mailing address for receipt of notices, home address, home and office
telephone numbers, occupation, date and place of birth, driver's license and social security number, and tax
identification number; all information required of the applicant shall also be required by the applicant's spouse;
(5) If the applicant is an entity other than an individual, each individual who has a ten (10) percent or greater
interest in the entity proposing to own and/or operate the business must provide the same information as the individual
applicant and sign the license application as an applicant;
(6) Any conviction for any felony or for any misdemeanors involving prostitution, obscenity or controlled
substance, indicating the type of crime and the date and place of conviction; and
(7) A statement signed under oath by the applicant and the applicant's spouse that the applicant and applicant's
spouse have personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the information contained
therein is true and correct; that the applicant and spouse grant permission to the city to perform any necessary
background checks on persons or businesses listed on the application; and that the applicant and spouse have read all
provisions of this code regulating sexually oriented businesses.
(c) Each application shall be accompanied by payment of the appropriate application fee. License fees shall not be refundable.
(d) Application Processing - Sexually Oriented Business License.
(1) Within ten (10) working days of receipt, the city secretary shall notify the applicant whether or not the
application for the sexually oriented business license is determined complete. In the event the application is
determined incomplete, the notification to the applicant shall include a written explanation of the reason(s) why the
application is incomplete.
(2) Failure to provide information and documentation required on the application for a sexually oriented business
license shall constitute an incomplete application and shall not be processed.
(3) Upon receipt of a complete application, the city secretary shall immediately transmit a copy of the application to
the fire chief, chief of police and building official. Not later than thirty (30) calendar days from the date the application
is determined to be complete, the police department, fire department, and building inspections department shall report
the results of their investigation to the city secretary. The reports shall include the following:
(A) It shall be the duty of the police department to perform background checks on the applicant(s) for the
sexually oriented business license to determine whether the information contained in the application is true and
correct and whether or not the applicant(s) complies with the criteria for holding a sexually oriented business
license;
(B) It shall be the duty of the fire department to determine whether the structure identified in the application
for the sexually oriented business meets the standards of the applicable fire code; and
(C) It shall be the duty of the building inspection department to determine whether the structure identified in
the application for the sexually oriented business meets the building code, and exterior and interior building
standards required by sexual oriented businesses.
(e) Approval or Denial - Sexually Oriented Business License. The city secretary shall approve and issue the sexually oriented
business license required hereunder to an applicant within forty-five (45) calendar days after receipt of a complete application and
the applicant shall be notified in writing of the city secretary's decision within five (5) working days thereof, unless the city
secretary finds one (1) or more of the following to be true, in which case the application shall be denied:
(1) The applicant has failed to provide information for issuance of the license or gave false, fraudulent or untruthful
information on the application form;
(2) The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age; all applicants shall provide documentation issued by a state or
federal agency bearing the applicant's date of birth and photographs as proof that the applicant is not under the age of
eighteen (18);
(3) The applicant or spouse has been convicted of, or released from confinement for conviction of, or received an
order for deferred adjudication of, any felony within the past five (5) years or any misdemeanor within the past three
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/414
(3) years where such felony or misdemeanor violation constitutes a specified criminal act as defined by this article; the
fact that the applicant or spouse has appealed such action shall have no effect on the disqualification of the application;
(4) The applicant or spouse has been convicted of an offense under this article or its predecessor within the past
three (3) years;
(5) The applicant or spouse has had a sexually oriented business license, or comparable license, of any type revoked
within the past five (5) years or one suspended within the past three (3) years, immediately preceding the date of the
application; the fact that the applicant or spouse has appealed such action shall have no effect on the disqualification of
the application;
(6) The applicant or spouse has held, within the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of the application, an
ownership, operational or a managerial position, at a sexually oriented business that has demonstrated an inability to
operate in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers;
(7) The applicant or spouse owes delinquent city taxes or assessments or other financial obligations to the city and
no arrangements satisfactory to the city manager have been made for the payment of such debts or obligations;
(8) The applicant's business premises does not comply with or meet the requirements of the applicable
governmental licensing, zoning, building, fire, health and property maintenance ordinances or codes, provided, that
upon a showing that the premises meets said requirements and that the applicant is otherwise qualified, the application
shall be eligible for reconsideration; or
(9) The license fee required by this article has not been paid.
(f) Provisional License. If the city secretary is unable to act on the license application within the required time period following
a determination of completeness, he/she shall notify the applicant in writing and issue a provisional license, which shall expire
following approval of the application or denial of the application and final disposition of the appeal proceedings as provided in
Section 4.611, Appeal of License Denial, Suspension or Revocation. The provisions of this article shall fully apply to a
provisional license.
(g) Information on License. The approved sexually oriented business license shall include the license number, name or the
license holder, the date of issuance and expiration, the address of the sexually oriented business, and a statement that the license is
not transferable.
(h) Posting. The approved sexually oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the sexually
oriented business's entrance so that it may be easily read at any time.
Sec. 4.607 Issuance of a Manager or Entertainer License
(a) All applications for a manager or entertainer license related to a sexually oriented business shall be made with the city
secretary.
(b) No application for a manager or an entertainer license shall be accepted by the city secretary prior to licensing of the
sexually oriented business for which the manager or entertainer license is applicable.
(c) All completed applications for a manager or entertainer license related to a sexually oriented business shall provide the
following information:
(1) The applicant's name, any aliases, mailing address for receipt of notices, home address, home and office
telephone numbers, occupation, date and place of birth and social security number, and tax identification number;
(2) The name and address of each sexually oriented business where the applicant intends to work and a valid copy
of the current sexually oriented business license for each of the sexually oriented business in which the manager or
entertainer proposes to work or perform;
(3) A statement signed under oath by the applicant that the applicant has personal knowledge of the information
contained in the application and that the information contained therein is true and correct; that the applicant grants
permission to the city to perform any necessary background checks on the applicant; and that the applicant has read all
provisions of this code regulating sexually oriented businesses; and
(4) The application must be accompanied by payment of the appropriate license fee.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/414
(d) The city secretary shall approve and issue the manager or entertainer license required hereunder to an applicant within
forty-five (45) calendar days after receipt of a complete application unless the city secretary finds one (1) or more of the
following to be true, in which case the application shall be denied:
(1) The applicant has failed to provide information required for issuance of the license or gave false, fraudulent or
untruthful information on the application form;
(2) The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age; all applicants shall provide documentation issued by a state or
federal agency bearing the applicants' date of birth and photographs as proof that the applicant is not under the age of
eighteen (18);
(3) The applicant has been convicted of, or released from confinement for conviction of, or received an order for
deferred adjudication of, any felony within the past five (5) years or any misdemeanor within the past three (3) years
where such felony or misdemeanor violation constitutes a specified criminal act as defined by this article; the fact that
the applicant has appealed such action shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant;
(4) The applicant has been convicted of an offense under this article or is predecessor within the past three (3) years;
(5) The applicant has had a sexually oriented manager or entertainer license, or comparable license, of any type
revoked within the past five (5) years or one suspended within the past three (3) years, immediately preceding the date
of application; the fact that the applicant has appealed such action shall have no effect on the disqualification of the
applicant;
(6) The applicant has held, within the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of application, an ownership,
operational or managerial position, at a sexually oriented business that has demonstrated an inability to operate in a
peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers;
(7) The applicant owes delinquent city taxes or assessments for other financial obligations to the city and no
arrangements satisfactory to the city manager have been made for the payment of such debts or obligations; or
(8) The license fee required by this article has not been paid.
(e) Application Processing-Manager or Entertainer License.
(1) Within ten (10) working days of receipt, the city secretary shall notify the applicant whether or not the
application for the manager or entertainer license related to a sexually oriented business is determined complete. In the
event the application is determined incomplete, the notification to the applicant shall include a written explanation of
the reason(s) why the application is incomplete.
(2) Failure to provide information and documentation required on the application for manager or entertainer license
shall constitute an incomplete application and shall not be processed.
(3) Within forty-five (45) calendar days from the date the application is determined to be complete, the city
secretary shall approve or disapprove the application for a manager or entertainer license. The applicant shall be
notified in writing of the city secretary's decision within a time period of five (5) working days thereof.
(4) If the city secretary is unable to act on the license application within the required time period following a
determination of completeness, he/she shall notify the applicant in writing and issue a provisional license, which shall
expire following approval of the application or denial of the application and final disposition of the appeal proceedings
as provided in Section 4.611. The provisions of this article shall fully apply to a provisional license.
(f) Information on License. The approved manager or entertainer license shall include the license number, name of the license
holder, including any stage name, licensee's photograph, the date of issuance and expiration, the address(s) of the sexually
oriented business(es) where such license is applicable, and a statement that the license is not transferable.
(g) Posting. A valid copy of the manager's license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually
oriented business when that manager is on duty. A valid copy of the entertainer's license shall not be posted but shall be available
on site within the office of the sexually oriented business for inspection at any time.
Sec. 4.608 License Terms and Renewal
(a) License Terms and Expiration.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/414
(1) All licenses issued under this article shall be issued for a period of one (1) year and are required to be renewed
annually.
(2) No license issued under this article shall be transferable to another person or entity.
(3) All licenses issued under this article shall expire on the last day of the calendar month during which the licenses
were issued or renewed during the previous year.
(b) License Renewal.
(1) All applications for license renewal shall be submitted to the city secretary no earlier than thirty (30) calendar
days prior to the date of expiration.
(2) A license that is expired by more than thirty (30) calendar days shall be subject to the same license review
procedures and criteria required of any applicant applying for a new license.
(3) If an application for renewal of a license has been submitted and accepted as complete by the city secretary, the
licensee may operate under the existing license until issuance or a renewed license.
(4) The city secretary shall approve the license renewal within thirty (30) calendar days after receipt of a complete
renewal application unless the city secretary finds one (1) or more of the following to be true (also applicable to the
applicant's spouse if a renewal for a sexually oriented business license), in which case the application shall be denied:
(A) The applicant has failed to provide information required for renewal of the license or gave false,
fraudulent or untruthful information on the application form;
(B) During the term of the existing license or its renewal period, the applicant has been convicted of, or
released from confinement for conviction of, or received an order for deferred adjudication of, any felony or
misdemeanor violation that constitutes a specified criminal act as defined by this article; the fact that the
applicant has appealed such action shall have no effect on the disqualification of the application;
(C) During the term of the existing license or its renewal period, the applicant has been convicted of an
offense under this article;
(D) During the term of the existing license or its renewal period, the applicant had a sexually oriented business
license, or comparable license, of any type revoked; the fact that the applicant has appealed such action shall
have no effect on the disqualification of the application;
(E) During the term of the existing license or its renewal period, the applicant has held an ownership,
operational or a managerial position, at a sexually oriented business that has demonstrated an inability to operate
in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers;
(F) The applicant owes delinquent city taxes or assessments or other financial obligations to the city and no
arrangements satisfactory to the city manager have been made for the payment of such debts or obligations;
(G) The applicant's business premises does not comply with or meet the requirements of the applicable
governmental licensing, zoning, building, fire, health and property maintenance ordinance or codes, provided,
that upon a showing that the premises meets said requirements and that the applicant is otherwise qualified, the
application shall be eligible for reconsideration; or
(H) The licensee fee required by this article has not been paid.
(5) Application Processing of License Renewal.
(A) Within five (5) working days of receipt, the city secretary shall notify the applicant whether or not the
license renewal application is determined complete. In the event the application is determined incomplete, the
notification to the applicant shall include a written explanation of the reason(s) why the application is
incomplete.
(B) Failure to provide information and documentation required on the application shall constitute an
incomplete application and shall not be processed.
(C) Within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the application is determined to be complete, the city
secretary shall approve or disapprove the application for renewal of the license. The applicant shall be notified in
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/414
writing of the city secretary's decision within a time period of five (5) working days thereof.
(6) If the city secretary is unable to act on the license application within the required time period following a
determination of completeness, he/she shall notify the applicant in writing and issue a provisional license, which shall
expire following approval of the application or denial of the application and final disposition of the appeal proceedings
as provided in Section 4.611, Appeal of License Denial, Suspension or Revocation. The provisions of this article shall
fully apply to a provisional license.
(7) Information on License. The renewed license shall contain the same information required to be shown on the
original license.
Sec. 4.609 License Suspension
(a) The chief of police shall suspend a license issued under this article for the following reasons:
(1) Licensee operated the sexually oriented business or performed sexually oriented entertainment in a location not
approved for such activity;
(2) Licensee violated any requirement of the zoning ordinance related to the regulation of sexually oriented
business;
(3) Licensee failed to maintain on site a current list of all employees (contract or otherwise) along with their
completed employment application and photo readily accessible for inspection within the premises;
(4) Licensee refused city or other governmental agency access to the premises and records;
(5) Licensee transferred a license issued under this article to another person or entity;
(6) Licensee allowed a person under the age of eighteen (18) years in or on the premises;
(7) Licensee allowed a person to appear in a state of semi-nudity or nudity or in a state of simulated nudity on the
premises;
(8) Licensee reconfigured the interior of the premises without approval from the city;
(9) Licensee operated the business without a licensed manager on duty during the time the business was opened to
the public;
(10) Licensee was delinquent in payment to the city for ad valorem taxes, or sales taxes related to the sexually
oriented business;
(11) Licensee demonstrated an inability to operate or manage the business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner
thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers;
(12) Licensee violated any of the “standards of conduct and operation” under Section 4.613;
(13) The licensee or manager of the business has been charged with any disqualifying offense, or any employee of
the business being charged with any disqualifying offense in connection with the business. This suspension period
shall coincide with the time during which the charges remain pending;
(14) The business has knowingly employed a person who has been convicted of any disqualifying offense in
connection with a sexually oriented business unless the conviction occurred at least three (3) years prior to the date of
this employment; provided that if the person was incarcerated in a penal facility in connection with the conviction,
then the three (3) year period shall run from the date of release from incarceration;
(15) The licensee, manager or employee has engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually
oriented business premises or allowed intoxicated persons on the business premises;
(16) The licensee, manager or employee refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises;
(17) The licensee, manager or employee permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business
premises; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/414
(18) The licensee, manager or employee demonstrated inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business in
a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers.
(b) The chief of police may suspend a license issued under this article for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days.
(c) A licensee subject to suspension shall have the right to appeal the suspension under the procedures provided in Section
4.611, Appeal of License Denial, Suspension or Revocation.
Sec. 4.610 License Revocation
(a) The chief of police shall revoke a license issued under this article for the following reasons:
(1) The licensee's license has been suspended more than twice during a twelve-month period;
(2) The licensed business was operated during a period of time when the license was suspended;
(3) A licensee omitted or gave false or misleading information on the license application, including, previous license
revocation or suspensions, or convictions or deferred adjudication for misdemeanors and felonies constituting a
specified criminal act; the fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license;
(4) A licensee has been convicted of, or received an order for deferred adjudication, for a felony or misdemeanor
constituting a specified criminal act;
(5) A licensee or an employee has allowed possession, use, or sale of a controlled substance on the premises;
(6) A licensee or an employee has allowed prostitution on the premises;
(7) A licensee or an employee has allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or
sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term “sexual contact” shall have the same meaning as it is
defined in section 21.01, Texas Penal Code; or
(8) On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve-month period, a person or persons committed specified criminal
act in or on the licensee's premises.
(b) The chief of police shall revoke a license issued under this article for a period of one (1) year.
(c) A licensee subject to revocation shall have the right to appeal the revocation under the procedures provided in Section
4.611, Appeal of License Denial, Suspension or Revocation.
(d) A licensee that has had a license revoked shall be subject to the same license criteria required of any applicant applying for
a new license.
(e) All premises used in connection with sexually oriented businesses shall be periodically inspected by the chief of police for
compliance with the requirements of this section:
(1) Separate toilet facilities for men and women shall be provided on the premises.
(2) Persons under the age of eighteen (18) shall not be permitted on the premises of the business.
(3) Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold or provided on the premises of the business except in compliance with a
current valid license or permit issued by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission.
(4) For businesses where no alcoholic beverages are sold or provided, the business shall not operate between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. on a Sunday or between 12:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any other day. For businesses
where alcoholic beverages are sold or provided, the business shall not operate at any time when the sale of alcoholic
beverages is not prohibited. No customer shall be permitted to enter upon or remain on the business premises at any
time other than during the permitted hours of operation.
(5) The business shall not have any bedroom, sleeping quarters, residence or living quarters on the premises of the
business.
(6) The business hours of the premises shall be plainly posted at each entrance to the business.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/414
(7) Doors to individual customer service areas, rooms, viewing booths, or cubicles shall not be capable of being
locked.
(8) Massage therapists shall wear clothing that covers the anus, female breast, and the entire genitals during the
performing of massage therapy.
Sec. 4.611 Appeal of License Denial, Suspension or Revocation
(a) Appeal. The applicant may appeal an unfavorable decision of the city secretary or chief of police by filing a written petition
with the city secretary requesting a hearing on the denial, suspension, or revocation of the license within ten (10) calendar days of
the date the applicant receives notification of the city secretary or chief of police's decision. The city council shall serve as the
appeals board. The appeal shall be scheduled within twenty (20) calendar days of the date the petition is received in the office of
the city secretary. The city secretary shall give written notice to the applicant of the time and place for the hearing on the
applicant's appeal at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the scheduled date of hearing.
(b) Provisional License. During the appeal of a license denial, suspension, or revocation, the applicant shall be permitted to
operate with a provisional license until the final disposition of the appeal proceedings before the city council. The provisions of
this article shall fully apply to a provisional license.
(c) Deferring Action on Proceedings. If the applicant has filed an appeal with the zoning board of adjustments, to contest the
decision of the building official regarding any standard governing a sexually oriented business, or a variance request by the
applicant is pending before the board, the city council may defer action on the license application pending resolution of the appeal
or variance request by the board, but shall take up the matter at the first regular meeting of the city council following the board's
decision.
(d) Decision. The city council shall issue a decision with findings within ten (10) calendar days after any hearing held in
accordance with this section. The decision on appeal shall be governed by the same standards as that for the original decisionmaker.
The minutes of the city council meeting shall show the action taken on the license, and if the city council acts favorably on
the appeal of the license, the city council shall direct the city secretary to issue the license.
(e) Notification of Decision. If the appeal of the license denial, suspension or revocation is denied, the applicant shall be
immediately notified by registered or certified mail to the address provided on the application, and the letter of notification shall
state the basis for such denial.
(f) Judicial Review. Upon denial of the appeal of the license denial, suspension, or revocation by the city council, an applicant
may seek judicial review.
Sec. 4.612 Inspection of Premises
Any sexually oriented business shall be deemed to have consented to periodic entry into and inspection of the business premises
by appropriate city officials and inspection of only those business records necessary for the purpose of determining whether such
business and persons are in compliance with this code. This entry and inspection shall take place at any time the business is
occupied or open for business.
Sec. 4.613 Standard of Conduct and Operation
(a) It shall be unlawful for any sexually oriented business, or any owner, manager, server, entertainer or employee thereof, or
any customer or any sexually oriented business, while on or about the premises of the business, to fail to adhere to the standards
of conduct and operation.
(b) Standards Applicable to All Sexually Oriented Business. The following standards apply to all sexually oriented businesses:
(1) Establishment License. All sexually oriented businesses shall post the license issued under this article in a
conspicuous, easily viewable location, at eye level, at the main cash register for the business and lighted in a manner
for ease of inspection;
(2) Manager on Duty. All sexually oriented businesses shall have a licensed manager on duty at all times the
business is open to the public for any purpose and said manager's name shall be posted in a conspicuous, easily
viewable location, at eye level, at the main cash register for the business and lighted in a manner for ease of
inspection;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/414
(3) Employee Records. All sexually oriented businesses shall maintain a current list of all employees (contract or
otherwise) along with their completed employment application and photo readily accessible for inspection within the
premises;
(4) Licenses Available for Managers and Entertainers. Each manager issued a license under this article shall, at all
times when on the premises of the licensed business, have said license in his or her possession. The license for each
entertainer shall be retained for ready inspection on the premises of the sexually oriented business;
(5) Age Restriction. No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be permitted on the premises of any
sexually oriented business;
(6) Interior Observation. The interior of all sexually oriented businesses shall be configured in such a manner that
offers an unobstructed view from manager's station of every area of the premises excluding restrooms;
(7) Restrooms. No restroom may contain any video equipment;
(8) Security Cameras. Parking areas surrounding the sexually oriented businesses shall be continually monitored
and said recordings from security cameras shall be continually monitored and said recordings from security cameras
shall be maintained for a period of at least thirty (30) days;
(9) Exterior Observation. The premises of all sexually oriented businesses shall be designed as to ensure that the
interior of the premises is not observable from the exterior of the building;
(10) Exterior Display. No sexually oriented business shall be conducted in any manner that permits the observation
of sexually oriented entertainers engaged in sexually oriented entertainment or any depiction relating to specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from any exterior source by display, decoration, sign, show window or
other openings;
(11) Specified Criminal Acts and Specified Sexual Activities Prohibited. No owner, manager, employee,
independent contractor, server, entertainer or customer shall engage in any specified criminal act or any specified
sexual activity on the premises of the business;
(12) Semi-Nude or Nude or Simulated Nudity. No person, including sexually oriented entertainers, shall be seminude
or in a state of semi-nudity, or nude or in a state of nudity, or in a state of simulated nudity, while on the premises
of a sexually oriented business licensed under this article;
(13) Posting of Age Restriction. A sign shall be posted at each entrance to a sexually oriented business stating, “It is
unlawful for a person under eighteen (18) years old to enter this location.”
(c) Standards for Sexually Oriented Media Store or Retail Store. Shall be subject to the following additional standards:
(1) Separate Room. If a business offers for sale or rent other media and/or merchandise, sexually oriented media
and/or merchandise shall be kept in a separate room physically and visually separate from the remainder of the store
by an opaque wall reaching at least eight (8) feet high or to the ceiling, whichever is less;
(2) Age Limit. No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall be permitted into a room containing sexually oriented
media and/or sexually oriented merchandise;
(3) Access. If a business offers for sale or rent other media and/or merchandise, access to the room containing
sexually oriented media and/or sexually oriented merchandise shall be through a solid door, accessed by an electronic
control device controlled and monitored by a clerk through direct visual control and posted with a sign clearly stating
that no one under the age of eighteen (18) shall enter the room;
(4) Location. If a business offers for sale or rent other media and/or merchandise, the entrance to the room
containing the sexually oriented media and/or sexually oriented merchandise shall be located so that it is as far as
reasonably practicable from media and/or merchandise likely to be of interest to children;
(5) Room Size. Any room wherein sexually oriented media and/or merchandise is offered for sale or rent shall be in
an area containing at least six hundred (600) square feet and having no walls, dividers, curtains, screens, shades or
other similar devices to obscure any part of the room from being monitored by the manager, unless it is to separate the
sexually oriented merchandise and/or media from nonsexually oriented merchandise or media;
(6) On-site Entertainment Prohibited. At no time shall the store provide any type of sexually oriented on-site
entertainment or show any type of sexually oriented electronic imagery on the premises;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/414
(7) Displays. No displays of sexually oriented media, merchandise or imager shall be visible from outside the room
containing sexually oriented media and/or merchandise or from the exterior of the business;
(8) Lighting. Any business that offers for sale or rent sexually oriented media and/or sexually oriented merchandise
shall be well lit at a lighting level of at least thirty (30) footcandles measured three (3) feet from the floor; and
(9) Monitoring. Activities in any room having sexually oriented media and/or sexually oriented merchandise shall
be monitored at all times by a store clerk through a video system located at the clerk's counter.
(d) Standards for Sexually Oriented Motion-Picture Theater. Shall be subject to the following additional standards:
(1) Presentation Area. All screenings of motion pictures, videos or other media shall occur in a room open to all
customers of the establishment and containing at least 1,000 square feet of floor area. No walls, dividers, curtains,
screens, shades or other similar devices shall be used to obscure any part of the screening room;
(2) Lighting. The lighting level in the area occupied by customers shall be at least five (5) footcandles as measured
at the floor;
(3) Seating. Seating shall consist of individual, theater-style chairs (maximum seat width 20 inches), with solid arms
separating the chairs. No couches, benches, portable chairs, beds, loose cushions or mattresses, or other forms of
seating shall be provided. Separate spaces for wheelchairs shall be provided in accordance with the applicable
provisions of the building code and the Americans with Disabilities Act; and
(4) Sexually Oriented Merchandise or Media. No sexually oriented motion-picture theatre shall sale or rent sexually
oriented merchandise or media.
(e) Standards for a Sexually Oriented Cabaret or Nightclub. Shall be subject to the following additional standards:
(1) Room. All customer-related activities and entertainment shall take place in a room of at least six hundred (600)
square feet and in a room that has an unobstructed view by all persons from any part of such room;
(2) Stage. All sexually oriented entertainment shall take place on stage elevated at least eighteen (18) inches above
the surrounding floor area, with a minimum area of one hundred (100) square feet, and with a horizontal separation of
at least sixty (60) inches between the edge of the stage and the nearest space to which customers have access. The
horizontal separation shall be physically enforced by a partial wall, rail, or other physical barrier measuring a
minimum of four (4) feet in height;
(3) Access. The manager and/or sexually oriented entertainer shall prohibit any person other than a licensed
entertainer to occupy the stage area;
(4) Tip. All tips for sexually oriented entertainment shall be collected in containers that are accessible to customers;
(5) Lighting. The lighting level in the area occupied by customers shall be at least fifteen (15) footcandles as
measured three (3) feet from the floor;
(6) Seating. Seating shall consist of chairs or open booths; no couches, beds, loose cushions or mattresses, or other
forms of seating shall be provided;
(7) Sexually Oriented Merchandise or Media. No sexually oriented cabaret or nightclub or motion-picture theatre
shall sale or rent sexually oriented merchandise or media; and
(8) Security. At all times the business is open and for an hour after closing, there shall be on site a licensed peace
officer employed by the business owner who holds a valid and current license (in good standing) issued by the Texas
Commission on Law Enforcement Officer Standards and Education. The peace officer's duty shall be to assist in
maintaining order and to report criminal activity or behavior.
Sec. 4.614 Enforcement and Penalties
(a) The city may enforce this article by any methods not inconsistent with state law and city charter.
(b) Any person violating the provisions of this article commits a class C misdemeanor.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/414
(c) Any person operating a sexually oriented business without a license or with an expired license, upon conviction, is
punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(d) Any person working as a sexually oriented entertainer or manager of a sexually oriented business without a license or with
an expired license, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(e) Any person violating any other provision of this article, upon conviction is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00).
(Ordinance 2012-06 adopted 2/7/12)
ARTICLE 4.700 FAIR HOUSING REGULATIONS*
Sec. 4.701 Declaration of Policy
(a) It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to bring about through fair, orderly and lawful procedures, the opportunity
of each person to obtain housing without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or
familial status.
(b) It is further declared that such policy is established upon a recognition of the inalienable rights of each individual to obtain
housing without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or familial status, and further
that the denial of such rights through considerations based on these protected classes is detrimental to the health, safety and
welfare of the inhabitants of the city and constitutes an unjust denial or deprivation of such inalienable rights which is within the
power and the proper responsibility of government to prevent.
Sec. 4.702 Definitions
As used in this article the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section
unless the context requires otherwise:
Director. The director of the human relations department or authorized assistant.
Discriminatory Housing Practice. An act which is unlawful under this article.
Dwelling. Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed and intended for occupancy as, a residence
by one or more persons and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereof of any such
building, structure or portion thereof.
Family. A single individual or a group of individuals living together under one common roof.
Major Life Activities. Functions such as, but not limited to, caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing,
hearing, speaking, breathing, learning and working.
Person. One or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual
companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers and fiduciaries.
Physical or Mental Handicap. Any physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more major life activities.
Physical or Mental Impairment. Shall include:
(1) Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement or anatomical loss affecting one of more of the
following body systems: neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory, including speech organs;
cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; genitourinary; hemic and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; or
(2) Any mental or psychological disorder, such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental
illness, and specific learning disabilities.
To Rent. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by
the occupant.
Senior Adult. A person fifty-five (55) years of age or older.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/414
Sec. 4.703 Interpretation and Effect
This article shall in no way be interpreted as creating a judicial right or remedy which is the same or substantially equivalent to
the remedies provided under Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended or the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act
(15 U.S.C. 1691). All aggrieved parties shall retain the rights granted to them to Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as
amended and the Federal Equal Credit Opportunity Act. In construing this article, it is the intent of the city council that the courts
shall be guided by Federal Court Interpretations of Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended, and the Federal Equal
Credit Opportunity Act, where appropriate.
Sec. 4.704 Discrimination in the Sale or Rental of Housing
Except as exempted by it shall be unlawful:
(1) To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or
otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin,
physical or mental handicap, or familial status.
(2) To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of a sale or rental of a dwelling or in
the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin,
physical or mental handicap, or familial status.
(3) To make, print or publish or cause to be made, printed or published, any notice, statement or advertisement with
respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation of discrimination based on race,
color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or familial status, or an intention to make any such
preference, limitation or discrimination.
(4) To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or
familial status, that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so
available.
(5) To induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or
prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion, sex, national origin,
physical or mental handicap, or familial status.
Sec. 4.705 Discrimination in Housing Financing
It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company, or other person whose business consists in
whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying
therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling or to discriminate against
him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance
because of the race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or familial status of such person or such
persons associated therewith or because of the race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or familial
status, of the present or prospective owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings for which such loan or
other financial assistance is to be made or given.
Sec. 4.706 Discrimination in Providing Brokerage Service
It shall be unlawful for any person to deny another person access to membership in, or participation in any multiple listing
service, real estate brokers' organization, or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling and renting
dwellings or to discriminate against another person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation, on
account of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap, or familial status.
Sec. 4.707 Unlawful Intimidation
It shall be unlawful for any person to harass, threaten, harm, damage or otherwise penalize any individual, group or business
because such individual, group, or business has complied with the provisions of this article or has exercised in good faith rights
under this article, or has enjoyed the benefits of this article, or because such individual, group, or business has made a charge in
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/414
good faith, testified in good faith or assisted in good faith in any manner in any investigation, or in any proceeding hereunder or
has made any report to the director.
Sec. 4.708 Exemptions and Exclusions
(a) Nothing in this article shall apply to:
(1) Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner, provided that:
(A) Such private individual owner does not own more than three (3) single-family houses at any one time; and
(B) If the owner does not reside in the house at the time of the sale or was not the most recent resident of such
house prior to the sale, the exemption granted by this section shall apply only with respect to one such sale
within any twenty-four (24) month period; and
(C) Such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on
such person's behalf, under any express voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or any portion of the
proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three (3) such single-family houses at any one time; and
(D) The sale or rental is made without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or
rental services of any real estate broker, agent or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman, or
person; and
(E) The sale or rental is made without the publication, posting or mailing of any advertisement or written
notice in violation of this article; but nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents,
abstractors, title companies and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title.
(2) Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than
four (4) families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living
quarters as his residence.
(b) For the purposes of subsection (a), a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:
(1) He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as principal in three (3) or more transactions
involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or
(2) He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of his own personal
residence in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two (2) or more transactions involving the
sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or
(3) He is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five (5) or more
families.
(c) Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association or society or a nonprofit institution or organization
operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association or society from limiting the sale,
rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion or
from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex, national
origin, physical or mental handicap, or familial status.
(d) Nothing in this article shall prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose
or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or
occupancy of such lodgings to its members, or from giving preference to its members.
(e) Nothing in this article shall bar any person from owning and operating a housing accommodation in which rooms are
leased, subleased or rented only to persons of the same sex, when such housing accommodation contains common lavatory,
kitchen or similar facilities available for the use of all persons occupying such housing accommodation.
(f) Nothing in this article shall prohibit the sale, rental, lease or occupancy of any dwelling designed and operated exclusively
for senior adults and their spouses, unless the sale, rental, lease or occupancy is further restricted on account of race, color,
religion, sex, national origin, physical or mental handicap or familial status.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/414
(g) Nothing in this article shall bar a person who owns, operates or controls rental dwellings whether located on the same
property or on one or more contiguous parcels of property, from reserving any grouping of dwellings for the rental or lease to
tenants with a minor child or children; provided however, in the event that said reserved area is completely leased or rented, the
person owning, operating or controlling said rental dwelling may not refuse to rent or lease any other available dwelling to the
prospective tenant on the basis of the tenant's status as parent or any other of the protected classifications set forth in this article.
Sec. 4.709 Violations
No person shall violate any provision of this article, or knowingly obstruct or prevent compliance with this article.
Sec. 4.710 Enforcement; Generally
The director of the human relations department shall have the responsibility of administering and implementing this article. The
director may delegate the authority to investigate and conciliate complaints to other designated city employees.
Sec. 4.711 Complaints; Generally
(a) Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing practice or who believes that he will be
irrevocably injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur (hereinafter referred to as the “charging party”)
may file a complaint with the director. Such complaints shall be in writing and shall identify the person alleged to have committed
or alleged to be committing a discriminatory housing practice and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a
discriminatory housing practice are based. The director shall prepare complaint forms and furnish them without charge to any
person, upon request.
(b) The director shall receive and accept notification and referral complaints from the U.S. Attorney General and the Secretary
of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to the provisions of Title VIII, Fair Housing Act of 1968, Public Law 90-284, and
shall treat such complaints hereunder in the same manner as complaints filed pursuant to subsection (a) above.
(c) All complaints shall be filed within one hundred eighty (180) days following the occurrence of an alleged discriminatory
housing practice. Upon the filing or referral of any complaint, the director shall provide notice of the complaint by furnishing a
copy of such complaint to the person named therein (hereinafter referred to as the “respondent”) who allegedly committed or
were threatening to commit an alleged discriminatory housing practice. The respondent may file an answer to the complaint
within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the written complaint.
(d) All complaints and answers shall be subscribed and sworn to before an officer authorized to administer oaths.
(e) If at any time the director shall receive or discover credible evidence and shall have probable cause to believe that any
person or persons have committed a discriminatory housing practice as to which no complaint has been filed or is about to be
filed, the director may prepare and file a complaint upon his own motion and in his own name and such complaint shall thereafter
be treated in the same manner as a complaint filed by a person aggrieved.
Sec. 4.712 Investigation and Conciliation
(a) Upon the filing or referral of a complaint as herein provided, the director shall cause to be made a prompt and full
investigation of the matter stated in the complaint; provided, however, that before any charge becomes accepted for investigative
purposes, the director or an investigator shall have personally reviewed with the charging party the allegations contained therein
and shall have determined that said charge comes within the provisions of this article. In the event such review results in the
determination that a particular charge does not come within the provisions of this article, the charging party shall be given a clear
and concise explanation of the reasons why it does not.
(b) If the director determines that there is not probable cause to believe that a particular alleged discriminatory housing practice
has been committed, the director shall take no further action with respect to that alleged offense.
(c) During or after the investigation, but subsequent to the mailing of the notice of compliant, the director shall, if it appears
that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is threatening to occur, attempt by informal endeavors to effect
conciliation, including voluntary discontinuance of the discriminatory housing practice and to obtain adequate assurance of future
voluntary compliance with provisions of this article. Nothing said or done in the course of such informal endeavors may be made
public by the director, the commission, the investigator, the conciliator, the charging party, or the respondent, or be used as
evidence in a subsequent proceeding without the written consent of all persons concerned.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/414
(d) Upon completion of an investigation where the director has made a determination that a discriminatory housing practice has
in fact occurred, if the director is unable to secure from the respondent an acceptable conciliation agreement, then the human
relations commission of the city must, upon a majority vote, refer the case to the city attorney for prosecution in municipal court
or to other agencies as appropriate. With such recommendation of the director and the referral of the human relations commission,
the director shall refer his entire file to the city attorney. The city attorney shall, after such referral, make a determination as to
whether to proceed with prosecution of such complaint in municipal court.
Sec. 4.713 Penalty
If a discrimination housing practice is found to have in fact occurred and the case has been referred to municipal court, the
respondent shall be assessed a penalty in accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in Section 1.109 of this code per
violation.
(Ordinance 2002-14 adopted 11/4/02)
ARTICLE 4.800 GARAGE SALES
Sec. 4.801 Definition
For the purpose of this article, the following term shall mean:
Garage Sale. Any occasional sale of personal property items, including rummage sales and yard sales.
Sec. 4.802 Permit Required
No person shall conduct a garage sale within the city without first filing with the city an application for a permit for the garage
sale. There shall be no permit fee for four garage sales per calendar year. Two additional garage sales shall be allowed with a
permit fee of $25.00 per garage sale. The permit which shall be prominently displayed on the premises, shall contain the name of
the person who will conduct the sale, the address at which the sale will be held and the dates on which the sale will be held .
Participation in a citywide garage sale event shall not count toward the maximum number of garage sales allowed at a location
within a calendar year.
Sec. 4.803 Restrictions on Conduct of Sale
(a) No person other than the occupant shall conduct a garage sale. No person shall conduct a garage sale if such a sale has been
conducted on the same property or premises within the period of three (3) months immediately preceding the date of the
commencement of the proposed sale except that in the event there has been a change of occupancy upon the property or premises
then the new occupant shall be permitted to hold one (1) garage sale on the property or premises within the above referenced
three-month period.
(b) No person shall sell or offer for sale at a garage sale merchandise other than used and discarded items of personal property
belonging to the occupant. The occupant may allow the neighbors to sell their items at the occupant's garage sale provided the
majority of all of the items to be sold are owned by the occupant.
Sec. 4.804 Length and Time of Holding Sale
No garage sale shall be conducted for a period in excess of seventy-two (72) consecutive hours. In the event the person who is
issued a permit does not hold the garage sale on the days for which the sale was originally permitted, he/she may return the
paperwork to the city on or before the first working day after the originally permitted sale date and reschedule the sale for a date
not more than sixty (60) days after the originally permitted date.
Sec. 4.805 Hours of Operation
Garage sales may only be held between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
Sec. 4.806 Display of Sales Merchandise
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/414
Personal property offered for sale may be displayed within the residence, in a garage, carport, and/or in the yard of the property;
and only in such areas. No property offered for sale shall be displayed in any public right-of-way, sidewalk, alley, or street.
Sec. 4.807 Signs
All off-premises signs advertising the garage sale shall be in compliance with the city's sign ordinance. A maximum of two (2)
on-premises signs may be placed within the property of the sale. No on- or off-premises sign shall be placed in the public rightof-
way. Signs found within the city which are unlawfully posted upon utility poles, regulatory signs or posts, or are placed on
sidewalks, in the right-of-way, or any other area not allowed by this article, are hereby declared a nuisance to public safety, as
they detract from the driving public's attention to traffic signals as well as other vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Police officers
may summarily remove posted signs as evidence of unlawful activity in preparation for prosecution. If no prosecutorial action is
taken, the signs may be destroyed.
Sec. 4.808 Penalties
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a violation and, upon conviction, shall be fined
not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00, excluding court costs and assessments.
(Ordinance 2018-19 adopted 7/12/18)
ARTICLE 4.900 GUIDELINES FOR FILMING
Sec. 4.901 Purpose
(a) The guidelines contained in this policy are intended to create a program for promoting economic development activity
within the city and the vicinity of the city. The following guidelines are also intended to protect the personal and property rights
of residents and businesses, and to promote the public health, safety and welfare. The city manager reserves the right to impose
additional regulations in the interest of public health, safety and welfare, or if otherwise deemed appropriate by the city manager.
(b) These guidelines cover requests for commercial use of city-owned property (including but not limited to streets, rights-ofway,
parks, and/or public buildings), commercial use of private property which may affect adjacent public or private property, and
the use of city equipment and personnel in all types of motion-picture production, including, but not limited to, feature films,
television programs, commercials, music videos and corporate films.
Sec. 4.902 City Control/City Manager Authority
(a) The city manager may authorize the use of any street, right-of-way, park, or public building, equipment or personnel for
commercial uses in the filming or taping of movies, television programs, commercials, or training films and related activities. In
conjunction with these uses, the city manager may require that any or all of the conditions and/or remuneration herein and as
specified on the application be met as a prerequisite to that use.
(b) The applicant agrees that the city shall have exclusive authority to grant the applicant the use of public streets, rights-ofway,
parks and public buildings of the city, as well as authority to regulate the hours of production and the general location of the
production. The city reserves the full and absolute right to prohibit all filming or to order cessation of filming in order to promote
the public health, safety or welfare.
(c) The applicant shall allow city departments (e.g., police, fire, building) to inspect all structures, property, devices and
equipment to be used in connection with the filming and taping, as deemed appropriate by the city manager.
Sec. 4.903 Permit Requirements
(a) Before filing an application for filming in the city, the office of the city manager must be contacted to discuss the
production's specific filming requirements and the feasibility of filming in the city.
(b) Any commercial producer who desires to undertake a commercial production in the city is required to complete and return
the attached application for filming to the office of the city manager, within the time frames below:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/414
(1) Commercials or Episodic Television. A minimum of two (2) business days prior to the commencement of
filming or any substantial activity related to the project.
(2) Feature Films. A minimum of five (5) business days prior to the commencement of filming or any substantial
activity related to the project.
Sec. 4.904 Application Fee
(a) An application processing fee of $25.00 should accompany each application for filming in the city.
(b) The city manager may waive this fee upon proof of an organization's nonprofit status or for any other reason deemed
appropriate by the city manager.
Sec. 4.905 Use of City Equipment and Personnel
(a) The applicant shall pay for all costs of any police, fire, public works, or other city personnel assigned to the project
(whether or not specifically requested by the production). Remuneration rates for the use of any city equipment, including police
cars and fire equipment, will be established on a case-by-case basis as determined by the city manager. The applicant shall pay all
costs in full within ten (10) days after receipt of an invoice for said costs. The city manager may, at his/her discretion, require an
advance deposit for all costs related to city personnel and/or the use of city equipment.
(b) The city manager, in consultation with the chief of police and/or fire chief, shall have the authority to stipulate additional
fire or police requirements and level of staffing for same, at any time during a film project if it is determined to be in the best
interest of public health, safety and welfare, which cost shall be borne entirely by the applicant.
(c) Off-duty police officers and firefighters shall be paid by the production company at a rate no less than one and one-half
times their hourly rate.
Sec. 4.906 Use of City-Owned Real Estate
(a) The city manager may authorize the use of any street, right-of-way, park or public building, use of the city name, trademark
or logo and/or use of city equipment and/or personnel for commercial uses in motion-picture production. In conjunction with
these uses, the city manager may require that any or all of the conditions and/or remuneration as specified herein and on the
application be met as a prerequisite to that use. A security or damage deposit may be required within the discretion of the city
manager.
(b) The applicant shall reimburse the city for inconveniences when using public property. Following is the rate schedule:
Activity Cost per calendar day (maximum of
8 hours/day)
Total or disruptive use (regular operating hours) of a public
building, park, right-of-way, or public area.
$500.00 per day/$100.00 per hour
after 8 hours
Partial, nondisruptive use of a public building, park, right-ofway,
or public area.
$250.00 per day/$50.00 per hour after
8 hours
Total closure or obstruction of public street or right-of-way,
including parking lots and on-street parking.
$50.00 per block, per day/$10.00 per
hour after 8 hours
Partial closure or obstruction of public street or right-of-way,
including parking lots and on-street parking.
$25.00 per block, per day/$5.00 per
hour after 8 hours
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/414
Use of city parking lots, parking areas, and city streets (for
the purpose of parking film trailers, buses, catering trucks,
and other large vehicles).
$50.00 per block or lot, per day/$10.00
per hour after 8 hours
(c) The applicant acknowledges and agrees that the city possesses and retains exclusive authority to grant the applicant a
revocable license for the use of its name, trademark, and logo, public streets, rights-of-way, parks and buildings of the city as well
as control over the hours of production and the general location of the production. The city reserves the full and absolute right to
prohibit all filming or to order cessation of filming activity in order to promote the public health, safety and/or welfare.
Sec. 4.907 Vehicles and Equipment
(a) The applicant shall provide a report listing the number of vehicles and types of equipment to be used during the filming,
including proposed hours of use and proposed parking locations. Such locations will need to be specifically approved by the city
manager. On-street parking or use of public parking lots is subject to city approval.
(b) The use of exterior lighting, power generators, or any other noise- or light-producing equipment requires on-site approval of
the city manager.
Sec. 4.908 Hours of Filming
Unless express written permission has been obtained from the city manager in advance, and affected property owners, tenants and
residents have been notified, filming will be limited to the following hours:
(1) Monday through Friday: 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
(2) Saturday, Sunday and holidays: 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
Sec. 4.909 Notification of Neighbors
The applicant shall provide a short written description, approved by the city manager, of the schedule for the proposed production
to the owners, tenants and residents of each property in the affected neighborhood(s). The applicant, or his or her designee, shall
make a good faith effort to notify each owner, tenant and resident of all such property, and shall submit, as part of this application,
a report noting owners, tenants and/or residents' comments, along with their signatures, addresses and phone numbers. Based
upon this community feedback, and other appropriate factors considered by the city manager, the city manager may grant or deny
the filming application.
Sec. 4.910 Certificate of Insurance
The applicant shall attach a valid certificate of insurance, issued by a company authorized to conduct business in the state, naming
the city and its agents, officers, elected officials, employees and assigns, as additional insured, in an amount not less than
$1,000,000.00 general liability, including bodily injury and property damage with a $5,000,000.00 umbrella; and automobile
liability (if applicable) in an amount not less than $1,000,000.00 including bodily injury and property damage.
Sec. 4.911 Damage to Public or Private Property
The applicant shall pay in full, within ten (10) days of receipt of an invoice, the costs of repair for any and all damage to public or
private property, resulting from or in connection with, the production, and restore the property to its original condition prior to the
production, or to better than original condition.
Sec. 4.912 Hold Harmless Agreement
The applicant shall sign the following hold harmless agreement holding the city harmless from any claim that may arise from
their use of designated public property, right-of-way, or equipment in conjunction with the permitted use:
I certify that I represent the firm which will be performing the filming/taping at the locations specified on the attached
permit application. I further certify that I and my firm will perform in accordance with the directions and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/414
specifications of The City of Gonzales, Texas, and that I and my firm will indemnify and hold harmless the City of
Gonzales, Texas and its elected officials, officers, servants, employees, successors, agents, departments and assigns
from any and all losses, damages, expenses, costs and/or claims of every nature and kind arising out of or in
connection with the filming/taping and other related activities engaged in pursuant to this application.
I further certify that the information provided on this application is true and correct to the best of my knowledge, and
that I possess the authority to sign this and other contracts and agreements with the City of Gonzales, Texas on behalf
of the firm.
Signed: ________________________
Title: __________________________
Date: __________________________
(Ordinance 2016-5 adopted 3/8/16)
CHAPTER 5
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
ARTICLE 5.100 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 5.101 Arson Reward
The city agrees to pay the reward set out in this section in accordance with the terms of the offer stated in the following arson
reward notice; such arson reward offer shall be posted as required by the state board of insurance and shall read as follows:
“ARSON REWARD
The City of Gonzales, Texas, hereby offers a reward of TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY DOLLARS ($250.00) for the arrest
and conviction of any person or persons found guilty of committing the crime of ARSON within the corporate limits of said
City of Gonzales, Texas. This reward is a standing offer, and shall be paid out of the general funds of the City of Gonzales,
Texas.”
(Ordinance 2014-14 adopted 5/13/14)
ARTICLE 5.200 FIRE CODE
Sec. 5.201 Adopted; Grievance Hearing, Conflicting Provision; Penalty
(a) The International Fire Code, 2015 edition, to include appendices B, C, D, E, F, G, H, and I references thereto, are hereby
adopted and incorporated by reference as the fire code of the city, subject to and including by reference such revisions,
corrections, additions and deletions as shall appear in this article. In the interpretation and application, the provision of this article
shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of public health, safety, morale, and general welfare. A copy
of the fire code is on file in the city fire marshal's office and the city secretary's office.
(b) Any person aggrieved, officer, department, or board of the city affected by any decision of the fire marshal and/or fire chief
under this article, shall have the right to request a hearing before the fire prevention board of appeals in accordance with those
provisions of the international building and international fire codes.
(c) In the event there is a conflict between this article and the adopted codes herein and any city, state or federal law, the more
restrictive requirements shall govern unless the less restrictive requirements are preemptive under state or federal law.
(d) A violation of this chapter is a strict liability offense, and requires no culpable mental state.
(e) Amendments, modifications, and deletions to the 2015 International Fire Code are adopted as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/414
Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the fire code of City of Gonzales, hereinafter referred to as “this
code.”
Section 108.1 is amended to read as follows:
108.1 Construction board of appeals. The construction board of appeals will hear and decide appeals of orders,
decisions or determinations made by the code official relative to the application and interpretation of this code.
Section 109.4 is amended to read as follows:
109.4. Violation penalties. Persons who violate this code or who fail to comply with any of the requirements in this
code, or who erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or contrary to
the directives of the fire code official or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under provisions of this code,
shall be assessed a fine up to $2,000.00. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be
deemed a separate offense.
Section 111.4 is amended to read as follows:
111.4. Failure to comply. Any person who continues work after having been served with a stop-work order, except
such work the code official has directed to be performed to remedy a violation or unsafe condition, shall be subjected
to a fine not less than $200.00 or more than $2,000.00.
Section 202 the following definitions are amended to read as follows:
Fire code official. The fire marshal or a duly authorized representative charged with the duties of administration and
enforcement of the fire code.
Fire watch. A temporary measure intended to ensure continuous and systematic surveillance of a building and portion
thereof by one (1) or more fire marshal approved individuals for the purpose of identifying and controlling fire
hazards, detecting early signs of unwanted fire, raising an alarm of fire, and notifying the fire department.
High-rise building. A building with an occupied floor located more than 55 feet (16,764 mm) above the lowest level
of fire department vehicle access.
Repair garage. A building, structure or portion thereof used for servicing or repairing motor vehicles. This occupancy
shall also include garages involved in minor repair, modification and servicing of motor vehicles for items such as
lube changes, inspections, windshield repair or replacement, shocks, minor part replacement, and other such minor
repairs.
Section 307.2 is amended by adding the following:
307.2.2 Some fires prohibited. The fire code official may prohibit any or all burning, including permit burning, when
the atmospheric conditions or circumstances make such fires hazardous.
Section 401.1 is amended by deleting the exception.
Section 503.2.1 is amended to read as follows:
503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 24 feet (7,315 mm),
exclusive of shoulders, except for approved security gates in accordance with section 503.6, and an unobstructed
vertical clearance of not less than 13 feet 6 inches (4,115 mm).
Section 503.2.4 is amended to read as follows:
503.2.4 Turning radius. The required turning radius of a fire apparatus access road shall be a minimum of 35 feet
(10,668 mm) inner radius and 55 feet (16,764 mm) exterior radius unless approved by the fire code official.
Section 503.2.7 is amended to read as follows:
503.2.7 Grade. The grade of the fire apparatus access road shall not exceed 6 percent in grade.
Exception: Grades steeper than 6 percent as approved by the fire code official.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/414
Section 503.3 is amended to read as follows:
503.3 Marking. Striping, signs, or other markings, when approved by the fire code official, shall be provided for fire
apparatus access roads to identify such roads or prohibit the obstruction thereof. Striping, signs and other markings
shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all times and be replaced or repaired when necessary to provide
adequate visibility.
1) Striping - Fire apparatus access roads shall be continuously marked by painted lines of red traffic paint six
inches in width to show the boundaries of the lane. The words “NO PARKING FIRE LANE” or “FIRE LANE
NO PARKING” shall appear in four inch white letters at 25 feet (7,620 mm) intervals on the red border markings
along both sides of the fire lanes. Where a curb is available, the striping shall be on the vertical face of the curb.
2) Signs - Signs shall read “NO PARKING FIRE LANE” or “FIRE LANE NO PARKING” and shall be 12
inches wide and 18 inches high. Signs shall be painted on a white background with letters and borders in red,
using not less than 2 inch lettering. Signs shall be permanently affixed to a stationary post and the bottom of the
sign shall be six feet, six inches (1,981 mm) above finished grade. Signs shall be spaced not more than fifty feet
(15,240 mm) apart along both sides of the fire lane. Signs may be installed on permanent buildings or walls or as
approved by the fire marshal.
Section 503.4 is amended to read as follows:
503.4 Obstruction of fire apparatus access roads. Fire apparatus access roads shall not be obstructed in any manner,
including the parking of vehicles. The minimum widths and clearances established in sections 503.2.1 and any area
marked as fire lane as described in section 503.3 shall be maintained at all times.
Section 503.4.1 is amended to read as follows:
503.4.1 Traffic-calming devices. Traffic-calming devices on public and private streets shall be approved by the fire
code official and the city engineer. Traffic-calming devices on fire apparatus access roadways in private property shall
be prohibited unless approved by the fire code official.
Section 506.1 is amended to read as follows:
506.1 Where required. Where access to or within a structure or an area is restricted because of secured openings or
where immediate access is necessary for life-saving or firefighting purposes, the fire code official requires a Knox Box
to be installed in an approved location.
Section 507.3 is amended to read as follows:
507.3 Fire flow. Fire flow requirements for buildings or portions of buildings and facilities shall be determined by
using the Insurance Services Office (ISO) Guide for Determination of Needed Fire Flow (Edition 06-2014).
Exceptions:
1. Every fire hydrant shall be capable of providing a minimum flow of 500 GPM in areas zoned residential
and 1500 GPM in areas zoned commercial or industrial.
2. Fire hydrant flows for buildings, excluding 1- or 2-family dwellings, provided with fire sprinkler systems
shall be the required fire flow of the fire sprinkler system plus 500 GPM or a minimum of 1,000 GPM,
whichever is greater.
3. The fire flow requirements listed in this section shall be met with a minimum of 20 psi residual.
Section 507.5.1.1 is amended to read as follows:
507.5.1.1 Hydrant for fire department connections. Buildings or facilities equipped with a fire sprinkler system or a
fire standpipe system shall have a fire hydrant located within 100 feet of the fire department connections.
Exceptions: The distance shall be permitted to exceed 100 feet where approved by the fire code official.
Section 507.5.3 is amended to read as follows:
507.5.3 Water mains. Public and private fire service mains shall be installed, inspected, tested and maintained in
accordance with the following requirements:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/414
1. Water mains shall be at least 8 inches and large enough to supply the required fire flows.
2. New 8 inch mains longer than 1,320 feet must be looped.
3. 6 inch lead lines for fire hydrants shall not exceed 100 feet, and in no case, reduce the amount of required
fire flow.
4. Primate mains, tanks, and hydrants shall be installed, inspected, tested and maintained in accordance with
the requirements of the most current editions of NFPA 24 and NFPA 25.
Section 507.5.4 is amended to read as follows:
507.5.4 Obstruction. Unobstructed access to fire hydrants shall be maintained at all times. Posts, fences, vehicles,
growth, trash, storage, and other materials or objects shall not be placed or kept near fire hydrants, fire department
inlet connections, or fire protection system control valves in a manner that would prevent such equipment of fire
hydrants from being immediately discernable. The fire department shall not be deterred or hindered from gaining
immediate access to fire protection equipment of hydrants.
Section 507.5.7 is amended by adding the following:
507.5.7 Fire hydrant marking. All fire hydrants located within the city, or its extraterritorial jurisdiction, shall be
identified with a blue reflector affixed to the pavement so that the hydrant is readily visible to arriving fire companies.
On unpaved streets, a blue reflector shall be fixed to a post as close as practicable to the edge of the roadway so as to
be visible. Specifications and type and placement locations of markers shall be obtained from the fire code official.
Section 609.2 is amended to read as follows:
Section 609.2 Where required. A type I hood shall be installed at or above all commercial cooking appliances and
domestic cooking appliances used for commercial purposes that produce grease vapors, including, but not limited to,
cooking equipment used in fixed, mobile, or temporary concessions, such as trucks, buses, trailers, pavilions, or any
form of roofed enclosure, as required by the fire code official.
Exceptions:
1) No change to existing exception.
Add:
2) Tents, as provided for in chapter 31.
Additionally, fuel gas and power provided for such cooking appliances shall be interlocked with the extinguishing
system, as required by section 904.12.2. Fuel gas containers and piping/hose shall be properly maintained in good
working order and in accordance with all applicable regulations.
Section 903.4.2 shall be amended by adding a second paragraph to read as follows:
The alarm device required on the exterior of the building shall be a weatherproof horn/strobe notification appliance
with a minimum 75 candela strobe rating, installed as close as practical to the fire department connection.
Section 912.4.1 is amended to read as follows:
912.4.1 Locking fire department connection caps. Fire department connections are required to have Knox FDC
caps/plug
(Ordinance 2016-12 adopted 8/2/16)
Sec. 5.202 Definitions Adopted; Refer to Zoning Code for Classifications
Business. A company or other organization that buys and sells goods, makes products, or provides services.
Commercial Area. Any area in which businesses are established and built for the purpose of financial gain.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/414
Commercial Structure. Any structure or building which is used or intended to be used in a capacity which engages in commerce
or is in business for financial gain.
Sec. 5.203 Schedule of Permit and Inspection Fees
Fees established for obtaining permits from the fire department fire prevention division shall be as established by city council and
set forth in Article 5.400 of this code. If commencement of a particular process is started before a permit is obtained, for which
there is a required permit fee, the fire marshal may impose a triple permit fee.
Sec. 5.204 Response to Hazardous Materials Incidents
Any response made to a hazardous material incident by the fire department, shall be billed to the responsible party for services
rendered at a minimum rate of $500.00 dollars per hour.
Sec. 5.205 Use of Firefighting Foam and Other Like Chemicals
(a) The recipients of emergency firefighting service, which utilizes firefighting foam or other like chemicals shall pay a fee for
the use of the foam chemical to the city for its use of said agent, in an amount sufficient to restore the amount of foam for the
emergency.
(b) For the purposes of this section, the amount of the fee to be paid shall be no greater than the low bid received by the city in
response to a request made for the purchase of firefighting foam following the emergency in question.
(c) The recipient of emergency service utilizing the foam shall have 30 days from the date of receiving the bill to pay said fee.
Sec. 5.206 Fee for Rescue at Low Water Crossings
A fee of $400.00 shall be assessed to any individual that a fire unit of the fire department rescues or attempts to rescue at a low
water crossing or other areas that were barricaded or blocked due to high water.
Sec. 5.207 Fee for Fire Department Personnel on Fire Watch for Special Events
The following fee is established for fire personnel on fire watch for special events:
(1) A fee in the amount of the actual labor cost incurred for the personnel used shall be charged for standby
personnel during special events.
(2) This fee shall apply when fire watch is requested by an individual.
Sec. 5.208 Equipment Damaged or Destroyed During a Call
Should fire department equipment be damaged or destroyed during the course of responding to an emergency incident which is
the result of an accidental, careless, negligent or intentional act, the party receiving the emergency service shall be responsible for
the costs of repair or replacement of any such damaged or destroyed equipment and shall be billed accordingly.
ARTICLE 5.300 FIRE DEPARTMENT
Sec. 5.301 Established
(a) There shall be maintained a fire department to provide means for fire protection, emergency 911 services, public safety
education, fire prevention code enforcement, other disaster services, and the city shall provide for the maintenance, support and
regulation of a full service fire department.
(b) A firefighters' force to be known as the fire department is established. It shall be composed of both paid and volunteer
personnel as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/414
(1) The paid firefighters' force shall be composed of those commissioned positions as established in the annual
budget of the city.
(2) The volunteer firefighters' force shall be composed of a maximum of 35 active members who have volunteered
to join the organization and whose applications have been approved by the volunteer membership. Active volunteer
firefighters shall participate in the state firemen's and fire marshal's Association certification program.
(3) All paid and volunteer personnel shall comply with all the rules and regulations of the city and of the fire
department, and shall be approved by the fire chief and the city manager.
(4) The human resources department shall establish and maintain a job description with the minimum qualifications
for each position in the fire department, including paid and volunteer personnel.
Sec. 5.302 Bylaws
(a) In addition to sections of this article outlining the establishing of the fire department, authority is granted for the volunteers
to establish a constitution and bylaws of the volunteer department to be developed and approved by the volunteer membership.
(b) A constitution and bylaws shall be approved by a two-thirds vote of the volunteer membership governing business and
operations. A copy of the documents and all proposed changes shall be furnished to the city manager and city council.
Sec. 5.303 Fire Chief Services
(a) The fire chief shall establish and maintain a good working relationship with the volunteer membership of the fire
department and shall foster a good working relationship between the paid and volunteer membership of the fire department.
(b) All members of the fire department shall be under the command of the fire chief or designee and subject to all of the
provisions of the constitution and laws of the state, the city charter, and the ordinances and policies of the city.
(c) The fire chief shall have supervisory authority for all paid fire personnel and volunteer firefighters. The fire chief and city
manager are authorized to conduct personnel related actions as necessary in accordance with city policies and procedures.
(Ordinance 2014-14 adopted 5/13/14)
Sec. 5.304 Officers and Duties for Paid Personnel and Volunteer Firefighters; Chain of Command
Officers of the fire department, in order of the chain of command for combat operations involving paid personnel and volunteers,
shall be as follows:
(1) The fire chief, elected by the volunteer membership and approved by the city manager.
(2) Volunteer assistant chiefs, elected by the volunteer membership and approved by the city manager.
(3) Paid/career battalion chief, appointed by the fire chief and approved by the city manager.
(4) Paid/career fire marshal, appointed by the fire chief and approved by the city manager.
(5) Paid/career and volunteer captains, appointed by the fire chief, and approved by the city manager.
(6) Paid/career and volunteer lieutenants, appointed by the fire chief, and approved by the city manager.
(7) Paid/career firefighters and volunteer firefighters, appointed by the fire chief and approved by the city manager.
(Ordinance 2018-6 adopted 2/6/18)
Sec. 5.305 Equipment and Benefits for Volunteer Firefighters
(a) Active volunteer firefighters shall be furnished the following by the city:
(1) Complete protective clothing and safety equipment, meeting current NFPA standards.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/414
(2) Communication equipment for responding to fire or other emergency alarms.
(3) Fire department uniform.
(b) Active volunteers will participate in the firefighters relief and retirement fund (SB 411), administered by the state firemen's
pension commissioner, as approved by the city council by contract dated October 24, 1979, effective November 1, 1979. The
pension fund will be funded through the fire department budget.
(c) The fire department volunteer membership is authorized to accept donations or contributions for their volunteer services
provided in and out of the city from individuals and businesses. The donations may include money or equipment. The volunteer
membership has the authority to hold fundraising events as approved by a majority of the volunteer membership, the fire chief
and the city manager. All equipment becomes part of the city inventory.
(Ordinance 2014-14 adopted 5/13/14)
ARTICLE 5.400 FEES
Sec. 5.401 Permit and fees
(a) Fixed Pipe System Permit: $50.00 per system. This fee covers reviewing plans, inspecting, witnessing the testing of, and
modification of, fire extinguishing systems in kitchen vent hoods, ducts, paint booths, and similar systems.
(b) Sprinkler System Permit: $150.00–$1,500.00. This fee covers reviewing plans, inspecting, and witnessing the hydrostatic
testing of sprinkler systems.
(1) For systems with up to 200 heads: $150.00.
(2) For each additional head: $0.50.
(3) Maximum fee: $1,500.00.
(c) Fire Alarm System Permit: $150.00–$1,500.00. This fee covers reviewing plans, inspecting, witnessing the testing of new
fire alarm systems in addition to existing systems.
(1) For systems with up to 200 initiating and/or signaling devices: $150.00.
(2) For each additional initiating and/or signaling device: $0.50.
(3) Maximum fee: $1,500.00.
(d) Smoke Control System Permit: $75.00. This fee covers witnessing the testing of the buildings smoke control system.
(e) Ventilation Control System Permit: $50.00–$100.00.
(1) Kitchen Hood System: $50.00, this fee covers reviewing plans, inspecting, and witnessing the testing of
ventilation control system for commercial cooking operations.
(2) Paint Booth: $100.00.
(f) Flammable and Combustible Liquid Storage Tanks Permit: $150.00 (per tank), this fee covers reviewing plans, inspecting,
and witnessing tests on the installation, and or removal or repair of any flammable or combustible liquid storage tanks and/or
system.
(g) Modification Permit: $25.00–$75.00, this fee covers reviewing plans, witnessing the testing of, inspecting, and approving
limited modifications to existing systems listed below:
(1) Existing fixed pipe suppression system: $25.00.
(2) Existing sprinkler system: $75.00, maximum addition of 10 heads allowed.
(3) Existing fire alarm system: $75.00, maximum of 10 initiating/signaling devices allowed.
(4) Existing smoke control system: $75.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/414
(5) Existing flammable or combustible liquids storage tank and/or system: $75.00.
(h) Underground Fire Line, Standpipe/Water System Permit: $100.00, this fee covers reviewing plans, witnessing the testing of,
inspecting, and approving installed fire protection systems, such as underground fire lines and standpipes.
(i) Fire Flow Test Permit: $100.00, this fee shall be assessed for flowing water through a fire hydrant or other appliance to
assist with determining the required fire flow.
(j) Fire Pump: $200.00.
(k) 30-Day Burn Permit: $25.00, this fee covers a required inspection of material prior to approval.
(l) Tent Permit: $50.00, this fee covers the fire safety inspection of tents over 400 square feet.
(m) Licensed Facilities Inspection Permit: $50.00–$100.00, this fee covers the fire safety inspection required by Texas
Department of State Health Services for operation.
(1) Foster and adoption home: No charge.
(2) Small facilities (less than 7 occupants) such as child and adult care centers, MHMR facilities, and group homes:
$50.00.
(3) Large child or adult care centers: $100.00.
(4) Hospitals, nursing homes, and assisted living: $100.00.
(n) Mobile Food Vendor Permit: $50.00, this fee covers the annual fire safety inspection.
(o) Reinspection/Retest: $50.00, this fee shall be assessed for each reinspection/retest. All reinspection/retest fees shall be paid
before any subsequent inspection/test is conducted.
(p) After-Hours Inspection: $50.00, this additional fee shall be assessed for any inspection called after hours.
(q) Permit Extension: 1/2 initial fee, this fee shall be assessed for extension of permit. Only one extension allowed per permit.
(r) No Permit: Triple the permit fee.
(s) Hazardous Materials Response and Operations: $500.00 per hour, this fee covers response and operations of the city fire
department at a hazardous materials incident.
(t) Fire Watch for Special Events: $ actual cost per hour.
(u) Rescue at Low Water Crossings: $400.00, this fee shall be assessed to any individual that emergency personnel of the city
rescues or attempts at a low water crossing or other areas that were barricaded or blocked due to high water.
(Ordinance 2016-12 adopted 8/2/16)
CHAPTER 6
HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE 6.100 GARBAGE AND TRASH
Division 1. General Provisions
Sec. 6.101 Definitions
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/414
For the purpose of this article the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
Dry Kitchen Refuse. All solids remaining after liquids and slop have been drained off of kitchen garbage.
Kitchen Garbage. All dry refuse, meat, vegetable and fruit refuse, small dead animals and dead fowl.
Premises. Any business house, business establishment, grocery store, dry goods store, mercantile store, department store,
boarding house, hotel, tourist camp, apartment house, hospital, rooming house, school, theaters, barbershop, beauty parlor, filling
station, garage, cafe, restaurant, lumberyard, electric shop, plumbing shop, tailor shop, private residence, vacant lot, and all other
places of business or places in the city where garbage, trash or rubbish accumulates.
Rubbish. All tin cans, bottles, glass, scraps of iron, tin, wire or other metals, and any other articles to which the term rubbish is
usually applied.
Trash. Paper of all kinds, rags, old clothing, paper containers, pieces of wood, boxes, barrels, crates, feathers, and any other
articles to which the term trash is usually applied.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 50, Section 50.01)
Sec. 6.102 Compliance with Provisions Prerequisite to Collection
The city sanitation department shall not make collection of kitchen garbage, trash or rubbish or tree limbs where the same is not
prepared for collection and placed as designated by the provisions of this article. Failure to comply herewith shall be deemed an
offense and each day's failure to comply will constitute a separate offense. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 50,
Section 50.02)
Sec. 6.103 Tampering with Garbage Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to meddle or tamper with any garbage can or receptacle, or any trash or rubbish receptacle, or
with any garbage, trash or rubbish, or to in any manner pilfer such cans or receptacles or such garbage, trash or rubbish, or to
scatter the contents thereof in any street, alley, sidewalk or premises in the city. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 50,
Section 50.03)
Sec. 6.104 Littering
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, cast or deposit upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or any yard or premises,
public or private, any filth of any kind, or cans, paper, trash, paper containers, rubbish, bottles or any other form of litter or waste
matter.
(b) (1) The owner or occupant of any store or other place of business situated within the city shall at all times to
keep his premises clean of wastepaper, wrapping paper, paper napkins, cartons, package containers, and other used or
waste materials thrown or left on said premises by its customers, and take measures to prevent same drifting or
blowing to adjoining premises.
(2) Receptacles of sufficient size and number shall be placed on the premises accessible to the customers of such
business where the above referred to articles of waste may be disposed of.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any customer going upon the premises of another to in any manner dispose of wastepaper, wrapping
paper, paper napkins, cartons, package containers, and other used or waste materials except in receptacles provided for such
purposes.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 50, Section 50.04)
Secs. 6.105–6.110 Reserved
Division 2. Collection of Garbage
Sec. 6.111 Disposition of Heavy Accumulations Such as Brick, Lumber, and the Like
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/414
Heavy accumulations such as brick, broken concrete, lumber, ashes, clinkers, cinders, dirt and plaster, sand or gravel, automobile
frames, dead trees, and other bulky, heavy materials shall be disposed of at the expense of owner or person controlling the same.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 50, Section 50.30)
Sec. 6.112 Disposition of Certain Wastes
Manure from cow lots, horse stables, poultry yards, pigeon lofts, and waste oils from garages or filling stations shall be disposed
of at the expense of the party responsible for the same. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 50, Section 50.31)
Sec. 6.113 Unlawful Disposition of Trash
It shall be unlawful to deposit garbage or trash in any receptacle belonging to another person, dwelling unit or establishment.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 50, Section 50.32)
Sec. 6.114 Collection Rates
(a) Residential Service.
Inside City $ Month
Trash 1X per week (cart only), w/96 gallon cart $14.80
Recycle 1X EOW (cart only), w/96 gallon cart $14.80
Curbside Bulky Service 4X per year per residence on call, maximum
5 CY per pickup
$14.80
Extra Carts (trash or recycle) $5.50
Outside City
Trash 1X per week (cart only), w/96 gallon cart $22.64
Trash 1X per week (cart only), w/96 gallon cart $26.89
Recycle 1X EOW (cart only), w/96 gallon cart $26.89
(b) Commercial Cart Service – Trash.
Size 1X Xtra PU
96 Cart $28.62 $8.00
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/414
(c) Container.
Size Frequency Xtra PU
1X 2X 3X 4X 5X 6X
2 CY 65 122 174
50
3 CY 83 156 228
60
4 CY 110 199 288
70
6 CY 130 224 317 411 504 658 80
8 CY 171 297 423 549 674 857 90
Casters 19 each container
Lockbars 19 each container
(d) Container Service – Recycle.
Size EOW 1X Xtra PU
96 Cart $10.25 $20.94 $8.00
4 CY 66 88 70
6 CY 78 104 80
8 CY* 94 137 80
*Only if FL Recycle Service is offered
(e) Roll-Off Service.
Delivery Haul & Disposal Daily Rent
20 CY Open Top 159 423 $4.45
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/414
30 CY Open Top 159 479 $4.45
40 CY Open Top 159 503 $4.45
Compactor Varies Varies Varies
(f) City Roll-Off Service.
Delivery Haul & Disposal Daily Rent
20 CY Open Top 127 271 $3.18
30 CY Open Top 127 424 $3.18
40 CY Open Top 127 451 $3.18
All rates above net to contractor.
(Ordinance 2014-27 adopted 12/2/14)
Secs. 6.115–6.120 Reserved
Division 3. Brush Collection
Sec. 6.121 Definition
Brush. Trees and shrubs on premises will be picked up by the city. Brush shall not include trash, garbage, yard trimmings, leaves,
lumber or any other debris. Nor does the service include the removal of trees and brush which has resulted from the clearing of
land by heavy equipment, i.e. bulldozers etc.
Sec. 6.122 Brush Parameters
Brush shall be processed in manageable sizes. Any trunk or limb exceeding eight inches (8") in diameter shall be cut into a
manageable size of four (4) foot or less. No single branch shall exceed forty (40) pounds in weight and shall be processed in a
manageable size.
Sec. 6.123 Frequency of Collection
Brush pickup service shall be provided to each applicable residential and business premises weekly whether the brush or
trimmings or cut by the resident or a professional tree trimming service as long as the resident pays brush pick-up fees. In the
interest of ensuring brush collection for the entire city in a timely manner, the brush department shall not normally deviate from
the established routes. Each neighborhood within the city limits has a designated brush pick up day. No collection of brush shall
be made on Saturday, Sunday or holidays observed by the city. Brush shall be placed at the curbside in a manageable pile no later
than 7:00 a.m. on the designated scheduled collection day.
Sec. 6.124 Location of Collection
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/414
Brush shall be placed at the customer's curbline. Brush will be picked up at no other location, and in no case shall brush
department crews enter private property to cut or remove brush and debris.
(Ordinance 2016-2 adopted 3/8/16)
Sec. 6.125 Charges for Brush Collection
There shall be charged, assessed, and collected from each person, firm, or corporation within the city limits for brush collection
and disposal at the rates set out to-wit:
A fee of five (5) dollars will be charged each month where actual loading time is not more than fifteen (15) minutes
per pick-up. In the event the city's designated brush department representative estimates that the time required for
removal of brush from a particular residence or commercial business will exceed fifteen (15) minutes in duration,
additional charges shall be levied to cover the cost of city work hours and equipment. A time limit of one hour per
residence per week is preferred. Subsequent to the removal of brush from the customer's premises, the city's
representative shall determine the actual work time taken, and a corresponding charge shall be levied on the customer's
utility bill of $20.00 for each additional fifteen (15) minute period of actual work time required for brush removal.
Charges shall not be prorated for periods of less than fifteen (15) minutes.
(Ordinance 2017-14 adopted 10/3/17)
ARTICLE 6.200 ABANDONED WELLS OR CISTERNS PROHIBITED*
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain any unused and abandoned well or cistern within the city. (1995 Code of
Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 97, Section 97.01)
ARTICLE 6.300 UNSANITARY AND UNSIGHTLY CONDITIONS ON PRIVATE PREMISES
Sec. 6.301 Designation of Prohibited Conditions
(a) Stagnant Water. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any lots or other premises in the city to allow or permit holes or places
where water may accumulate and become stagnant to be or remain on such lot or premises or to allow or permit the accumulation
of stagnant water thereon, or to permit the same to remain therein.
(b) Accumulation of Carrion, Filth, Refuse, Waste Materials, Furniture, Electronics, Junk, Salvage Materials or Other Bulky
Items. It shall be unlawful for the owners or renter of any lot building, house, establishment or premises in the city to allow or
permit any carrion, filth, refuse, waste material, furniture, electronics, appliances, junk, salvage materials or other bulky items to
accumulate or remain thereon.
(c) Growth or Accumulation of Rubbish, Weeds. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any lot or premises in the city to allow or
permit weeds, rubbish or any other unsightly, objectionable or unsanitary matter of whatever nature to grow, accumulate or
remain on such lot or premises. It shall be unlawful to permit grass, weeds or any plant that is not cultivated to grow to a greater
height than twelve inches on an average, or to grow in rank profusion upon any property. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm
or corporation to fail to keep any lot or tract of land within the city free from weeds, brush or non-aesthetic trees as defined in this
code.
(d) Maintenance of Abutting Property. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any lot or premises in the city to allow or permit
weeds, rubbish or any other unsightly, objectionable or unsanitary matter of whatever nature to grow, accumulate or remain on the
area between the property line and the curbline of adjacent streets and alleys, and where no curb exists, the area extending to the
adjacent street or alley surface.
(e) Exemptions. The following property is exempted from the provisions of this section:
(1) State highway median or right-of-way; and
(2) The cultivation of concentrated wildflowers from March 1st until June 30th of each year in areas where weeds
and grasses do not exceed 18 inches in height.
Sec. 6.302 Notice to Owner to Remedy or Remove Condition
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/414
(a) Whenever any condition described in this article is found to exist on any premises within the city, the owner of such
premises shall be notified by the city in writing, to correct, remedy or remove the condition within ten days after such notice and
it shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with such notice.
(b) Methods for notification are as follows:
(1) In person;
(2) By United States mail;
(3) By publication at least twice within ten (10) consecutive days;
(4) By posting notice on or near a building near the property to which the violation relates;
(5) By posting notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation
relates, if the property contains no buildings.
(c) If the city mails a notice of violation to a property owner in accordance with subsection (b) and the United States Postal
Service returns the notice as “refused” or “unclaimed,” the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as
delivered.
Sec. 6.303 Correction or Removal of Conditions by City
(a) Failure of Owner to Correct Condition. In the event the owner of any lot or premises upon which condition described in this
article exists fails to correct, remedy or remove such condition within ten days after notice to do so is given in accord with this
article, the city may do such work or make such improvements as are necessary to correct, remedy or remove such condition, or
cause the same to be done, and pay therefor and charge the expenses incurred thereby to the owner of such lot. Such expenses
shall be assessed against the lot or real estate upon which the work was done or the improvements made. The doing of such work
by the city shall not relieve such person from prosecution for failure to comply with such notice in violation of Section 6.302(a).
(b) Property Owner Invoice. Prior to the filing of the statement of expenses and lien with the county clerk, the city secretary
shall prepare an invoice detailing the expenses incurred to correct, remedy or remove such condition and deliver such invoice by
regular mail. The invoiced amount is due and payable within 30 days after notice is mailed.
(c) Filing of Statement of Expenses Incurred. Whenever any work is done or improvements are made by the city under the
provisions of subsection (a) above, the city manager, on behalf of the city, shall file a statement of the expenses incurred thereby
with the county clerk. Such statement shall give the amount of such expenses and the date or dates on which the work was done,
or the improvements were made.
(d) Lien for and Collection of Expenses. After the statement provided for in subsection (b) above is filed, the city shall have a
privileged lien on the lot or real estate upon which the work was done or improvements made, to secure the expenses thereof.
Such lien shall be second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements, and the amount thereof shall bear interest at the rate
of 10% per annum from the date the statement was filed. For any such expenditures and interest, suit may be instituted and
recovery and foreclosure of the lien may be had in the name of the city and the statement of expenses made in accord with
subsection (b) above, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for such work or
improvements.
(Ordinance 2018-21 adopted 7/12/18)
Sec. 6.304 Immediate Abatement by City
The city may immediately abate the nuisances of weeds in excess of forty-eight (48) inches in height which are an immediate
danger to the health, life or safety of any person.
Sec. 6.305 Notice Given Within One Year
Upon giving written notice to a property owner in violation of the city health ordinances, the city may inform the property owner
by certified mail that if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature on or before the first anniversary of the
date of the notice, the city may without further notice correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expense against
the property.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/414
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 6.306 Enforcement; Penalties
(a) Criminal Remedies.
(1) Unless otherwise provided, an offense under Section 6.301 is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine as provided as
listed below:
(A) Any person convicted of one previous offense under Section 6.301 within three years of the date of an
alleged offense shall be fined not less than $250.00.
(B) Any person convicted of two or more previous offenses under Section 6.301 within three yeas of the date
of an alleged offense shall be fined not less than $500.00.
(2) Each separate occurrence of a violation or each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(b) Civil Remedies. The penal provisions imposed under this section shall not preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin the
violation. The city retains all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state, and federal law.
(Ordinance 2018-21 adopted 7/12/18)
ARTICLE 6.400 MOSQUITO CONTROL*
Sec. 6.401 Definition
For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
Collections of Water. Those contained in ditches, pools, ponds, excavations, holes, depressions, open cesspools, privy vaults,
fountains, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs (except horse troughs in frequent use), urns, cans, boxes, bottles, tubs,
buckets, defective house roof gutters, tanks or flush closets or other similar water containers.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 97, Section 97.25)
Sec. 6.402 Treatment Required
It shall be unlawful to have, keep, maintain, cause or permit within the city, any collection of standing or flowing water in which
mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, unless such collection of water is treated so as effectually to prevent such breeding. (1995
Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 97, Section 97.26)
Sec. 6.403 Methods of Treatment
The method of treatment of any collections of water directed toward the prevention of breeding of mosquitoes shall be approved
by the accredited code enforcement officer, and may be any one or more of the following:
(1) Screening with wire netting of at least 16 meshes to the inch each way or with any other material which will
effectually prevent the ingress or egress of mosquitoes.
(2) Complete emptying every seven days of unscreened containers, together with their thorough drying or cleaning.
(3) Using a larvicide approved and applied under the direction of the code enforcement officer.
(4) Covering completely the surface of the water with kerosene, petroleum or paraffin oil once every seven days.
(5) Cleaning and keeping sufficiently free of vegetable growth and other obstructions, and stocking with mosquitodestroying
fish.
(6) Filling or draining to the satisfaction of the code enforcement officer.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/414
(7) Proper disposal, by removal or destruction, of tin cans, tin boxes, broken or empty bottles and similar articles
likely to hold water.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 97, Section 97.27)
Sec. 6.404 Presence of Larvae
The natural presence of mosquito larvae in standing or running water shall be evidence that mosquitoes are breeding therein, and
failure to prevent such breeding within three days after notice by the code enforcement officer shall be deemed a violation of this
article. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 97, Section 97.28)
Sec. 6.405 Failure of Person to Abate Condition
Should the person responsible for conditions giving rise to the breeding of mosquitoes fail or refuse to take necessary measures to
prevent the same within three days after due notice has been given to him, the code enforcement officer is authorized to do so,
and all necessary cost incurred by him for this purpose shall be a charge against the property owner or other person offending, as
the case may be. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 97, Section 97.29)
Sec. 6.406 Right of Entry
(a) For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, the code enforcement officer, or his duly accredited agent, acting
under his authority, may at all reasonable times enter in and upon any premises within his jurisdiction.
(b) Any person or persons charged with any of the duties imposed by this article failing, within the time designated by this
article, or within the time stated in the notice of the code enforcement officer, as the case may be, to perform such duties, or to
carry out the necessary measures to the satisfaction of the code enforcement officer, shall be deemed guilty of a separate violation
of this article.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 97, Section 97.30)
ARTICLE 6.500 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Sec. 6.501 Purpose
The purpose of this article is the protection of health, life, resources and property through prevention and control of unauthorized
discharges of hazardous materials. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 95, Section 95.70)
Sec. 6.502 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
Abandoned. When referring to a storage facility, means out of service and not safeguarded in compliance with this article.
Carcinogen. A substance for which:
(1) The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) states that there is sufficient evidence of
carcinogenicity in animals, or that there is potential of human carcinogenicity or that the substance is a confirmed
human carcinogen; or
(2) The National Cancer Institute (NCI) has found in animal bioassay that there is positive evidence of
carcinogenesis in animals or humans.
CAS Number. The unique identification number assigned by the Chemical Abstracts Service to specific chemical substances.
Chemical Name. The scientific designation of a substance in accordance with the International Union of Pure and Applied
Chemistry of the system developed by the Chemical Abstracts Service.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/414
Common Name. Any designation or identification such as code name, code number, trade name, or brand name used to identify a
substance other than by its chemical name.
City Manager. The city manager of Gonzales, Texas or his assigned employees.
Disclosure Statement. The written request for information prepared pursuant to Section 6.506(c)(1)-(4)..
EPA Waste Stream Code. The identification number assigned pursuant to the regulations of the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency to specific types of hazardous waste.
Facility. An area, a building, or buildings, appurtenant structures and surrounding land area used by a single business entity at a
single location or site.
Handle. To generate, treat, store or dispose of a hazardous waste in any fashion.
Hazard Class. Explosives A, Explosives B, Explosives C, blasting agents, flammable liquids, combustible liquids, flammable
solids, oxidizers, organic peroxides, corrosive materials, flammable gases, nonflammable gases, Poisons A, Poisons B, irritating
materials, etiologic agents, radioactive materials, other regulated materials.
Hazardous Material [“HAZ-MAT”]. Any material which is subject to regulation pursuant Section 6.505. A mixture shall be
deemed to be a hazardous materials if it is either a waste and contains any material regulated pursuant to Section 6.505.
Hazardous Waste. Hazardous or extremely hazardous waste as defined by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
MSDS. A material safety data sheet prepared pursuant to the regulations of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
Officer. Officer or employee assigned by the city manager to administer this article, or any designee of such officer or employee.
Permit. Any hazardous materials storage permit issued pursuant to this article, as well as any additional approvals thereto.
Permit Quantity Limit. The maximum amount of hazardous material that can be stored in a storage facility. Separate permit
quantity limits will be set for each storage facility for which a permit is obtained in accordance with the requirements of this
article.
Permittee. Any person, firm or corporation to whom a permit is issued pursuant to article, and any authorized representative,
agent or designee of such person, firm or corporation.
Physician. Any person who holds a valid certificate from the state to practice the healing arts.
Pipes. Pipeline systems which are used in connection with the storage of hazardous materials exclusively within the confines of a
facility and which are not intended to transport hazardous materials interstate or intrastate commerce or to transfer hazardous
materials in bulk to or from a marine vessel.
Primary Containment. The first level of containment, such as, the inside portion of that container which comes into immediate
contact on its inner surface with the hazardous material being contained.
Product-Tight. Impervious to the hazardous materials which is contained, so as to prevent the seepage of the hazardous material
from the primary containment. To be “product-tight” the container shall be made of a material that is not subject to physical or
chemical deterioration by the hazardous material being contained.
Secondary Containment. The level of containment external to and separate from the primary containment.
SIC Code. The identification number assigned by the Standard Industrial Classification Code to specific types of businesses.
Single-Walled. Construction with walls made of but one thickness of material. Laminated, coated, or clad materials shall be
considered as single-walled.
Storage Facility. Any one or combination of tanks, sumps, wet floors, waste-treatment facilities, pipes, vaults or other portable or
fixed containers, used, or designed to be used, for the storage of hazardous materials at a facility.
Sump. A pit or well in which liquids collect.
Use. Includes the handling, processing or storage of a hazardous substance.
User. Any person who uses a hazardous substance or handles a hazardous waste.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/414
Unauthorized Discharge. Any release or emission of any hazardous material which does not conform to the provisions of this
article, unless such release is in accordance with the release regulations of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
Permit, or with waste discharge requirements established by the Regional Water Quality Control Board pursuant to or with local
sewer pretreatment requirements for publicly owned treatment works.
Wet Floor. A floor which is used to routinely collect, contain or maintain standing liquids or to transmit standing liquids on a
more or less continuous basis.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 95, Section 95.71)
Sec. 6.503 Professional Assistance for City Determinations
Whenever the approval or satisfaction of city may be required under this article for a design, monitoring, testing, or other
technical submittal by an applicant or permittee, the city may in its discretion, require such applicant or permittee, at such
applicant's or permittee's sole cost and expense, to retain a suitably qualified independent engineer, or chemist, or other
appropriate professional consultant, acceptable to city, for the purpose of evaluating and rendering a professional opinion
respecting the adequacy of such submittal to achieve the purposes of this article. City shall be entitled to rely on such evaluation
and/or opinion of such engineer, chemist or professional consultant in making the relevant determinations provided for in this
article. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 95, Section 95.72)
Sec. 6.504 Obligation as to Storage of Hazardous Materials
(a) No person, firm or corporation shall cause, suffer or permit the storage of hazardous materials:
(1) In the manner which violates a provision of this article of any other local, federal or state statute, code, rule or
regulation relating to hazardous materials;
(2) In a manner which causes an unauthorized discharge of hazardous materials or poses a significant risk of such
unauthorized discharge;
(3) The city manager or his assigned personnel shall have discretion to exempt an applicant from any specific
requirement of this article, other than the requirement for secondary containment in underground storage facilities,
except as provided in Section 6.507(b) or to require applicant to meet additional or modified requirements, where such
action would be appropriate and consistent with achieving the general obligation of this article for protecting public
health, safety and welfare.
(b) (1) Any person, firm, or corporation which stores any material regulated by Section 6.505 which is not
excluded by Section 6.505(b) shall obtain and keep current a hazardous materials storage permit.
(2) All such hazardous materials shall be contained in conformity with Section 6.507.
(3) The storage of such hazardous materials shall be in conformance with the approved hazardous materials
management plan.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 95, Section 95.73)
Sec. 6.505 Enumeration of Regulated Materials
(a) The materials regulated by this article shall consist of the following:
(1) Any material listed as a hazardous and/or extremely hazardous material;
(2) Any material which is on the list of Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) toxic pollutants, 40 CFR 401.15, as
amended;
(3) Any material which is classified by the National Fire Protection Association (NEPA) as either a flammable
liquid a Class II combustible liquid or a Class III-A combustible liquid; or
(4) Any material which has been determined to be hazardous based upon any appraisal or assessment by or on
behalf of the party storing this material in compliance with the requirements of the EPA or which should have been,
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/414
but was not, determined to be hazardous due to the deliberate failure of the party storing the material to comply with
the requirements of the EPA and/or the Department of Health Services; or
(5) Any material which has been determined by the party storing it, through testing or other objective means, to be
likely to create a significant potential or actual hazard to public health, safety or welfare. This subsection shall not
establish a requirement to test for the purpose of this article.
(b) Exclusions shall apply only to materials which are not otherwise regulated pursuant to this section. These exclusions shall
be as follows:
(1) (A) The following elemental metals included within the purview of subsection (a) above shall not be
considered hazardous materials for purposes of this article unless they are stored in a friable, powered or finely
divided state:
(i) Aluminum;
(ii) Beryllium;
(iii) Cadmium;
(iv) Chromium;
(v) Copper
(vi) Lead;
(vii) Manganese;
(viii) Molybdenum;
(ix) Nickel;
(x) Rhodium;
(xi) Silver;
(xii) Tellurium;
(xiii) Tin; and
(xiv) Zinc.
(B) Regardless of state, Tantalum, Titanium, Tungsten, and Uranium shall be excluded from regulation under
this article.
(2) Materials recognized in the official United States Pharmacopoeia, official Homeopathic Pharmacopoeia of the
United States, or official National Formulary, or any supplement to any of them if such materials are intended for use
in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease in man or other animals, hormones, enzymes, and
aflatoxins.
(3) (A) Aluminum salts;
(B) Asphalt fumes;
(C) Atrazaine;
(D) Benomyl;
(E) Bis (dimethylthiocarbamoyl) disulfide;
(F) Boron oxide;
(G) 4-tert-butyl-2-Chlorophenyl-methyl methyl-phosphoramidate;
(H) Camphor;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/414
(I) Carbon Black;
(J) 2-Chlor-6 (trichloromethyl) pyridine;
(K) Clopidol;
(L) Coal tar pitch volatiles;
(M) Cotton dust;
(N) Dibenzoyl peroxide;
(O) Dicyclopentadieny iron;
(P) 3, 5-Dinitro-o-toluamide;
(Q) 2, 6-Di-tert-butyl-p-cresol;
(R) Ferbam;
(S) Fumaric acid;
(T) Glass, fibrous or dust;
(U) Graphite;
(V) Helium;
(W) Iron oxide;
(X) Iron salt;
(Y) Magnesium oxide;
(Z) Mica;
(AA) Mineral wool fiber;
(BB) Oil mist;
(CC) Pheno-othiazine;
(DD) Phenyl ether;
(EE) Phenyl ether-diphenyl (eutectic mixture) vapor;
(FF) Phthalic anhydride;
(GG) m-PhthadlodinitriIe;
(HH) Polytetra-fluoreoethylene decomposition products;
(II) Rhodium salts;
(JJ) Ronnel Rosin core solder;
(KK) Rotenone, commercial;
(LL) Silica;
(MM)Soapstone;
(NN) Talc;
(OO) Tantalum oxide;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/414
(PP) Terphenyls;
(QQ) 4-4-Thiobis (6-tertbutyl-m-cresol).
(4) Hazardous materials contained solely in consumer products packaged for distribution to, and use by, the general
public or commercial products used at the facility solely for janitorial or minor maintenance purposes such as paint
thinner or stripper.
(5) Hazardous materials when contained in a substance intended for use as animal feed.
(6) Hazardous materials located at a work station in a quantity reasonably required for use as determined by the
circumstances.
(7) The city manager shall exempt any material from the requirements of this article where it has been demonstrated
to the satisfaction of city that the material in the quantity and/or solution stored does not present a significant actual or
potential hazard to the public health, safety or welfare.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 95, Section 95.74)
Sec. 6.506 Hazardous Material Disclosure Statement
(a) Filing of Statement.
(1) Any person who uses or handles a hazardous material must annually submit a completed disclosure statement to
the city clerk.
(2) A person not required to obtain a business license who uses or handles a hazardous substance shall submit a
completed disclosure statement by September 1 of each year.
(3) The user shall submit a disclosure statement detailing the new use or other appropriate information within 15
days of any:
(A) New use or significant change in the use or handling of a material;
(B) New use or handling of a previously undisclosed hazardous material;
(C) Change of business address;
(D) Change of business ownership; or
(E) Change of business name.
(b) Disclosure of Information.
(1) Upon receipt of a disclosure statement, the city clerk shall ensure that the name and address on the form are
correct.
(2) The city secretary shall maintain files of all disclosure statements received. Subject to the provisions of
subsection (c)(6) relating to trade secrets, these files shall be open to the public during normal business hours. The
disclosure statement shall be filed by street address and parcel number and cross-referenced by the SIC number(s) and
CAS number(s) of EPA waste stream codes listed on the disclosure form.
(3) The city secretary department shall keep a record of all person who request access to the hazardous materials
disclosure forms. The record shall include:
(A) The person's name, address and telephone number;
(B) Name and address of the person, business or governmental agency such person represents; and
(C) Identity of the specific files(s) examined or requested to be copied by the user.
(c) Statement to be Filed With City Secretary; Renewal; Content.
(1) A disclosure statement shall be filed with the city secretary.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/414
(2) If a disclosure statement has not been amended within a year's time, the disclosure statement will expire a year
from the date it was received. Within 30 days after expiration, the disclosure statement must be revised and
resubmitted to reflect current data as required by subsection (c)(3) of this section.
(3) (A) The disclosure statement form shall include, but not be limited to, requests for the following:
(i) A copy of the Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) for every hazardous substance used by the person
completing the disclosure statement.
(ii) If a material regulated under this article is not covered by the EPA “Hazardous Substance
Information and Training Act” and therefore, there is no MSDS available, the permittee is required to
compile an information sheet on the material to approximate what is required on a MSDS.
(iii) The maximum aggregate amount of each hazardous material disclosed in either subsection (i) or (ii)
above which is handled or used at any one time by the user over the course of a year.
(iv) The Department of Health Services manifests for wastes or equivalent information, and the hazard
class or classes compiled over the course of a year.
(v) Sufficient information on how and where the hazardous materials disclosed in subsection (iii) above
are handled or used by the user to allow fire and safety personnel to prepare adequate emergency responses
to potential releases of the hazardous materials.
(B) Sufficient information on any releases of the hazardous materials disclosed in subsection (iii) above, into
the air, water, sewers, or land to permit the city to understand the sources and content of hazardous material
releases.
(C) The SIC code of the business, if applicable.
(D) The name and phone number of the person representing the business and able to assist emergency
personnel in the event of an emergency involving the business during nonbusiness hours.
(E) Upon request, all users must provide information in addition to that required in the disclosure form filed
pursuant to subsection (a) above as follows:
(i) To the city manager, any information determined by the city manager to be necessary to protect the
public health, safety and/or the environment; and
(ii) To any physician where the physician determines that such information is necessary to the medical
treatment of his or her patient. Any additional information furnished under this subdivision shall be subject
to the trade secret provisions of subsection (c)(4) of this section.
(4) The following materials, person or entities shall be exempt from disclosure under this article:
(A) A material designated as a hazardous material by this article solely by its presence on the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission list of radioactive materials shall be exempt from the requirement that a MSDS be
submitted with the disclosure statement.
(B) Any person using or handling an aggregate amount less than 500 pounds or 55 gallons or 200 cubic feet of
compressed gas at standard temperature and pressure (STP) whichever is the lesser of a hazardous material, shall
be exempted from the requirement of disclosure of that use or handling unless the city manager has provided
notice that he or she has lowered the weight or volume limits of this exemption for specific hazardous material in
response to public health concerns. The exemption of this subsection shall not apply to the using or handling of
carcinogens except to the extent that such carcinogens are handled or used solely for personal purposes.
(C) Hazardous substances contained solely in consumer products packages for use by and distributed to the
general public.
(D) Any person, while engaged in the transportation of hazardous materials, including storage directly incident
thereto, provided that such materials are accompanied by shipping papers prepared in accordance with the
provisions of 49 CFR Parts 171 through 177.
(5) The disclosure statement is a public record, except that no trade secret shall be disclosed. Any request for a
public record hereunder shall be submitted in writing.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/414
(6) Trade Secrets.
(A) If a user believes that a request for information made by either the disclosure statement or otherwise
pursuant to this article involves the release of a trade secret, the user shall so notify the city clerk in writing
nonetheless, of that information on the statement that the user believes involves the release of a trade secret.
(B) Subject to the provisions of this section, the city clerk shall protect from disclosure any trade secret
coming into it possession when requested to do so in writing by the user.
(C) (i) When a claim for trade secret protection is made for any hazardous material pursuant to this
subsection, the disclosure statement to be publicly disclosed shall indicate the number of materials claimed
to be trade secrets and the maximum quantity used or handled at the facility.
(ii) Any information reported to or otherwise obtained by the city manager, or any of his representatives
or employees, which is exempt from disclosure pursuant to subsection (A) above shall not be disclosed to
anyone except:
(aa) To an officer or employee of the city, the state, or the United States of America, in connection
with the official duties of such officer or employee under any law for the protection of health, or to
contractors with the city and their employees if in the opinion of the city clerk such disclosure is
necessary and required for the satisfactory performance of work; or
(bb) To any physician where the physician determines that such information is necessary to the
medical treatment of his or her patient.
(D) For the purposes of this section, fire and emergency response personnel and state health personnel
operating within the jurisdiction of the city shall be considered employees of the city.
(E) Any officer or employee of the city, or former officer or employer, who by virtue of such employment or
official position has obtained possession of or the access to information, the disclosure of which is prohibited by
this subsection, and who, knowing that disclosure of the information is prohibited, knowingly and willfully
discloses the information in any manner to any person not entitled to receive it, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
Any contractor with the city and any employee of such contractor, who has been furnished information as
authorized by this subsection, shall be considered to be an employee of the city for purposes of this section. Any
physician who has been furnished information or who has obtained information pursuant to subsection (c)(6)(C)
(ii)(bb) above and who, knowing that the disclosure of the information is prohibited, knowingly and willfully
discloses the information, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(F) Information certified by appropriate officials to the United States, as necessarily kept secret for national
defense purposes, shall be accorded the full protections against disclosure as specified by such official or in
accordance with the laws of the United States.
(G) The city official shall endeavor to protect: for disclosure any and all trade secrets which come into the
city's possession pursuant to subsection (F). If an action is instituted under the State Public Records Act for the
release of such trade secrets, the permittee or permit applicant shall be deemed a real party in interest in any such
action. Notice of a lawsuit to compel disclosure shall be given by the city to the permittee or permit applicant
promptly upon receipt of such notice by city. The permittee or permit applicant shall have the option to defend
the city in any such action. The permittee or permit applicant shall indemnify the city for any and all attorney's
fees, costs and expenses imposed on or otherwise incurred by city in any proceeding related to this subsection, as
well as for any judgment imposed.
(H) The provisions of this subsection shall not permit a user to refuse to disclose information required
pursuant to this article to the city clerk.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 95, Section 95.75)
Sec. 6.507 Containment Standards
(a) (1) No person, firm, or corporation shall store any hazardous materials regulated by this article until a permit
or approval has been issued pursuant to this article. No permit or approval shall be granted pursuant to this article
unless permit applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city, by the submission of appropriate plans and other
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/414
information, that the design and construction the storage facility will result in a suitable manner of storage for the
hazardous materials or materials to be contained therein.
(2) All installation, construction, repair or modification, closure, and removal shall be to the satisfaction of city. The
city manager shall have the discretion to exempt an applicant from any specific requirement, other than the
requirement to secondary containment in underground storage facilities, or to impose reasonable additional
requirements, in order to better secure the purpose and general obligation of this article, it shall serve as an
interpretation of the provisions of this article addressed in such guidelines.
(b) New Storage Facilities.
(1) No person, firm or corporation shall construct or install any new storage facility until a permit or approval has
been issued pursuant to this article.
(2) (A) All new storage facilities intended for the storage of hazardous materials which are liquids or solids
at standard temperature and pressure (STP) shall be designated and constructed with a monitoring system
capable of detecting that the hazardous material stored in the primary containment has entered the secondary
containment.
(B) Visual inspection of the primary containment is the preferred method; however, other means of monitoring
may be required. Where secondary containment may be subject to the intrusion of water, a means of monitoring
for such water shall be provided.
(C) Whenever monitoring devices are provided, they shall, where applicable, be connected to attention getting
visual and/or audible alarms.
(3) Primary and secondary levels of containment shall be required for all new storage facilities intended for the
storage of hazardous materials which are liquids or solids at standard temperature and pressure (STP), unless
specifically herein exempted by the city manager.
(A) All primary containment shall be product tight.
(B) Secondary Containment:
(i) All secondary containment shall be constructed of materials of sufficient thickness, density, and
composition so as not to be structurally weakened as a result of contact with the discharged hazardous
materials, and so as to be capable of containing hazardous materials discharged from a primary container
for a period of time equal to or longer than the maximum anticipated time sufficient to allow recovery of
the discharged hazardous material.
(ii) In the case of an installation with one primary container, the secondary containment shall be large
enough to contain at least 110% of the volume of the primary container.
(iii) In the case of a storage facility with multiple primary containers, the secondary container shall be
large enough to contain 150% of the volume of the largest primary container placed in it, or 10% of the
aggregate internal volume of all primary containers in the storage facility, whichever is greater.
(iv) If the storage facility is open to rainfall, then the secondary containment must be able to additionally
accommodate the volume of a 24-hour rainfall as determined by a 25-year storm history.
(C) Laminated, coat, or clay materials shall be considered single walled and shall not be constructed to fulfill
the requirements of both primary and secondary containment.
(D) (i) A variance from the requirement for secondary containment for an underground storage facility
may be granted upon a finding by the city council that based on special circumstances:
(aa) The requirement of secondary containment creates an unusual and particular hardship;
(bb) An equivalent or superior degree of protection is provided by the proposed alternative; and
(cc) The proposed alternative has been appropriately certified or has been specified in the
guidelines approved.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/414
(ii) No variance shall be granted under this section except after a public hearing on such variance, notice
of which is published once in a newspaper of general circulation not less than ten nor more than 20 days
prior to such hearing to any interested party who files a written request therefore. Any written request for
such mailed notice shall be valid for one year from the date on which it is filed unless a renewal request is
filed. Renewal requests for such mailed notices shall be filed on or before July 1 of each year commencing
July 1, 1986. The notice shall contain a statement that a variance from secondary containment for
hazardous materials will be considered, the address of the facility for which a variance is sought, the name
of the applicant, and the time and place of the hearing.
(4) Means of overfill protection may be required for any primary container. This may be an overfill prevention
device and/or an attention getting high level alarm.
(5) Materials that in combination may cause a fire or explosion, or the production of a flammable, toxic, or
poisonous gas, or the deterioration of a primary or secondary container, shall be separated in both the primary and
secondary containment so as to avoid intermixing.
(6) Drainage of precipitation from within a storage facility containing hazardous materials which are liquids or
solids at STP, shall be controlled in a manner approved by the city manager so as to prevent hazardous materials from
being discharged. No drainage system will be approved unless the flow of the drain can be controlled.
(c) Existing Storage Facilities. Any storage facility in existence as of the effective date of this article or any storage facility for
which a building permit was issued prior to the effective date of this article (i.e., June 9, 1987) which does not meet the standards
of this article, may be permitted pursuant to this article as long it is providing suitable storage for hazardous materials as
determined by the city manager. In addition, storage facilities which contain hazardous materials which are liquids or solids at
standard temperature and pressure (STP) must be monitored in accordance with a plan approved by the city manager as set forth
herein:
(1) A monitoring plan for each such storage facility containing hazardous materials which are liquids or solids at
STP, shall be submitted to city as part of the hazardous materials management plan.
(2) Monitoring under such plan shall include visual inspection of the primary containment wherever practical;
however, if the visual inspection is not practical, an alternative method of monitoring each storage facility on a semiannual
or more frequent basis may be approved by city.
(3) Alternative methods of monitoring may include but are not limited to:
(A) Pressure testing piping systems, one or more groundwater monitoring wells which are down-gradient and
adjacent to the storage facility;
(B) Vapor analysis within each well where appropriate; and
(C) Analysis of any soil borings at the time of initial installations of each well. The number of wells, depth of
wells, and sampling frequency shall be approved by the city manager.
(4) Such monitoring devices and methods as approved by the city shall be installed and operating within six months
of the issuance of a provisional permit. The community development director may grant an extension of this
compliance date; however, such extension shall not exceed one additional year. The full term permit may be issued
when compliance with this part of this article has been approved.
(5) The continued use of a permit approved for existing storage facilities is subject to review and modification or
termination by city whenever there has been any unauthorized discharge. It shall also be reviewed by the city manager
each time the permit is renewed. In determining whether continued storage in such storage facility is suitable, the
community development director shall consider the age of the storage facility, the methods of containment, the
methods of monitoring, the feasibility of the required retrofit, the concentration of the hazardous materials contained,
the severity of potential unauthorized discharge, and the suitability of other long term preventive measures which meet
the intent of this article.
(6) Existing storage facilities which are not approved in accordance with this article must be upgraded to comply
with this article or be closed in accordance with subsection (d) below within one year of a decision not to issue a full
term permit. Extension of time for compliance with this subsection is not to exceed one additional year, may be
granted try the city manager.
(d) Out of Service Facilities.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/414
(1) No storage facility shall be abandoned.
(2) Storage facilities which are temporarily out of service and are intended to be returned to use must continue to be
monitored and inspected.
(3) Any storage facility which is not being monitored and inspected in accordance with this article must be closed or
removed in a manner approved by the city manager.
(4) Any person, firm or corporation having an interest, including a leasehold interest, in real property and having
reason to believe that an abandoned storage facility is located upon such storage facility within six months of the
effective date of this article (i.e., June 9, l987).
(5) Whenever an abandoned storage facility is located, a plan for the closing or removing or the upgrading and
permitting of such storage facility shall be filed within 90 days of its discovery. A closure plan shall conform to the
standards for closure specified in this article.
(e) Monitoring.
(1) Monitoring methods shall include a leak out system for detecting leakage from the primary container. A
monitoring system capable of detecting that the hazardous material stored in the primary containment has entered the
secondary container shall be provided. Visual inspection of the primary containment is the preferred method; however,
other means of monitoring may be required by the city manager. Where secondary containment may be subject to the
intrusion of water, a means of monitoring for such water shall be provided. Whenever monitoring devices are
provided, they shall, where applicable, be connected to attention getting visual and/or audible alarms.
(2) Every permittee under this article shall provide testing, monitoring (if applicable) and inspections in compliance
with the hazardous materials management plan and shall maintain records adequate to demonstrate compliance
therewith.
(f) (1) Every permittee under this article shall carry out maintenance, ordinary upkeep, and minor repairs in a
careful and safe manner. No permit or other approval will be required for such maintenance and upkeep.
(2) Any substantial modification or repair of a storage facility other than minor repairs or emergency repairs shall be
in accordance with plans to be submitted to the city manager and approved in accordance with this article prior to the
initiation of such work.
(3) The permittee may make emergency repairs to a storage facility in advance of seeking an additional permit
approval whenever an immediate repair is required to prevent or contain an unauthorized discharge or to protect the
integrity of the containment. However, within five working days after such emergency repairs have been started, the
permittee shall seek an additional approval pursuant to this article by submitting drawings or other information
adequate to describe the repairs to the city manager.
(4) Replacement of any storage facility for hazardous materials which are liquids or solids at STP, must be in
accordance with the new storage facilities standards of this article.
(g) Handling.
(1) Dispensing and mixing of hazardous materials must not be done in such a manner as to substantially increase the
risk of an unauthorized discharged.
(2) When hazardous materials are moved into or out of a storage facility, they shall remain in the travel path only for
the time reasonably necessary to transport the hazardous material, and such movement shall be in a manner which will
not substantially increase the risk of an unauthorized discharged.
(h) Secured Facilities. Access to the storage facilities shall be secured by means of fences and/or locks. The storage facilities
shall be kept securely locked when unattended.
(i) Emergency Equipment. Emergency equipment shall be provided which is reasonable and appropriate for potential
emergencies presented by the stored hazardous materials. Such equipment shall be regularly tested and adequately maintained.
(j) Posting of Emergency Procedures. Simplified emergency procedures shall be posted conspicuously in locations where
hazardous materials are stored.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 95, Section 95.76)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/414
Sec. 6.508 Transportation of Hazardous Materials
(a) All hazardous materials transported into, within, and out of the city limits must be in compliance with the mandatory
requirements of Title VII, and Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
(b) Transportation of hazardous materials shall be limited to specific travel routes along Highway 183 and Highway 90A. The
transport of hazardous materials on streets other than those listed above is prohibited by this article, excepting those cases
provided for in subsection (d) below.
(c) Transportation of hazardous materials into, within and out of the city limits must be done between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m. Transportation of hazardous materials at any other time is prohibited by this article, excepting those cases provided
for in subsection (d) below.
(d) Exemptions.
(1) Gasoline Deliveries. Gasoline may be transported off regular routes along Highway 183 and Highway 90A and
within the city only if its final destination for delivery is within city limits. The route of transportation must be the
most direct and safe available.
(2) Permission may be granted by the city manager to transport hazardous materials on streets other than those
designated as hazardous material transport routes and at times other than the designated hours of 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
Requests for such permission must be submitted in writing to the city manager at least 24 hours prior to the requested
time of transport.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 95, Section 95.77)
Sec. 6.509 Hazardous Materials Management Plan
(a) Each applicant for a permit pursuant to this article shall file a written plan for the city manager's approval, to be known as a
Hazardous Materials Management Plan (HMMP), which shall demonstrate the suitable storage of hazardous materials. The
HMMP may be amended at any time with the consent of the city manager. The HMMP shall be a public record except as
otherwise specified. Approval of the HMMP shall mean that the HMMP has provided adequate information for the purposes of
evaluating the permit approval. Such approval shall not be understood to mean that the city has made an independent
determination of the adequacy of that which is described in the HMMP.
(b) Standard Form HMMP. The standard form hazardous material management plan must be submitted unless the facility
qualifies as a minimal storage site under this article. The HMMP shall include and be subject to the following:
(1) General Information. HMMP shall contain the name and address of the facility and business phone number of
applicant, the name and titles and emergency phone numbers of the primary response person and an alternate, the
number of employees, number of shifts, hours of operation, and principal business activity.
(2) General Facility Description. The HMMP shall contain a map drawn at a legible scale and in a format and detail
determined by the city manager. It shall show the location of all buildings and structures, chemical loading areas,
parking lots, internal roads, storm and sewer drains, and shall specify the uses of adjacent properties. The city may
also require information as to the location of wells, floodplains, earthquake faults, surface water bodies, and/or general
land uses (schools, hospitals, institutions, residential areas) within one mile of the facility boundaries.
(3) Facility Storage Map. The HMMP shall contain a facility storage map at a legible scale for licensing and
enforcement purposes. The information in this section is provided for purposes of ensuring the suitable and secure
storage of emergency response personnel of city. The facility storage map shall indicate the location of each hazardous
material storage facility, and access to such storage facilities. In addition, the map shall indicate the location of
emergency equipment related to each storage facility, and the general purpose of the other areas within each facility.
For each storage facility, the map shall contain information as prescribed below, except that where the hazardous
material being stored is a trade secret, it shall be identified in a coded manner (and the key shall be provided
separately) and not in a manner which would reveal trade secret information:
(A) A floor plan to scale and the permit quantity limit.
(B) For each nonwaste hazardous material which is stored in a quantity greater than the quantities specified
the general chemical name, common/trade name, major constituents for mixtures, United Nations (US) or North
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/414
America (NA) number, if available, and physical state. For each waste hazardous material stored in any quantity
within the storage facility, the presence of wastes and its major constituents shall be indicated.
(C) For all hazardous materials, including wastes, stored in such storage facility, the hazard class or classes
and the quantity range for each such class, aggregated within each storage facility, in the following range:
Quantity
Number
Range
Range Amounts
1 Up to and including 500 pounds for solids, 55 gallons for
liquids, and 200 cubic feet at STP for compressed gases
2 Between 500 and 5,000 pounds for solids, 55 and 550
gallons for liquids and 200 and 2,000 cubic feet at STP of
compressed gases
3 Between 5,000 and 25,000 pounds for solids, 550 to
2,750 gallons for liquids, and 2,000 to 10,000 cubic feet
at STP for compressed gases
4 Between 25,000 and 50,000 pounds for solids, 2,750 add
5,500 gallons for liquids, and 10,000 and 20,000 cubic
feet at STP for compressed gases
5 More than 50,000 pounds solids, 5,500 gallons for
liquids, and 20,000 cubic feet at STP for compressed
gases
(D) For materials not regulated under this article but regulated under the Standard Fire Code, such as radio
actives or cryogens, or for materials stored in storage facilities exempted by the city manager may require that
the hazard class or classes and the quantity range of each such hazard class, using the quantity ranges listed in
subsection (c) above be provided.
(E) For hazardous materials which are water reactive, the map shall provide a code for their location.
(F) For tanks, the capacity limit of each tank and the hazardous material contained in each tank by general
chemical name, common/trade name, major constituents for mixtures, United Nations (UN) or North America
(NA) number, if available, and physical state.
(4) Confidentiality of Facility Storage Map. Due to the threat to the security of the facility storage map, this
information shall be maintained by city for law enforcement purposes only and shall not be made public. The city shall
not disclose this information to the public without the consent of the permittee or permit applicant unless ordered to do
so by a court of competent jurisdiction. The permittee or permit applicant shall be deemed a real party in interest in
any such action. Prompt notice of a lawsuit to compel disclosure shall be given by the city to the permittee or permit
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/414
applicant. However, the city shall be under no duty to prevent disclosure where there has been any unauthorized
discharge of hazardous materials stored in any storage facility shown on such map or where the disclosure arises out of
any official emergency response relating to the storage facility.
(5) Annual Update. The facility storage map shall be updated annually with the disclosure statement or whenever an
additional approval is required for the facility or whenever the disclosure statement is required to be amended.
(6) Disclosure Statement. The disclosure statement shall be filed in accordance with Section 6.506.
(7) Separation of Materials. The HMMP shall contain a description of the methods to be utilized to ensure
separation and protection of stored hazardous materials from factors which may cause a fire or explosion, or the
production of a flammable, toxic, or poisonous gas, or other deterioration of the primary or secondary containment.
(8) Monitoring Program. The HMMP shall contain a description of the location, type, manufacturer specifications
(if applicable), and suitability of monitoring methods to be used in each storage facility storing hazardous materials
which are liquids or solids at STP. It shall also specify the frequency of inspections of storage facilities which be
conducted by the permittee.
(9) Recordkeeping. The HMMP shall contain an inspection checksheet or log designed to be used in conjunction
with routine inspections. The checksheet or log shall provide for the recording of the date and the of inspection, and
for monitoring activity the date and time of any corrective action taken, the name of the inspector, and the counter
signature of the designated safety manager for the facility or the responsible official as designated in the HMMP.
(10) Emergency Equipment. The HMMP shall describe emergency equipment availability, testing and maintenance.
(11) Variation in Information.
(A) Additional information may be required for the HMMP where such information is reasonably necessary to
meet the intent of this article.
(B) Requirements for information in the HMMP may be waived where such information is not reasonably
necessary to meet the intent of this article.
(C) Whenever the permittee has submitted a plan which includes substantially the same information as is
required for any component(s) of the HMMP to any other public agency regulating hazardous materials, such
plan may be submitted to the city manager in lieu of such component(s) with the permission of the city manager.
(c) Short Form HMMP; Minimal Storage Site.
(1) A facility qualifies as a minimal storage site if the quantity of each hazardous material stored in one or more
storage facilities in an aggregate quantity for the entire facility is 500 pounds or less for solids, 55 gallons or less for
liquids, or 200 cubic feet or less at STP for compressed gases.
(2) The applicant for a permit for a facility which qualifies as a minimal storage site may opt to file the short form
hazardous materials management plan. Such plan shall include the following components:
(A) General information as called for in subsection (b)(1) above;
(B) A simple line drawing of the facility showing the location of the storage facilities and indicating the hazard
class or classes and physical state of the hazardous materials being stored, whether any of the material is a waste
and shall indicate presence and location of hazardous materials which are water reactive.
(C) A carcinogen identification form which shall indicate the storage of any quantity of any carcinogen. This
provision will be satisfied by the submittal to the city manager of a copy of the carcinogen registration form
submitted to the Texas Department of Industrial Relations in accordance with this article, as amended.
(D) Information describing that the hazardous materials will be stored in a suitable manner and will be
appropriately contained, separated and monitored.
(E) Description of emergency equipment to be maintained.
(F) Assurance that the disposal of any hazardous materials will be in an appropriate manner.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/414
(3) Where a claim for trade secret protection is made for any carcinogen pursuant to this article, the carcinogen
identification to be publicly disclosed shall identify all carcinogens not claimed to be trade secrets and it shall indicate
the number of carcinogens claimed to be trade secrets.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 95, Section 95.78)
Sec. 6.510 Report of Discharges
(a) Reporting Unauthorized Discharge Liquids and Solids at STP. As soon as any person in charge of a storage facility or
responsible for emergency response for a facility has knowledge of any unauthorized discharge of a hazardous material which is
liquid or solid at STP, such person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery and containment and clean up of such
discharge and shall record or report the occurrence as required by this article.
(b) Unconfirmed Unauthorized Discharge.
(1) Indication of Loss in Inventory Records. Whenever a material balance or other inventory record employed as a
monitoring technique under the HMMP indicates a loss of hazardous material, and no unauthorized discharge has been
confirmed by other means, the permittee shall have five working days to determine whether or not there has been an
unauthorized discharge. If before the end of such period it is determined that there has been no unauthorized discharge,
an entry explaining the occurrence shall be made in the permittee's monitoring record. Where the permittee has not
been able, within such period, to determine that there has been no unauthorized discharge, it is deemed confirmed and
the permittee shall proceed in accordance with this article.
(2) Test Results. Whenever any test results suggest a possible unauthorized discharge, and no unauthorized
discharge has been confirmed by other means, the permittee shall have five working days to retest. If second test
results obtained within that period establish that there has been no unauthorized discharge, the results of both tests
shall be recorded in the permittee's monitoring records. If it has not been established within such period that there has
been no authorized discharge, an authorized discharge is deemed confirmed and the permittee shall proceed.
(c) Confirmed Unauthorized Discharge. Any unauthorized discharge which is confirmed by any means or is presumed
confirmed shall be treated as follows:
(1) Recordable Unauthorized Discharge. Any recordable unauthorized discharge, as hereinafter defined, shall be
contained and safely disposed of in an appropriate manner by the permittee and such occurrence and the response
thereto shall be recorded in the permittee's monitoring records. A recordable unauthorized discharge is any
unauthorized discharge of a hazardous material which meets all of the following criteria:
(A) The discharge is from a primary containment to a secondary containment or to a rigid above ground
surface covering capable of containing the discharge until clean up of the hazardous material is completed;
(B) The permittee is able to adequately clean up and discharge before it escapes from such secondary
containment or such above ground surface; but if the clean-up requires more than eight hours, it becomes a
reportable discharge in accordance with subsection (2) below;
(C) There is no increase in the hazard of fire or explosion, nor is there any production of a flammable or
poisonous gas, nor is there any deterioration of such secondary containment or such rigid above ground surface.
(D) An otherwise recordable unauthorized discharge does not need to be recorded or reported as provided in
this article if the discharge is not the result of the deterioration or failure of the primary container, and the
quantity discharged is less than one ounce by weight, and can be cleaned up within 15 minutes.
(2) Reportable Unauthorized Discharge. Any unauthorized discharge which is not determined to be recordable
under subsection (c)(1) above, must be reported to the city manager immediately. The reporting party shall provide
information to the fire chief and the city manager relating to the ability of the permittee to contain and dispose of the
hazardous material, the estimated time it will take to complete containment and disposal, and the degree of hazard
created. The city manager may verify that the hazardous material is being contained and appropriately disposed.
Whenever the city manager determines that the permittee is not adequately containing and disposing of such
hazardous materials, the city manager shall have the power and authority to undertake and direct emergency response
in order to protect the public health and/or safety.
(d) Gases at STP. Notwithstanding any person in charge of a storage facility or responsible for emergency response for a
storage facility, who has knowledge of any unauthorized discharge of a hazardous material which is a gas at STP, must
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/414
immediately report such discharge to the city if such discharge presents a threat of imminent danger to public health and safety.
(e) Clean-Up Responsibilities. Any person, firm or corporation responsible for storing the hazardous material shall institute and
complete all actions necessary to remedy the effects of any unauthorized discharge whether sudden or gradual. City shall
undertake actions to remedy the effects of such unauthorized discharge itself, only if the city manager determines that it is
reasonably necessary under the circumstances for the city to do so. The responsible party shall be liable to reimburse city for all
costs incurred by city in remedying the effects of such unauthorized discharge, including the costs of fighting fires to the
maximum extent allowed by law. This responsibility is not conditioned upon evidence of willfulness or negligence of the party
storing the hazardous material(s) in causing or allowing such discharge. Any responsible party who undertakes action to remedy
the effects of unauthorized discharge(s) shall not be barred by this article from seeking to recover appropriate costs and
expenditures from other responsible parties except as provided by this section.
(f) Indemnification. The permittee shall indemnify, hold harmless and defend the city against any claim, cause of action,
disability, loss, liability, damage, cost or expense, howsoever arising, which occurs by reason of an unauthorized discharge in
connection with the permittee's operations under the permit required under this article except as rises from city's sole willful act or
sole active negligence.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 95, Section 95.79)
Sec. 6.511 Inspections and Records
(a) Inspections by City.
(1) The city may conduct inspections, at its discretion, for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with this article
and causing to be corrected any conditions which would constitute any violation of this article or of any other statute,
code, rule or regulation affecting the storage of hazardous materials.
(2) Permittees are not required to disclose the identity of hazardous materials protected as trade secrets to anyone
other than the official designated for that purpose pursuant to Section 6.506(c)(6), except in the case of an emergency
response or an unauthorized discharge related to the storage facility in which the trade secret material is contained.
Therefore, the permittee may put temporary coverings over the labels of trade secret materials during the course of city
inspections conducted by other than the city official so designated.
(A) Right of Entry. Whenever necessary for the purpose of investigating or enforcing the provisions of this
article, or whenever any enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any structure or
upon any premises a condition which constitutes a violation of this article, the officers may enter such structure
or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same, or to perform any duty imposed upon any of the
respective officers by law; provided that if such structure or premises be occupied, the officer shall first present
proper credentials and request entry, and further provided, that if such structure or premises is unoccupied, the
officer shall first make a reasonable attempt to contact a responsible person from such firm or corporation and
request entry, except in emergency circumstances. If such entry is refused, the officer seeking entry shall have
recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
(B) Inspections by City; Discretionary. All inspections specified herein shall be at the discretion of the city
and nothing in this article shall be construed as requiring the city to conduct any such inspection, nor shall any
actual inspection made imply a duty to conduct any other inspection. Furthermore, nothing in this article shall be
construed to hold the city or any officer, employee or representative of the city responsible for any damage to
persons or property by reason of making an inadequate or negligent inspection or by reason of any failure to
make an inspection or reinspection.
(b) Special Inspections. In addition to the inspections specified above, the city may require the periodic employment of special
inspectors to conduct an audit or assessment of the permittee's facility to make a hazardous material safety evaluation and to
determine compliance with the provisions of this article.
(1) The special inspector shall be a qualified person or firm who shall demonstrate expertise to the satisfaction of
the city manager.
(2) The special inspection report shall include an evaluation of the facilities and recommendations consistent with
the provisions of this article where appropriate. A copy of the report shall be filed with the city manager at the same
time that is submitted to the permittee.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/414
(3) The permittee shall, within 30 days of the report, file with the city manager a plan to implement all
recommendations, or shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city manager why such recommendations shall not be
implemented.
(c) Substituted Inspections. An inspection by an employee of any other public agency may be deemed by the city manager as a
substitute for any requirement of this article.
(d) Maintenance of Records. All records required by this article shall be maintained by the permittee for a period not less than
three years. The records shall be made available to the city manager during normal working hours and upon reasonable notice.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 95, Section 95.80)
Sec. 6.512 Application for Hazardous Material Storage Permit
(a) Permit Required. Any person, firm or corporation which stores any hazardous material shall obtain and keep current a
hazardous materials storage permit issued pursuant to this article. One or more such permits shall be issued for a facility
according to the administrative convenience of the city manager. Additional approval shall be obtained for any storage facility
thereafter connected, installed, substantially modified, replaced, closed or removed, or for any charge in or addition to hazardous
materials stored not in accordance with the prior approval. Notwithstanding the above, the permittee shall have 30 days to apply
for an additional approval for the storing of a new or different hazardous material with the same hazard class as stated on the
existing permit approvals, where much storage does not increase the hazard of fire or explosion or the hazard of the production of
flammable or poisonous gas. Storage of new or different hazardous material, not meeting all of these criteria shall require the
prior additional approval.
(b) Application. Application for a new, amended or renewed permit or an additional approval shall be made to the city manager
on the form provided by the city. In addition to the information required by such form, applicant shall submit the hazardous
materials management plan required by Section 6.509(a) and construction plans, if any, in conformity with Section 6.510(a).
Applicant shall specify the permit quantity limit requested to be permitted for each storage facility.
(c) Investigation. The city manager may make such investigation of the applicant and the proposed facility or activity as the
city manager deems necessary to carry out the purpose of this article.
(d) Approval of Permit. A permit shall not be approved until the city manager is satisfied that the storage approved adequately
conforms to the provisions of this article.
(e) Provisional Permit. If the city manager finds that the proposal does not completely conform to the provision of this article,
the city manager may approve a provisional permit, subject to conditions to be imposed by the city manager, when such a
provisional permit is feasible and does not appear to be detrimental to the public interest. The applicant must be informed in
writing of the reasons why a full term permit was not issued.
(f) Temporary Permit. A temporary permit for storage may be issued where storage does not exceed 30 days and occurs no
more frequently than every six months. The containment standards of the hazardous materials management plan of the inspection
and records requirements may be modified as appropriate under those circumstances for the storage of hazardous material on a
nonregular temporary basis.
(g) Issuance of Permits.
(1) Upon the approval of a temporary, provisional, or full term permit by the city manager and upon the payment of
any applicable fee, the officer shall issue and deliver the permit to the applicant. Such permit shall contain the
following information:
(A) The name and address of the permittee for purposes of notice and service of process;
(B) The address of the facility for which the permit is issued;
(C) Authorization of any and all storage facilities approved under the permit, the permit quantity limit or limits
and the approved hazard class or classes for each storage facility;
(D) The date the permit is effective;
(E) The date of expiration;
(F) When applicable, a designation that the permit is provisional or temporary; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/414
(G) Any special conditions of the permit.
(2) The city secretary shall keep a record of all permits issued and all conditions attached thereto.
(h) Additional Approvals.
(1) When a request for an additional approval is filed as required, the procedures set forth in this article for an
application for a permit shall also apply to such an application for an additional approval, and shall be accompanied by
an appropriate amendment to the HMMP.
(2) (A) If the additional approval requested is for closure of a storage facility, the permittee shall apply for
approval to close such storage facility not less than 30 days prior to the termination of the storage of hazardous
materials at the storage facility. Such closure shall be in accordance with a closure plan which described
procedures for terminating the storage of hazardous materials in each storage facility in a manner that:
(i) Minimizes the need for further maintenance;
(ii) Controls to the extent that a threat to public health of safety or to the environment from residual
hazardous materials in the storage facility is minimized or eliminated; and
(iii) Demonstrates that hazardous materials that were stored in the storage facility will be removed,
disposed of, neutralized or reused in an appropriate manner.
(B) This 34-day period may be waived by the city if there are special circumstances requiring such waiver.
(i) Term. A permit may be issued for a term of two years, excepting provisional permits which may be issued for any period of
time up to six months, and temporary permits which may be issued for no longer than 30 days.
(j) Renewal. Every application for the renewal of a permit or extension of a provisional permit shall be made at least 30 days
prior to the expiration date of such permit. If a timely application for renewal has been submitted, the permit shall remain in effect
until the city manager has made a determination pursuant to subsection (k) below and any administrative appeal pursuant thereto
has been exhausted.
(k) Determination. The community development director shall make a determination with regard to any application for a
permit, an additional approval, or a renewal, within 90 days from the date that the application has been completed or compliance
with the appropriate provisions of the Texas Water Commission has been completed, whichever occurs later. This time limit may
be further extended by mutual agreement between the city manager and applicant.
(l) Fees. The city shall establish fees sufficient to recover its costs in administering this article and no application need be
accepted unless and until the fees have been paid.
(1) Delinquent Fees. All permit fees delinquent for 30 days or more shall be subject to an additional charge to be
determined by city which shall be added to the amount of the fee collected.
(2) Refund of Fees. No refund or rebate of a permit fee shall be allowed by reason of the fact that the permit is
denied or the permittee discontinues the activity or use of a facility prior to the expiration of the term or that the permit
is suspended or revoked prior to the expiration of the term.
(m) Transfer of Permit. The permit may be transferred to new owners of the same business only if the new owners accept
responsibility for all obligations under this article at the time of the transfer of the business and document such transfer on a form
provided by city within 30 days of transfer of ownership of the business. Such transfer shall be subject to the approval of the city
manager.
(n) Effective Date of Permit. No permit shall become effective until the permit has been signed and accepted by the permittee.
Where the permittee is a company, firm or corporation, the acceptance must be signed by a person having the legal authority to
bind the permittee.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 95, Section 95.81)
Sec. 6.513 Denial of Permit
(a) Denial of Application. If the city manager has cause to deny the application and determines that it would not be feasible or
in the public interest to approve a temporary or provisional permit, then the city manager shall deny the application.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/414
(b) Grounds for Denial. A permit shall be denied if the applicant fails to demonstrate adequate conformity to the provisions of
this article. In addition, a permit can be denied for any of the grounds upon which the permit would be subject to revocation
pursuant to Section 6.514.
(c) Transmittal of Decision. The decision to deny the application shall be given to the applicant in writing, setting forth the
findings upon which the decision is based.
(d) Appeal to City Manager. Within 30 days from the date of deposit of the decision in the mail in accordance with Section
6.514(b)(2) the applicant may appeal in writing to the city manager or his designee setting forth with particularity the ground or
grounds for the appeal.
(e) Hearing on Appeal. The city manager shall set a time and place for the hearing on the appeal and shall notify the applicant,
in writing, of such date and time, no later than ten (10) working days from the date the appeal was received by the city manager.
The hearing shall be conducted within 30 days from the date the appeal was received by the city manager.
(f) Disposition of Appeal. After the hearing on the appeal, the city manager may refer the matter back for a new investigation
and decision, may affirm the decision, may approve a provisional permit as provided in Section 6.512(e) or may approve the
application with or without conditions. The decision of the city manager shall be the final administrative determination and is
subject to judicial review by the city council.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 95, Section 95.82)
Sec. 6.514 Remedial Action
(a) Grounds for Remedial Action. A permit may be subjected to remedial action for any of the following causes, arising from
the acts or omissions of the permittee, either before or after a permit is issued:
(1) Fraud, willful misrepresentation, or any willful, inaccurate or false statement in applying for a new or renewed
permit;
(2) Fraud, willful misrepresentation, or any willful, inaccurate or false statement in any report required by this
article;
(3) Failure to abate, correct or rectify any noncompliance within the time specified in the notice of noncompliance;
(4) Failure to correct conditions constituting an unreasonable risk or an unauthorized discharge of hazardous
materials within a reasonable time after notice from a governmental entity other than city;
(5) Failure to abide by the remedial action imposed by the city; and
(6) Failure to pay any applicable fees.
(b) Notice of Noncompliance.
(1) Unless the city manager finds that an immediate suspension under subsection (d) below is necessary to protect
the public health or safety from imminent danger. The city manager shall issue a notice of noncompliance:
(A) For failure to comply with the provisions of this article, any permit conditions or any provisions of the
hazardous material management plan; or
(B) Before taking remedial action pursuant to subsection (a) above.
(2) Such notice shall be given in writing to the permittee in person or by mail. If the noncompliance is not abated,
corrected or rectified within the time specified, remedial action may be taken.
(c) Notice of Hearing. A notice of hearing shall be given to the permittee by the city manager in writing, setting forth the time
and place of the hearing, the ground or grounds upon which the remedial action is based, the pertinent code section or sections,
and a brief statement of the factual matters in support thereof. The notice shall be given at least 15 days prior to the hearing date.
(d) Suspension Prior to Hearing. Whenever the city manager finds that suspension of a permit prior to a hearing for remedial
action is necessary to protect the public health or safety from imminent danger, the city manager may immediately suspend any
permit pending the hearing for remedial action. The city manager shall immediately notify the permittee of such suspension by
having a written notice of the suspension personally served on the permittee. The permittee shall have the opportunity for a
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/414
preliminary hearing with regard to such preheating suspension within three working days of receiving written notice of such
suspension.
(e) Remedial Action.
(1) If the city manager, after the hearing, finds that cause exists for remedial action, the city manager shall impose
one or more of the following:
(A) Warning;
(B) An order to correct the particular noncompliance specified in the notice issued pursuant to impose one or
more of the following:
(i) A revocation of the permit for the facility or for a storage facility and approval of a provisional
permit;
(ii) Suspension of the permit for the facility or for a storage facility for a specified period not to exceed
six months;
(iii) Modification or addition of conditions of the permit; or
(iv) Revocation of the permit with no reapplication permitted for a specified period not to exceed five
years.
(2) If the grounds for remedial action are based on and if such grounds are limited to one storage facility, the
remedial action taken shall be limited to that storage facility.
(f) Transmittal of Decision. Within ten days of the hearing, the city manager shall render a written opinion, stating the findings
upon which the decision is based and the action taken, if any. The decision of the city shall be the final administrative
determination and is subject to judicial review by the city council.
(g) Authority After Suspension, Revocation or Expiration. The suspension, revocation or expiration of a permit issued under
this article shall not prevent any proceedings to investigate such permit, nor the instituting of any other proceeding or taking
remedial action against such permittee.
(h) Return of Permit. In the event that a permit issued under the provisions of this article is suspended or revoked, the permittee
shall forward it to the city manager not later than the end of the third business day after notification of such suspension or
revocation.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 95, Section 95.83)
Sec. 6.515 Hearing Procedure
(a) Rules. In any hearing under this article, all parties involved shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary, and
tangible evidence bearing on the issues, to be represented by counsel, and to confront and cross-examine any witnesses against
them. Any hearing under this article may be continued by the person conducting the hearing for a reasonable time for the
convenience of party or a witness.
(b) Notices. All notices required by this article shall be sent certified mail, postage prepaid, to the applicant or the permittee at
the address given for purposes of notice on the application or permit or delivered to the permittee personally.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 95, Section 95.84)
Sec. 6.516 Compliance Schedule
(a) New Storage Facilities.
(1) As of the effective date of this article [i.e., June 9, 1987], a hazardous materials storage permit for a facility must
be contained prior to the installation or use of any new storage facility unless a building permit for such new storage
facility was issued prior to such date.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/414
(2) The hazardous material management plan must be filed at the time of application for a hazardous materials
storage permit.
(b) Existing Storage Facilities.
(1) A facility which has any existing hazardous materials store facilities or had obtained a building permit for such a
storage facility prior to the effective date of this article, being June 9, 1987, and to which new storage facility is added,
shall have one year from such effective date to file a completed application for a hazardous materials storage permit,
including a monitoring plan in accordance with Section 6.509(b). The time limitation, for determination specified in
Section 6.512(a) shall not apply but the applicant shall be deemed to have a provisions permit of indefinite term, until
city makes such determination.
(2) Notwithstanding the above, a disclosure statement, if applicable, must be filed within 90 days of the effective
date of this article.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 95, Section 95.85)
Sec. 6.517 Disclaimer of Liability
(a) The degree of protection required of this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes. The standards set forth
herein are minimal standards and this article does not imply that compliance will ensure that there will be no unauthorized
discharge of hazardous material. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city, an officer or employee thereof for any
damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. All persons handling,
storing, using, processing, and disposing of hazardous materials within the city should be and are advised to determine to their
own satisfaction the level of protection in addition to that required by this article necessary or desirable to ensure that there is no
unauthorized discharge of hazardous materials.
(b) This article is not intended to create any different standard or obligation for the storage of carcinogens than is imposed for
the storage of other hazardous materials. Hazardous materials are identified as carcinogens herein for public record purposes only
and the identification of a material as a carcinogen shall not require a different or stricter application of the provisions of this
article, nor notice to any person under any circumstances other than those expressly specified in this article, nor shall such
identification create any other duty of obligations applicable to the storage of other hazardous materials.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 95, Section 95.86)
Sec. 6.518 Guidelines
Guidelines approved by the city manager may be issued from time to time and shall be maintained in the office of the city
secretary. Such guidelines, in the areas addressed therein, shall serve as an advisory interpretation of this article. (1995 Code of
Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 95, Section 95.87)
Sec. 6.519 Duties are Discretionary
Subject to the limitations of due process, notwithstanding any other provision of this code, whenever the words “shall” or “must”
are used in establishing a responsibility or duty of the city, its elected or appointed officers, employees, or agents, it is the
legislative intent that such words establish a discretionary responsibility or duty requiring the exercise of judgment and discretion.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 95, Section 95.88)
Sec. 6.520 Conflict With Other Laws
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article:
(1) A storage facility regulated by any state of federal agency will be exempted from any conflicting provision of
this article.
(2) If the storage facility is required to have a permit from the state department of health under the health and safety
code, it shall be exempted from any provision of this article which is covered by the regulations adopted under the
state department of health.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/414
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 95, Section 95.89)
Sec. 6.521 Violations
(a) As provided under this article, violations of the provisions of this article shall be subject to criminal sanctions.
(b) Remedies under this article are in addition to and do not supersede or limit any and all other remedies, civil or criminal.
(c) A civil action may be instituted against any employer by an employee who has been discharged, demoted, suspended or in
any other manner discriminated against in terms or conditions of employment, or threatened with any such revitalization, because
such employee has, in good faith, made any oral or written report or complaint related to the enforcement of this article to any
company official, public official or union official, or has testified in any proceeding in any way related thereto. In addition to any
actual damages which may be awarded, damages shall include costs and attorney fees.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 95, Section 95.90)
Sec. 6.522 Penalty
(a) Any person who shall violate any provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
shall be punished in accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in section 1.109 of this code.
(b) (1) Any person, firm or corporation who intentionally or negligently violates any provision of sections 6.501
through 6.521, except that an unauthorized discharge which is recordable and recorded in compliance with section
6.509 shall not be in violation of sections 6.501 through 6.521 for purposes of this section, or fails to comply with any
order issued thereunder, shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,000 per day for each violation which shall
be assessed and recovered in a civil action brought in the name of the people by the city attorney. In determining the
penalty, the court shall consider all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the following:
(A) The extent of harm or potential harm caused by the violation;
(B) The nature and persistence of the violation;
(C) The length of time over which the violation occurred;
(D) The frequency of past violations;
(E) The permittee's record of maintenance; and
(F) Corrective action, if any, taken by the permittee.
(2) In any civil action brought pursuant hereto in which the city prevails, the court shall determine and impose
reasonable expenses, including attorneys' fees, incurred by the city in the investigation and prosecution of the action.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 95, Section 95.99)
ARTICLE 6.600 PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS
Sec. 6.601 Authority of Building Official
(a) The building official, or assignee, of the city is hereby authorized to perform inspections of any place of public
accommodation in the city (including but not limited to, hotels, motels, bed and breakfasts) for compliance with state law and/or
any local regulations related to sanitation and safety.
(b) Said inspections may be performed:
(1) On an annual basis at the discretion of the building official; or
(2) At any reasonable time upon complaint by any guest or tenant .
Sec. 6.602 Filing of Complaint
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/414
Complaints may be filed in the office of the city secretary. The complainant should have the name, address and room number of
the hotel/motel available when filing the complaint.
Sec. 6.603 Actions by Building Official
(a) Upon receipt of a complaint as outlined herein, the building official will investigate said complaint and whether or not a
violation is found, shall perform an exit review with the owner, manager or person in charge of the premises at the end of the
inspection, which includes reviewing each violation found by the inspector, and having the owner, manager or person in charge of
the premises sign the inspection sheet, retaining a copy. The signature will act only as an acknowledgement of the findings of the
inspection and will not be taken as an admission of violation or guilt. The signature will also act as agreement/acknowledgement
that the exit review was performed and they are aware of any violations occurring on this visit.
(b) Upon receipt of a complaint as outlined herein, the building official will investigate said complaint and if a violation is
found, shall notify the owner of the place of public accommodation by mail, return receipt requested, of the violation(s).
Sec. 6.604 Abatement
(a) Upon receipt of notice as outlined herein, the owner shall have thirty (30) days to abate the condition(s) constituting a
violation. The building official will investigate the conditions at the end of said thirty-day period to determine compliance.
(b) Any person who shall willfully refuse or fail to abate conditions under the terms of this article, and/or any person who shall
interfere with or hinder said abatement under the terms of this article, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished as
set forth in section 1.109 of this code of ordinances. In case the owner or occupant of any such establishment shall be a
corporation, and shall violate any provision of this article, the president, vice-president, secretary, treasurer of such corporation, or
any manager, agent or employee of such corporation shall be also severally liable for the penalties therein provided.
Sec. 6.605 Compliance With Other Ordinances
This article in no way restricts or otherwise limits enforcement authority with regard to other ordinances of the city. In particular,
chapter 3, article 3.300 of this code of ordinances regarding substandard buildings shall apply when justified.
(Ordinance 2005-01 adopted 1/3/05)
CHAPTER 7
MUNICIPAL COURT
ARTICLE 7.100 MUNICIPAL COURT BUILDING SECURITY FUND*
Sec. 7.101 Fund Created
There is hereby created and established a municipal court building security fund pursuant to article 102.017 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure. This fund shall be administered under the direction of the governing body of the city.
Sec. 7.102 Fee Assessed
(a) The municipal court of the city is hereby authorized and required to assess a municipal court building security fee in the
amount of $3.00 against all defendants convicted of a misdemeanor offense by the municipal court. A person is considered
convicted for purposes of this article if:
(1) A sentence is imposed on the person;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/414
(2) The person received community supervision, including deferred adjudication; or
(3) The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
(b) Each misdemeanor conviction shall be subject to a separate assessment of the fee.
Sec. 7.103 Collection of Fee
The security fee shall be collected by the municipal court clerk and paid to the finance director who discharges the duties of
municipal treasurer for deposit in the municipal court building security fund.
Sec. 7.104 Fund Purposes
Money deposited in the municipal court building security fund may be used only for security personnel, services and items related
to buildings that house the operations of the municipal court. The term security personnel, services, and items include:
(1) The purchase or repair of X-ray machines and conveying systems;
(2) Handheld metal detectors;
(3) Walkthrough metal detectors;
(4) Identification cards and systems;
(5) Electronic locking and surveillance equipment;
(6) Bailiffs, deputy sheriffs, deputy constables, or contract security personnel during times when they are providing
appropriate security services;
(7) Signage;
(8) Confiscated weapon inventory and tracking systems;
(9) Locks, chains, alarms or similar security devices;
(10) The purchase or repair of bullet-proof glass;
(11) Continuing education or security issues for court personnel and security personnel; and
(12) Warrant officers and related equipment.
(Ordinance 2012-14 adopted 4/3/12)
ARTICLE 7.200 MUNICIPAL COURT TECHNOLOGY FUND*
Sec. 7.201 Fund Created
There is hereby created and established a municipal court technology fund pursuant to article 102.0172 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure. This fund shall be administered under the direction of the governing body of the city.
Sec. 7.202 Fee Assessed
(a) The municipal court of the city is hereby authorized and required to assess a municipal court technology fund fee in the
amount of $4.00 against all defendants convicted of a misdemeanor offense by the municipal court. A person is considered
convicted for purposes of this article if:
(1) A sentence is imposed on the person;
(2) The person receives community supervision, including deferred adjudication community supervision; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/414
(3) The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
(b) Each misdemeanor conviction shall be subject to a separate assessment of the fee.
Sec. 7.203 Collection of Fee
The technology fee shall be collected by the municipal court clerk and paid to the finance director for deposit in a fund to be
known as the municipal court technology fund.
Sec. 7.204 Fund Purposes
The municipal court technology fund may be used only to finance the purchase of or to maintain technological enhancements for
the municipal court, including:
(1) Computer systems;
(2) Computer networks;
(3) Computer hardware;
(4) Computer software;
(5) Imaging systems;
(6) Electronic kiosks;
(7) Electronic ticket writers;
(8) Docket management systems.
(Ordinance 2012-13 adopted 4/3/12)
ARTICLE 7.300 MUNICIPAL COURT CHILD SAFETY FUND*
Sec. 7.301 Fund Created
There is hereby created a municipal child safety trust fund. This fund shall be administered under the direction of the city council.
Sec. 7.302 Fee Assessed
(a) A person convicted of an offense regarding the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles as allowed by section 542.202,
Texas Transportation Code or chapter 682, Texas Transportation Code, shall pay as court costs on each parking violation the
maximum amount authorized by article 102.014 (b), Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, in addition to other taxable court costs.
(b) A person convicted of an offense under subtitle C, title 7, Texas Transportation Code, when the offense occurs within a
school crossing zone as defined by section 541.302 of that Code, shall pay as court costs the maximum amount provided for in
Texas Transportation Code, section 102.014(c), in addition to other taxable court costs.
(c) A person convicted of an offense under section 25.093, Texas Education Code, or section 25.094, Texas Education Code,
shall pay as court costs the maximum amount authorized by article 102.014 (d), Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, in additional
to other taxable court costs.
(d) The additional court costs under this article shall be collected by the municipal court clerk and paid to the official who
discharges the duties of municipal treasurer for deposit in the child safety trust fund. The municipal court clerk shall keep separate
records of money collected under this article.
Sec. 7.303 Conviction
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/414
A person is considered convicted for purposes of this article if:
(1) A sentence is imposed;
(2) The person received probation or deferred adjudication; or
(3) The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
Sec. 7.304 Fund Purposes
The municipal child safety trust fund must be used for a school crossing guard program if the city operates one. If the city does
not operate a school crossing guard program, or if the money received from court costs exceeds the amount necessary to fund the
school crossing guard program, the city may either deposit the money in an interest bearing account or expend it for programs
designed to enhance child safety, health, or nutrition, including child abuse prevention and intervention, drug and alcohol abuse
prevention. Or any other purpose permitted by law.
(Ordinance 2012-15 adopted 4/3/12)
ARTICLE 7.400 MUNICIPAL COURT SPECIAL EXPENSE FEE
Sec. 7.401 Adopted
The city council hereby adopts a municipal court special expense fee pursuant to article 45.203 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
for the issuance and service of a warrant of arrest under section 38.10, Penal Code, or section 543.009, Transportation Code.
(Ordinance 2014-20 adopted 8/5/14)
CHAPTER 8
OFFENSES AND NUISANCES
ARTICLE 8.100 ABANDONED AND UNCLAIMED PROPERTY*
Sec. 8.101 Exceptions to Provisions
Nothing contained within this article shall apply to, alter or affect any portion of this code or any other city ordinance regulating
the impounding and sale of livestock, fowl or dogs, nor shall the same in any manner affect or apply to any livestock, fowl or
dogs. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 90, Section 90.01)
Sec. 8.102 Declaring Certain Property a Nuisance and Authorizing Impounding
Any vehicle or other property or obstruction, placed, left standing, parked, erected or lying in violation of any provision of this
code or any other ordinance of the city or left unattended for more than 48 continuous hours in or on any public street, alley,
sidewalk, park or other public place of the city is declared to be a nuisance. Any such property when so found shall be removed
summarily by any police officer of the city and taken to the police pound and shall be kept there until redeemed or sold as
provided in this article. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 90, Section 90.02)
Sec. 8.103 Lien on Impounded Property
The city shall have a lien on all personal property impounded under the provisions of this article for all costs incurred in moving,
impounding, storing, and advertising such property and such lien shall be prior and superior to all other liens of every kind, save
and except liens for ad valorem taxes, and the city may retain possession thereof until all costs are paid and may sell the same as
provided in this article. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 90, Section 90.03)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/414
Sec. 8.104 Redemption
The owner or any person legally entitled to possession of any personal property impounded under the provisions of this article
may redeem the same as follows.
(1) Before Sale. By paying to the chief of police the impounding fee and any other actual expenses incurred by the
city in impounding and keeping the impounded property, as determined by the chief of police.
(2) After Sale. By paying to the buyer at the auction sale, double the amount paid by him for such personal property
and any reasonable expenses incurred by him for keeping same; providing that the property must be redeemed from
the auction buyer within 30 days after the date of the auction sale, excluding the date of sale; otherwise, title to the
property shall become absolute in the auction buyer.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 90, Section 90.04)
Sec. 8.105 Property to be Sold
When any personal property impounded under the provisions of this article, other than motor vehicles, is not redeemed within 60
days after being impounded, and when any motor vehicle so impounded is not redeemed after compliance by the chief of police
with the provisions of Section 8.107, the chief of police shall sell the same at public auction to satisfy the lien of the city. (1995
Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 90, Section 90.05)
Sec. 8.106 Sale Procedure for Property Other Than Motor Vehicle
Before selling such personal property impounded under the provisions of this article, other than motor vehicles, the chief of police
shall post two notices thereof, one at the county courthouse door and one at the entrance of the city hall and shall cause a copy
thereof to be published in a daily newspaper published in the city once a week for two consecutive weeks, the date of the first
publication to be at least 14 days prior to the day of the auction sale. The notice of sale shall describe the impounded property,
state that the same is unredeemed, state that the same will be sold at public auction, designate the place of sale, and state a time
and date of sale which shall not be less than 14 days from the date of posting such notices. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX,
Chapter 90, Section 90.06)
Sec. 8.107 Sale Procedure for Motor Vehicles
(a) When any motor vehicle impounded under the provisions of this article has not been redeemed within 30 days from the date
of its impounding, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to submit to the state highway department, or similar agency of the
proper state when the vehicle is from another state, all information in his possession concerning said vehicle and to request that
department supply to him all information the records of the department contain on the vehicle.
(b) Immediately on receipt of such information from the department, the chief of police shall notify the owner and lienholders
as shown by the records of the department by registered or certified mail with return receipt requested, that said vehicle has been
impounded and of the provisions of this article in regard to redemption and sale of impounded property.
(c) In the event a motor vehicle has not been redeemed within five (5) days from receipt of the return receipt or notice of
nondelivery of the registered or certified mail, the chief of police shall prepare a notice of sale of such vehicle, in the manner
described in Section 8.106, shall send a copy of the notice to owner and lienholders, as shown by the records of the highway
department, by registered or certified mail, and shall post and advertise the notices in the manner required in Section 8.106.
Notice by registered or certified mail to the address shown on the records of the highway department shall constitute notice of the
pending sale of such owner and lienholders.
(d) When the chief of police is unable to ascertain the names or addresses of the owner and lienholders, and the motor vehicle
has not been redeemed within 45 days from its impounding, no notice of sale other than posting and advertising as herein
prescribed shall be required.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 90, Section 90.07)
Sec. 8.108 Sale of Property
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/414
When any property impounded under the provisions of this article, including motor vehicles, is not redeemed by the date and time
designated in the notice of sale therefor, the chief of police shall sell such property at public auction, and, as city auctioneer, shall
execute bill of sale of the property to the purchaser thereof; provided, he shall not execute or deliver any but a conditional bill of
sale unless and until the title of the buyer has become absolute by an expiration of 30 days in time, exclusive of the day of sale,
without being redeemed by the owner of the impounded property. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 90, Section 90.08)
Sec. 8.109 Disposal of Proceeds of Sale
After deducting the impounding fee and all other actual expenses incurred by the city in impounding, storing and selling of
property, impounded under the provisions of this article, as determined by the chief of police, not to exceed a reasonable amount
for each impounded article, he shall pay the balance of the proceeds of such sale, if any, to the owner of the property. If the owner
fails to call for such proceeds, they shall be paid in to the city treasury. Within six months after such auction sale, the owner may
apply in writing to the chief of police, and upon satisfactory proof of ownership, shall be entitled to receive the amount of the
proceeds delivered to the city treasury. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 90, Section 90.09)
Sec. 8.110 Property for Which No Bids are Made Considered Junk
Property impounded under the provisions of this article which is offered for sale at public auction in accordance with the
procedure herein prescribed and upon which no person bids, shall thereafter be sold or otherwise disposed of as junk. Money
received for junk property shall be disposed of in the same manner as proceeds from an auction sale under this article. (1995 Code
of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 90, Section 90.10)
Sec. 8.111 Records
The chief of police shall keep a record book which shall contain a description of all property impounded, the date and time of
such impounding, the date notices of sale were posted and advertised and mailed to owners and lienholders, the return of receipts
of registered or certified notices, the date of the sale at auction, the amount realized for each article at such sale, the name and
address of the owner and lienholders, if known, the name and address of the auction buyer, and any such other information as he
may deem necessary. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 90, Section 90.11)
Sec. 8.112 Fees
Fees for the actual costs of processing property impounded under the provisions of this article shall be charged for taking and
impounding, plus cost of removing each item of property, for preparing advertisements of sale for each item of property, for
selling each item of property, and for posting notices of sale relating to any one item of property. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title
IX, Chapter 90, Section 90.12)
ARTICLE 8.200 JUNKED VEHICLES*
Sec. 8.201 Definitions
Antique Vehicle. A passenger car or truck that is at least 25 years old.
Enforcement Authority. Any peace officer or code enforcement officer employed by the City of Gonzales.
Junked Vehicle. A vehicle that:
(1) Is self-propelled; and
(A) Does not have lawfully attached to it an unexpired license plate; or
(B) Does have lawfully attached to it an unexpired license plate but does not have lawfully attached to it a
valid motor vehicle insignia (registration sticker); and
(2) Is:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/414
(A) Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded;
(B) Substantially disfigured, damaged, or disintegrated;
(C) Ruined, destroyed or demolished; or
(D) Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:
(i) Seventy-two (72) consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property;
(ii) Thirty (30) consecutive days if the vehicle is on private property.
Motor Vehicle. Any motor vehicle subject to registration pursuant to the Texas Certificate of Title Act.
Motor Vehicle Collector. A person who owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles and who collects, purchases,
acquires, trades, or disposes of special interest or antique vehicles or parts of them for his own use in order to restore, preserve,
and maintain an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest.
Motor Vehicle Demolisher. Any person in the business of converting motor vehicles into processed scrap or scrap metal, or to
otherwise wreck or dismantle motor vehicles.
Special Interest Vehicle. A motor vehicle of any age which has not been altered or modified from original manufacturer's
specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist.
Storage Facility. A garage, parking lot, or any type of facility or establishment for the servicing, repairing, storing, or parking of
motor vehicles.
Sec. 8.202 Junked Vehicles Declared a Public Nuisance
A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle that is visible at any time of the year from a public place or public right-ofway
is hereby declared a public nuisance because it:
(1) Is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the public;
(2) Tends to reduce the value of private property;
(3) Invites vandalism;
(4) Creates a fire hazard;
(5) Is an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors; and
(6) Produces urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city.
Sec. 8.203 Offense
(a) A person commits an offense if the person maintains a public nuisance described by Section 8.202 of this article.
(b) An offense under this section is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred and no/100 dollars
($200.00).
(c) The court shall order abatement and removal of the nuisance on conviction.
(Ordinance 2018-22 adopted 7/12/18)
Sec. 8.204 Exceptions
The following vehicles or parts thereof are excepted from the provisions of this article:
(1) A vehicle or vehicle part which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not
visible from the street or other public or private property.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/414
(2) A vehicle or vehicle part which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property that is an antique or
special interest vehicle or part thereof stored by a motor vehicle collector on the collector's property, provided that the
vehicle or part and the outdoor storage area, if any, are:
(A) Maintained in an orderly manner;
(B) Do not constitute a health hazard; and
(C) Screened from ordinary public view by means of a fence. Fences shall be consistent with building
regulations and zoning requirements applicable to the property.
(3) An unlicensed, operable or inoperable antique or special interest vehicle or part thereof stored by a motor vehicle
collector on the collector's property, provided that the vehicle or part and the outdoor storage area, if any, are:
(A) Maintained in an orderly manner;
(B) Do not constitute a health hazard; and
(C) Screened from ordinary public view by means of a fence. Fences shall be consistent with building
regulations and zoning requirements applicable to the property.
(Ordinance 2018-38 adopted 10/11/18)
Sec. 8.205 Enforcement
(a) Any peace officer, code enforcement officer or other regularly salaried, full-time city employee authorized to enforce this
article, may enter the public areas of any building or premises, not a private residence or dwelling, structure or completely
enclosed structure on private property, at all reasonable times whenever necessary in the performance of his duties to inspect and
investigate for violations of any law, or to enforce any law.
(b) The authority to inspect shall include but not be limited to the authority to examine vehicles or parts thereof, obtain
information as to identity of vehicles and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or part thereof declared to be a nuisance.
(c) If such building or premises be occupied and involved in conducting business, he shall first present proper credentials and
demand entry, unless otherwise permitted by law. If such entry is refused, or, if no owner or other person having charge or control
of the building or premises can be located, he shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.
Sec. 8.206 Notice
The procedure for the abatement and removal of a junked vehicle or part thereof, as a public nuisance, from private property,
public property, or public right-of-way shall be as follows:
(1) Once a determination has been made that a public nuisance under this article exists, the enforcement authority
shall give not less than ten (10) days written notice to:
(A) The last known registered owner of the public nuisance;
(B) Each lienholder of record; and
(C) The owner or occupant of:
(i) The property on which the public nuisance is located; or
(ii) If the public nuisance is located on the public right-of-way, the property adjacent to the right-of-way.
(2) The notice must be personally delivered or sent by certified mail with a five-day return requested. If the address
of the last known registered owner is unknown, notice may be placed on the public nuisance. If the notice is returned
undelivered, action to abate the public nuisance shall not be taken until the 11th day after the date of return;
(3) The notice must state that: The public nuisance must be removed not later than the 10th day after the date on
which the notice was personally delivered, mailed, or placed on the public nuisance; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/414
(4) A request for a hearing must be made not later than the 10th day after the notice was personally delivered,
mailed, or placed on the public nuisance.
Sec. 8.207 Hearing
(a) The city manager or authorized designee shall conduct a public hearing if timely requested by a person who received notice
under Section 8.206.
(b) The hearing shall be held not earlier than the 11th day after the service of notice in Section 8.206.
(c) At the hearing, the junked vehicle is presumed to be inoperable, unless demonstrated otherwise.
(d) An order requiring the removal of the public nuisance must contain a description, license plate number, and identification
number of the public nuisance, if available at the location of the nuisance.
(e) A judge of the municipal court of the city may issue necessary orders to enforce the procedures for the abatement and
removal of a public nuisance under this article.
Sec. 8.208 Abatement
(a) Once abatement proceedings have been commenced, the relocation of the public nuisance to another location in the city has
no effect on the proceedings.
(b) Once the public nuisance is removed, it may not be reconstructed or made operable.
(c) If the public nuisance is not removed by the 10th day after proper notice, the enforcement authority may remove it or cause
it to be removed.
(d) No later than the 5th day after removal, the enforcement authority shall give notice to the Texas Department of Motor
Vehicles of the removal.
(e) A citation may be issued and a complaint may be filed in the municipal court of the city for the violation of maintaining a
public nuisance, if the nuisance is not removed and abated and a hearing is not requested within the ten (10) day period provided
in Section 8.207.
Sec. 8.209 Disposal of Junked Vehicles
A junked vehicle or part thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard, a motor vehicle demolisher, or any suitable site
operated by the city, for processing as scrap or salvage pursuant to authority provided in the Texas Transportation Code, §
683.078 or any successor statute for junked vehicle disposal.
Sec. 8.210 Effect of Article on Other laws
Nothing in this article shall affect laws that permit immediate removal of a vehicle left on public property that is obstructing
traffic or laws that establish procedures for taking possession of abandoned vehicles.
(Ordinance 2018-22 adopted 7/12/18)
ARTICLE 8.300 NOISE
Sec. 8.301 Definitions and Standards
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed:
A-Weighted Sound Level. The sound pressure level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting
network. The level so read is designated dB(A) or dBA.
Chief of Police. The chief of police or his designees.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/414
Daytime/Evening. The hours between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., Sunday through Thursday, and 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., Friday
and Saturday.
Impulsive Sound. Sound of short duration, usually less than one second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of
sources of impulsive sound include explosions, drop forge impacts, and the discharge of firearms.
Leq. An average measure of continuous noise that has the equivalent acoustic energy of the fluctuating signal over the same time
period. The time period of monitoring will be continuous over any two (2) hours and will use the A-weighting network reported
in decibel units.
Nighttime. The hours between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., Sunday through Thursday, and 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., Friday and
Saturday.
Noise Nuisance. Any loud, irritating, vexing, or disturbing sound originating from a nearby property under separate ownership
which causes injury, discomfort, or distress of a person of reasonable nervous sensibilities, or any sound that exceeds the
maximum permitted sound levels specified in Section 8.302(a)(6)(B).
Sound Level. The weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of a sound level meter and frequency weighting network
such as A, B, or C as specified in American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters (ANSI S1.4-1983,
R 2001). If the frequency weighing employed is not indicated, the A-weighting shall apply.
Sound Level Meter. An instrument which includes a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averages, output
meter, and weighting network used to measure sound pressure levels.
Sec. 8.302 Noise Nuisance Enumeration
The following acts, among others not hereinafter enumerated, are declared to be “noise nuisances,” and are unlawful and in
violation of the provisions of this article when such acts are done or accomplished or carried on in such a manner, or with such
volume, intensity, or with continued duration, so as to annoy, to distress, or to disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of a person of
reasonable nervous sensibilities, within the vicinity or hearing thereof, or so as to endanger or injure the safety or health of
humans or animals, or so as to interfere with the physical well being of humans or animals, or so as to endanger or injure personal
or real property:
(1) The playing, permitting, or causing the playing of any radio, television, phonograph, drum, jukebox,
nickelodeon, musical instrument, sound amplifier, or similar device which produces, reproduces, or amplifies sound.
(2) Any loud or vociferous language, or any soliciting for, or description of, any amusement house, moving picture
theater, or other like place of amusement, or for the performance therein, in the entrance thereto, the foyer or lobby
thereof, or on the sidewalks adjoining the same.
(3) The keeping of any animal, fowl, or bird, which makes frequent or long, continued noise.
(4) The continued or frequent sounding of any horn or other signal device on any automobile or vehicle,
motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, except as a danger signal.
(5) The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine,
automobile, motorcycle, or other motor vehicle or boat, except through a muffler or other device which prevents loud
or explosive noises therefrom.
(6) The erection, including construction, excavation, demolition, alteration, or repair work, or the permitting or
causing thereof, of any building or other structure, or the operation or the permitting or causing the operation of any
tools or equipment used in construction, excavation, drilling, demolition, alteration, or repair work.
(A) Other than during the daytime on weekdays; or
(B) At anytime such that the sound level at or across a real property boundary exceeds 80 dBA.
(C) This section shall not apply in cases of urgent necessity in the interest of public safety, or in cases of
public convenience, including city sponsored or co-sponsored parades and public events.
(7) The crying, calling, or shouting, in person or by mechanical device, or the use of any whistle, rattle, bell, gong,
clapper, hammer, drum, horn, loudspeaker, or phonograph with or without an amplifier, hand organ, or other devices
or instruments, musical or otherwise.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/414
(8) The raucous shouting, whistling, yelling, singing, hooting, or crying of peddlers, hawkers, vendors, or any other
persons.
(9) The making of noise that exceeds sixty-three (63) decibels on residential zoned property as defined by Chapter
14, Zoning, when measured from property under separate ownership.
(Ordinance 2001-20 adopted 12/3/01)
(10) The making of noise in business zoned property as defined by chapter 14, zoning that exceeds 75 dB(A)
decibels between daytime/evening hours being between 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. daily, and that exceeds 65 dB(A)
decibels between nighttime hours being 11:01 p.m. and 7:59 a.m., daily, when measured from property under separate
ownership. (Ordinance 2015-7 adopted 10/6/15)
(11) The making of noise that exceeds seventy-two (72) decibels on industrial zoned property as defined by Chapter
14, Zoning, when measured from property under separate ownership.
(12) The making of noise that exceeds eighty-five (85) decibels using the Leq method of noise measure for noise
emanating from entertainment zoned property as defined by Chapter 14, Zoning, when measured from property under
separate ownership. Any adjacent property owned, leased, controlled, or managed by any person, entity, or any
affiliate that directly or indirectly controls, is controlled by, or shares common control with the other entity that has an
ownership interest or lease interest in the monitored property shall not be considered property under separate
ownership for purposes of determining the boundaries of the noise source property in an entertainment district.
Sec. 8.303 Vibration
It shall be unlawful for any person to create, maintain, or cause any ground or airborne vibration that is perceptible without
instruments at any point on any affected property adjoining the property in which the vibration source is located.
Sec. 8.304 Vehicular Mounted Sound Amplification System
It shall be unlawful for any person operating or controlling a motor vehicle in either a public or private place within the city to
operate any sound amplifier which is part of, or connected to, any radio, stereo receiver, compact disc player, cassette players, or
other similar device in the motor vehicle, in such a manner that when operated, is audible at a distance of thirty (30) or more feet
from the source or, when operated causes a person to be aware of the vibration accompanying the sound in any location outside
the confines of the vehicle emitting the sound, noise, or vibration. A culpable mental state is not necessary to constitute a
violation of this section.
(Ordinance 2001-20 adopted 12/3/01)
Sec. 8.305 Racing Motor; Sudden Starts or Stops; Unnecessary Horn Blowing; Auxiliary or Compression Engine
Brakes; Prohibited
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person in control of any vehicle to cause, allow or permit the acceleration or racing the motor of
a vehicle from a sudden start so as to cause a loud noise.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person in control of any vehicle to bring a motor vehicle to a sudden start or stop or blow the
horn when no necessity for the protection of the driver or property exists.
(c) The use or operation of an auxiliary or compression engine brake, commonly referred to as a jacobs or jake brake, which
produces any noise in addition to the normal operating engine noise, shall be prohibited with the city.
(d) This provision shall not be construed to prohibit the use of such braking mechanism by emergency vehicles while in the
performance of their official or normal duties.
(e) This provision is not intended to prohibit the passage of vehicles equipped with engine or jake brakes in posted areas, but
rather prohibit the use of such equipment in posted areas.
(Ordinance 2010-03 adopted 5/4/10)
Sec. 8.306 Exception
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/414
The provisions of this article shall not apply to:
(1) The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to an emergency; or
(2) Sound produced by emergency vehicles; or
(3) Sound produced by a vehicle motor while the vehicle is moving on a public right-of-way, public waterway,
airport runway, or railway; or
(4) Sound produced by any governmental body in the performance of a governmental function; or
(5) Sound generated at a scheduled stadium event, by parade spectators and participants on the parade route during a
permitted parade; by outdoor celebration participants sponsored or cosponsored by the city for the general welfare of
the public; by patrons and participants using cannons and gunfire during historical battle reenactments for which a
pyrotechnic permit has been obtained and the explosives have been inspected and approved by the fire marshal; by
pyrotechnic displays that are inspected and approved by the City of Gonzales Fire Marshal.
(6) Sound produced by the operation of any air-conditioning unit, heat pump, or swimming pool machinery which
does not produce a sound exceeding sixty-three (63) dBA on residential property or seventy (70) dBA on
nonresidential property, when measured at a distance of either fifteen (15) feet from the equipment producing the
sound, or to the nearest exterior wall of a residential or commercial building under separate ownership, whichever
distance is shorter.
(7) Sound produced solely for the purpose of encouraging citizen participation in elections.
(8) Church bells during daylight hours.
Sec. 8.307 Method of Noise Measurement
Whenever portions of this article prohibit noise over a certain decibel limit, measurement of said noise shall be made with a
decibel meter meeting the standards prescribed by the American National Standards Institute. The instruments shall be maintained
in calibration and good working order. Calibration corrections shall be employed in meeting the response specifications prior to
every sampling of noise. Measurements recorded shall be taken so as to provide a proper representation of the noise being
measured. The microphone shall be positioned so as not to create any unnatural enhancement or diminution of the measured
noise. A windscreen for the microphone shall be used. Traffic, aircraft, and other transportation noise sources and background
noises shall not be considered in taking measurements except where such background noise interferes with the primary noise
being measured. As provided in Section 8.302(12), measurements may be taken at a point on adjacent public or private property,
or on either side of an adjacent public right-of-way at or near the boundary line of the property where the noise is generated.
(Ordinance 2001-20 adopted 12/3/01; Ordinance 2010-03 adopted 5/4/10)
Sec. 8.308 Enforcement
(a) Citation. The chief of police or his/her designee may issue citations to any persons having possession or control over noisegenerating
property or making sounds that violate any provision of this article. (Ordinance 2014-18 adopted 7/8/14)
(b) Seizure of Noise Producing Property. The chief of police or his/her designees may enter private property to investigate and
identify noise nuisance producing devices, machines, instruments, or objects. Such identified property may be seized to
summarily abate the noise nuisance if:
(1) A person who is cited for the subject noise violation has been convicted of a violation of any provision of this
article within the preceding twelve (12) months, or has been declared to be a “habitual noise nuisance violator” within
the preceding twenty-four (24) months; or
(2) The location of the noise nuisance has been declared an habitual noise nuisance source by the chief of police,
after appropriate notice to the real property owner or person in possession of the subject noise-source real property, of
an administrative hearing to be held for the purpose of hearing evidence and determining whether the subject location
is in fact a “habitual noise nuisance source.” Upon finding a location to be a “habitual noise nuisance source,” the
noise producing property shall be immediately seized at the time of any subsequent violations whether or not there is a
previous noise nuisance conviction associated with the location.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/414
Such seizures shall be for the purpose of assuring continued cessation of the noise nuisance after the departure of
the officers by securing the instrumentality of the noise nuisance temporarily. The noise producing device, machine,
instrument, or object shall be returned to the owner or person proving the right of possession, or to his/her authorized
agent, not sooner than twenty-four (24) hours after seizure. Any disputed ownership or right of possession shall be
resolved at a property disposition hearing before a magistrate of the City of Gonzales, Texas. Seizure of noise nuisance
producing property shall be accomplished in addition to and not in lieu of municipal court prosecution and/or a civil
suit for injunctive relief and civil penalties.
(c) Impoundment of Noise Nuisance Animals.* Upon the determination of the chief of police that any animal(s) at an identified
address or location within the City of Gonzales has produced noise on two (2) occasions of a nature and intensity that violates the
standards established by this article, he/she may notify the resident or occupant that the animal(s) are producing a noise nuisance,
and that an administrative hearing shall be held for the purpose of determining if the animal(s) constitute a continuing noise
nuisance which must be summarily abated by seizure and impoundment until the owner or person from whom the animal was
seized provides written consent of another person to provide shelter and care for the animal(s) in a fenced property not less than
two hundred (200) feet from any neighboring residential structure, or until the tenth day of impoundment. Said animals, if not
reclaimed on or before the tenth (10th) day of impoundment, shall be placed for adoption or humanely euthanized by the animal
control officer.
(d) Declaration of Habitual Noise Nuisance Producer. After producing noise measured at decibels in excess of the maximum
allowed by this article on three (3) separate days within a twelve (12) month period, the noise producer shall be given notice of an
administrative hearing before a municipal court magistrate for the purpose of introducing evidence so that the magistrate can
make a determination of whether or not the cited noise producer is a “habitual noise nuisance producer,” and if the magistrate so
finds, a written declaration of said finding shall be signed by the magistrate and kept on file by the chief of police for a period of
one (1) year.
(e) Declaration of Habitual Noise Nuisance Location. After the production of noise in excess of that allowed by this article by
anyone at the same address or property location on three (3) separate days within a twelve (12) month period, the owner or lessee
or person in possession shall be given notice of an administrative hearing before a municipal court magistrate for the purpose of
introducing evidence so that the magistrate can make a determination of whether or not the location is a “habitual noise nuisance
source,” and if the magistrate so finds, a written declaration of said finding shall be signed by the magistrate and shall be kept on
file by the chief of police for a period of one (1) year.
(f) Seizure. If the magistrate determines that the noise producer is a “habitual noise nuisance producer” or that the location is a
“habitual noise nuisance source,” the noise producing instrument, equipment, or other noise producing item used by the habitual
noise nuisance producer may be immediately seized at the time of a subsequent decibel measurement in excess of that allowed by
the article. At the time of such seizure, a written notice of the right to an immediate administrative hearing before a municipal
court magistrate shall be issued to the habitual noise producer, owner, or person in possession of the habitual noise nuisance
source. The hearing shall be for the purpose of determining if a noise nuisance actually occurred on which the abatement officer
based his seizure, and to voice any complaints about the manner of the seizure. If the noise produced is determined by the
magistrate not to constitute a noise nuisance, the subject property shall be immediately delivered to the person from whom it was
seized.
Sec. 8.309 Penalties
Any person who violates any portion of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction be subject to a fine in
accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in Section 1.109 of this code.
Sec. 8.310 Identification of Violator
The persons responsible for violations of this article are identified as follows:
(1) At Private Residences. Any adult resident present at the time of the offense, and any adult guest or adult
trespasser with the ability to control the level of noise at the time of the offense when no adult resident is present at the
time of the offense.
(2) At Business Locations. Any business owner, operator, manager, employee in charge, and all persons in control
or in possession of the noise nuisance generating instrument or property at the time of the offense.
(3) At any location with an unattended noise nuisance producing machine, device, instrument, child, animal, or
combination of same. Any person who leaves unattended any machine, instrument, device, child, animal, or any
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/414
combination of same, which thereafter commences producing noise in violation of this article.
(Ordinance 2001-20 adopted 12/3/01; Ordinance 2010-03 adopted 5/4/10)
ARTICLE 8.400 NUISANCES*
Sec. 8.401 Nuisances Within 5,000 Feet of City Limits
Whenever any nuisance as herein later specified exists within 5,000 feet of the perimeter of the corporate limits of the city, the
city manager or his assigns shall order the nuisance to be abated, corrected or removed by the person or parties causing or
creating such nuisance. The person or parties shall be subject to jurisdiction of the municipal court of the city and a fine or
penalties may be subjected against the person or parties as set out in Section 1.109 of this code. Provided that the person or
parties causing or creating such nuisance shall fail or refuse to abate, correct or remove such nuisance, the city manager or his
assigns shall oversee that such nuisance is abated, corrected or removed and all cost accruing therein shall be taxed against the
person or parties causing or creating such nuisance and collected by the municipal court as other costs along with such fines or
penalties as may be levied under provisions of Section 1.109 of this code. Such nuisances are as herein set forth:
(1) Dumping of trash or refuse on any public rights-of-way.
(2) The pollution of any stream, drain or tributary which may constitute the source of water supply of the city.
(3) Sale or discharge of any fireworks unless permitted by special permit from the fire marshal.
(4) Storage or dumping of any hazardous chemical, gas, powder or other substance as listed on the EPA hazardous
chemical list, unless a special permit is issued by a state agency and the city council or the fire marshal.
(5) The open discharge of sewerage or discharge of untreated sewerage from a septic tank drain field.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 99, Section 99.01)
(6) The accumulation of any filth of any kind, or cans, paper, paper containers, rubbish, bottles or any other form of
litter or waste matter. (Ordinance 96-8 adopted 3/26/96)
Sec. 8.402 Duty of Persons to Abate Nuisance
When the city council shall have legally declared any thing, act or commission to be a nuisance and instructed the party guilty of
maintaining or creating such nuisance to abate or remove the same within a designated reasonable time, and notice of such action
shall have been served upon the party to be so charged, and he shall fail to obey the same within the time so reasonably
designated, he shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 99, Section 99.02)
Sec. 8.403 Abatement of Nuisance by City
Whenever any nuisance has been declared to exist within the city by the city council and such nuisance has been ordered to be
abated, corrected, or removed, and the person causing or creating such nuisance shall fail or refuse to obey such order, the city
council shall direct the chief of police to abate the same, who shall proceed at once to carry out such order, calling such assistance
as he deems necessary. All costs accruing therein shall be taxed against the person causing or creating such nuisance and collected
as other costs. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 99, Section 99.03)
ARTICLE 8.500 CURFEW FOR MINORS*
Sec. 8.501 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein.
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural include the
singular, and words in the singular include the plural. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.
Establishment. Any privately owned place of business carried on for a profit or any place of amusement or entertainment to which
the public is invited.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/414
Juvenile. Any person under the age of seventeen (17) years of age, or in equivalent phrasing, any person of the age sixteen (16)
years old or younger.
Operator. Any individual, firm association, partnership or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment; and
whenever used in any clause prescribing a penalty, the term as applied to associations or partnerships shall include the members
or partners thereof and as applied to corporations shall include the officers thereof.
Parent. Any natural parent of a juvenile, a legal guardian, or any adult person, eighteen (18) years or older, in whose care the
juvenile has been placed by the natural parent or legal guardian.
Public Place. Any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground, public building, parkway, or vacant lot.
Remain. To stay behind, to tarry, and stay unnecessarily upon a public place, including congregating in groups totaling four (4) or
more juveniles in which any minor included would not be using the public place for an ordinary or serious purpose such as
passage or going home. To implement this definition with more precision and precaution, numerous exceptions will be provided
hereinafter to indicate that this is not a mere prohibitory or presence type curfew ordinance. More exceptions become available to
juveniles with increasing years and advancing maturity as appropriate in the interest of reasonable regulation.
Time of Right. The prevailing local standard time at the date in question, whether Central Standard Time or Central Daylight
Savings Time, as observed by the public. The time maintained by the police department shall be the prima facie evidence of the
time of day for continued implementation of this article.
Years of Age. The time from one birthday, such as sixteenth, to the next, but not including the day of the next birthday. Thus upon
a person's seventeenth birthday, he or she will cease to be a juvenile regulated by this article.
Sec. 8.502 Curfew Established
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person sixteen (16) or less years of age to be or remain in or upon any public place or in or upon
any establishment within the city between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. of the following day, official city time, except
that on Fridays and Saturdays and nights next preceding school holidays (not including summer vacation) the hours shall be from
1:00 a.m. to 5:30 a.m.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person sixteen (16) or less years of age to be or remain in or upon any public place or in or upon
any establishment between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday while
school is in session with the exception of a holiday observed by the closure of classes at the school in which the minor is enrolled
and the designated lunch time for high school students.
Sec. 8.503 Exceptions
In the following exceptional cases, a juvenile in or upon any public place or in and upon an establishment shall not be deemed in
violation of this article; this section is intended as a clear guide for juveniles, their parents, and law enforcement officials:
(1) When the juvenile is accompanied by his parent, legal guardian or authorized adult supervisor.
(2) When exercising First Amendment rights protected by United States Constitution, such as free exercise of
religion, freedom of speech and the rights of assembly, it shall be deemed a bona fide exercise of such rights if the
assembly, whether parade or demonstration, has been permitted by the city or other bona fide religious, social or
school activities involving the right to assemble.
(3) When engaged in performing an errand or other legitimate business at the direction of a parent, guardian or
supervisory adult including travel to and from such location by a direct route.
(4) When the juvenile is on the sidewalks at the place where such juvenile resides, or on the sidewalk of either nextdoor
neighbor, when said neighbors do not object to such presence.
(5) When the juvenile is engaged in employment activities, such as but not restricted to, newspaper delivery.
(6) All of the above cited exceptions to the curfew ordinance include travel to and from such activity by a direct
route, and this article is in no way to be construed as limitation upon normal travel by a juvenile engaged in interstate
movement.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/414
(7) Each of the foregoing exceptions are severable and in addition, other possible exceptions may be added hereto in
the future as warranted by experience as illuminated by the views of students, school personnel, citizens,
neighborhood spokesman, parents, officers and persons in authority concerned positively with minors as well as
juvenile delinquency.
Sec. 8.504 Parental Responsibility
It shall be unlawful for a parent knowingly to permit or by insufficient control to allow a juvenile in his or her care to be or
remain in any public place, or to be or remain in any establishment other than for excepted activities during the curfew hours
established by this article. The term “knowingly” includes knowledge which a parent should reasonably be expected to have
concerning the whereabouts of a juvenile in such parent's custody. It shall be prima facie evidence of violation of this section if a
responsible parent has no knowledge of a juvenile's whereabouts during the hours of curfew established by this article. The
purpose of this section is to require neglectful or careless parents to meet the community standard of parental responsibility.
Sec. 8.505 Establishment Owner's Responsibility
It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a business establishment to allow a juvenile to remain upon such business
premises during the hours of curfew established in this article beyond the time necessary to conduct an excepted activity. It shall
be no defense to this section that the juvenile made a purchase, if the juvenile did not immediately make such purchase upon
arrival and depart immediately thereafter. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that the owner or operator of such
business establishment has promptly notified the police department that juveniles present on the premises after hours have refused
to depart.
Sec. 8.506 Enforcement Procedures
(a) A law enforcement officer, upon finding or having his or her attention called to any juvenile in or on a public place or in or
on the premises of a business establishment in a prima facie violation of this article, may take the juvenile into custody. Such
juvenile may be transported to the police department. Upon arrival at the police department, a legal guardian, or other responsible
adult shall be immediately notified to pick up such juvenile. An officer taking a juvenile into custody shall also have discretion to
release such juvenile to a parent, legal guardian, or other responsible adult under circumstances deemed appropriate by the officer.
An officer may also issue a warning notice to the juvenile in accordance with section 52.01 of the Texas Family Code and order
such juvenile to go directly and promptly to his or her home. Delinquent conduct or conduct indicating a need for supervision
under section 51.03 and 52.01 of the Texas Family Code shall be handled in accordance with applicable provisions of the family
code.
(b) Upon picking up a juvenile in custody, said parent, legal guardian or other responsible adult may be questioned about the
circumstance of the juvenile's activities. This in intended to permit ascertainment, under constitutional safeguards, or relevant
facts, and to centralize responsibility for accurate, effective, fair, impartial and uniform environment and recording, thus making
available experienced supervisory personnel, the best of facilities, and if required, referral to social agencies equipped to handle
family problems that may be disclosed by investigation. In the absence of convincing identification, an officer on the street may
use his or her best judgment in determining age. Procedures shall be constantly refined in the light of experience, and changes
herein may be made on the basis of such experience.
(c) In any event, an officer shall within twenty-four (24) hours file a written report on the juvenile incident or shall participate
to the extent possible in the preparation and filing of such a report by his supervisor.
(d) When a parent, legal guardian or other responsible adult has come to take charge of a juvenile and the appropriate
information has been received, the juvenile shall be released to the custody of the parent, legal guardian or other responsible
adult. If a parent, legal guardian or other responsible adult cannot be located or fails to take charge of the juvenile, then the
juvenile shall be released to appropriated authorities. However, the police department shall have the discretion to refuse a juvenile
to an adult other than the parent or legal guardian of the juvenile.
(e) A juvenile may not be held at the police department for more than six (6) hours; during such time the following procedures
shall be observed:
(1) The office must be an unlocked, multipurpose area that is not designated, set aside, or used as a secure detention
area of part of a secure detention area;
(2) The juvenile may not be secured physically to a cuffing rail, chair, desk, or stationary object;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 222/414
(3) The juvenile may not be held longer than necessary to accomplish the purposes of identification, investigation,
processing, release to parent, guardian or custodian, and arrangement of transportation to school or court; and
(4) The office may not be designated or intended for residential purposes.
Sec. 8.507 Penalties
Prevailing community standards as reflected by this article require that availability of criminal penalties in order for this article to
be a viable instrument for the maintenance of such standards. Consequently, violation of this article by a juvenile, parent or
business establishment owner or operator shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine in accordance with the
general penalty provision set forth in Section 1.109 of this code. Each day any violation continues constitutes a separate offense.
(Ordinance 2018-11 adopted 5/10/18)
ARTICLE 8.600 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES*
Sec. 8.601 Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages on Streets and Sidewalks
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage while on any street, sidewalk or other public way in the
city. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 110, Section 110.01)
Sec. 8.602 Sale and Consumption of Beer on Certain Occasions
(a) The sale and consumption of beer on public property belonging to the city, on occasions and at celebrations may be
permitted by the city council, upon the terms and subject to the conditions set forth in this section.
(b) Upon properties where such sale is restricted by the instrument under which the city holds title, no permits for the sale and
consumption of beer shall be issued by the city council.
(c) Sale and consumption of beer on public property may be permitted by the city council, and application for a permit to sell
such beer shall state the occasion or celebration on which beer is proposed to be sold and consumed, the dates for such proposed
sale and consumption and the proposed area or areas in which beer is proposed to be sold and consumed. Such application shall
be made to the city council at a meeting held not later than seven days before the date of the proposed sale and consumption of
beer.
(d) The city council shall hear such application, and in the event that the city council by majority vote finds that the application
has been made by a reasonable organization and the occasion for which such permit is requested is of sufficient importance, it
may grant such permit, stating the area or areas that such beer may be sold and consumed, the day or days on which the same may
be sold and consumed and the hours of sale and consumption.
(e) No beer may ever be sold by an organization, corporation, persons or group on any public property belonging to the city,
until and unless a permit is granted by the city council in accordance with this section.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 110, Section 110.02)
(f) The city manager will have authority to grant variances in such instances as set forth above. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 8.603 Sale of Alcoholic Beverages Within 300 Feet of Certain Places
(a) It shall be unlawful to sell an alcoholic beverage to be consumed on the premises within 300 feet of any church, public
school or public hospital within the city. Such measurement shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front
door to front door, and in direct line across intersections. The measurement of the distance between the place of business where
alcoholic beverages are sold and the public schools shall be from the nearest property line of the public school to the nearest
doorway by which the public may enter the place of business, along street lines and in direct line across intersections.
(b) The city council may allow variances to the regulation when it determines that enforcement of the regulation in a particular
instance is not in the best interest of the public, constitutes waste or inefficient use of land or other resources, creates an undue
hardship on an applicant for a license or permit, does not serve its intended purpose, is not effective or necessary, or for any other
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 223/414
reason the city council, after consideration of the health, safety and welfare of the public and the equities of the situation,
determines is in the best interest of the community.
(c) Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the continued sale of alcoholic beverages within 300 feet of any church, public
school, or public hospital by an individual, business or corporation seeking an on-premises license or permit on-premises issued a
valid permit within five years of the effective date of this article.
(d) Any person violating this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalty in accordance
with the general penalty provision set forth in Section 1.109 of this code.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title XI, Chapter 110, Section 110.03)
Sec. 8.604 Alcohol Beverage Permits and Fees
An alcohol beverage permit fee shall be levied and collected in an amount not to exceed one-half of the fees established by the
Texas Alcohol Beverage Code and as amended. (Ordinance 2017-16 adopted 10/3/17)
ARTICLE 8.700 ILLEGAL SMOKING MATERIALS
Sec. 8.701 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the use, possession, sale, ingestion, smoking or delivery of restricted smoking materials
as defined herein. Any form of delivery to include a simple gift constitutes a violation of this article.
Sec. 8.702 Definitions
Restricted Smoking Material.
(1) Any substance, however marketed, which can reasonably be converted for smoking purposes whether it is
presented as incense, tobacco, herbs, spices or any blend thereof if it includes any of the following chemicals or a
comparable chemical:
(A) Salvia divinorum or salvinorin A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as salvia divinorum,
whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound,
manufacture, salts, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or extracts;
(B) 2-[(1R, 3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl) phenol (also known as CP47, 497) and
homologues;
(C) (6aS, 10aS)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6, 6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7, 10, 10a-tetrahydrobenzo [c]
chromen-1-ol) (also known as HU-211 or Dexanabinol);
(D) 1-pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-018);
(E) 1-butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-073); or
(F) 1-pentyl-3-(4-methoxynaphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-081).
(2) Products containing some of the above substances are currently being marketed under the following commercial
names:
“K-2,” “K-2 Summit,” “K-2 Sex,” “Genie,” “Dascents,” “Zohai,” “Sage,” “Spice,” “KO Knock-Out 2,”
“Spice Gold,” “Spice Diamond,” “Yucatan Fire,” “Solar Flare,” “Pep Spice,” “Fire N' Ice,” and “Salvia
Divinorum.”
(3) It is anticipated by the council that new products will be marketed under different names but will be subject to
this definition if they contain any of the chemical components set forth above.
Restricted Smoking Material Paraphernalia. Any paraphernalia, equipment or utensil that is used or intended to be used in
ingesting or inhaling illegal smoking materials and may include:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 224/414
(1) A metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipe with or without a screen, permanent screen,
hashish head, or punctured metal bowl;
(2) A water pipe;
(3) A carburetion tube or device;
(4) A smoking or carburetion mask;
(5) A chamber pipe;
(6) A carburetor pipe;
(7) An electric pipe;
(8) An air-driven pipe;
(9) A chillum;
(10) A bong; or
(11) An ice pipe or chiller.
Sec. 8.703 Sale, Delivery, Offer, Gift, Use or Possess
It shall be unlawful for any person to use, possess, purchase, sell, offer to sell, deliver to or to give any restricted smoking
materials as defined herein.
Sec. 8.704 Use or Possession of Restricted Smoking Paraphernalia
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in their possession any restricted smoking paraphernalia with the intent to use it, to
ingest, inhale or otherwise consume restricted smoking material. If an individual is found in possession of this type of
paraphernalia it will be a violation of this article if appropriate forensic testing is done on the paraphernalia and traces of
restricted smoking material are present on the device.
Sec. 8.705 Defenses to Prosecution
It shall be a defense to prosecution for a violation of this article if the use of the restricted smoking material is at the direction or
under a prescription issued by a licensed physician or dentist authorized to prescribe controlled substance within the state.
(Ordinance 2011-05 adopted 4/5/11)
ARTICLE 8.800 RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS FOR SEX OFFENDERS*
Sec. 8.801 Purpose, Intent
The city council finds that sex offenders who are required to register as a sexual predator under V.T.C.A., Texas Code of Criminal
Procedure, chapter 62, present an extreme threat to the health, safety, and welfare of children. It is the intent of this section to
serve the city's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city by
creating areas around locations where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers wherein certain registered sex
offenders and sexual predators are prohibited from loitering or prohibited from establishing temporary or permanent residency.
Sec. 8.802 Definitions
For the purposes of this section, the following terms, words and the derivations thereof shall have the meaning given herein.
Child. Any person under the age of seventeen (17).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 225/414
Child Care Facility. A family day care home which provides regular care to no more than four (4) children under fourteen (14)
years of age, excluding children related to the caretaker, and provides care after school hours for not more than six (6) additional
elementary school children, but the total number of children, including those related to the caretaker, shall not exceed twelve (12)
at any given time.
Child Care Institution. A commercial day care center, provides regular care to any number of adults or children for less than
twenty-four (24) hours a day.
Child Safety Zone. Public parks, private and public schools, public library, amusement arcades, video arcades, indoor and outdoor
amusement centers, amusement parks, public or commercial and semi-private swimming pools, child care facility, child care
institution, public or private youth soccer or baseball fields, crisis center or shelter, skate park or rink, public or private youth
center, movie theater, bowling alley, scouting facilities and offices for child protective services.
Database. The state department of public safety's sex offender database or the sex offender registration files maintained by the
sex offender registration officer of the city's police department.
Loiter. Standing, sitting idly, whether or not the person is in a vehicle or remaining in or around the area.
Park or Playground. One of the following:
(1) Any land, including improvements to the land that is administered, operated or managed by the city for the use
of the general public as a recreational area.
(2) City recreational areas include, but are not limited to, conservation area, jogging trail, hiking trail, bicycle trail,
recreation center, water park, swimming pool, soccer field or baseball field.
Permanent Residence. A place where the person abides, lodges or resides for 14 or more consecutive days.
Places Where Children Regularly Congregate. Same as child safety zone.
Public Way. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to,
streets, shopping centers, parking lots, transportation facilities, restaurants, shops and similar areas that are open to the use of the
public.
School. A private or public preschool, private or public elementary school or private or public secondary school.
Sex Offender. An individual who has been convicted of or placed on deferred adjudication for a sexual offense involving a person
under seventeen (17) years of age for which the individual is required to register as a sex offender under chapter 62, Texas Code
of Criminal Procedure.
(Ordinance 2012-05 adopted 2/7/12)
Sign. A square shape display made of wood, plastic or other material being no smaller than two feet in width by two feet in length
with white backing and black lettering visible at all times from the nearest pubic roadway that states as follows:
“A REGISTERED SEX OFFENDER LIVES HERE.”
(Ordinance 2015-10 adopted 12/1/15)
Temporary Residence. A place where a person abides, lodges or resides for a period of fourteen (14) or more days in the
aggregate, during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where the person routinely
abides, lodges or resides for a period of four (4) or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the
person's permanent residence.
Sec. 8.803 Sex Offender Prohibition
(a) It is an offense for a sex offender to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within one thousand (1,000)
feet of the real property comprising a school, child care facility, child care institution, park or playground or other places where
children regularly congregate.
(b) It is an offense for a sex offender to knowingly enter a child safety zone.
(c) It is an offense for a sex offender to knowingly loiter on a public way within 300 feet of a child safety zone.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 226/414
(d) A sex offender, shall not, on each October 30th and 31st (or any other date set by the city for trick-or-treaters) between the
hours of 4:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m., leave an exterior porch light on or otherwise invite trick-or-treaters to solicit the premises.
Sec. 8.804 Property Owners Prohibited from Renting Real Property to Registered Sex Offenders
It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure or part thereof, manufactured home, trailer, or any other conveyance, with the
knowledge that it will be used as a permanent residence or temporary residence by any person prohibited from establishing such
permanent residence or temporary residence pursuant to the terms of this chapter, if such place, structure, or part thereof,
manufactured home, trailer, or other conveyance is located within 1,000 feet from a child safety zone, as defined in Section 8.802.
Sec. 8.805 Evidentiary Matters
(a) If a sex offender that is prohibited from being in a child safety zone is found in a child safety zone by a police officer, the
sex offender is subject to punishment in accordance with this article.
(b) It shall be prima facie evidence that this section applies to such a person if that person's record appears in/on the database
and the database indicated that the victim was less than seventeen (17) years of age.
(c) The distance of the three hundred (300) feet from a child safety zone shall be measured on a straight line from the closest
boundary of the child safety zone.
(d) The distance of one thousand (1,000) feet from any place where children congregate shall be measured on a straight line
from the closest boundary line of the sex offender's residence to the closest boundary line of the school, child care facility, child
care institution, park or playground or other places where children regularly congregate.
(e) In the case of multiple residences on one property, measuring from the nearest property line of the residences to the nearest
property line of the school, child care facility, child care institution, park or playground or other places where children regularly
congregate.
(f) In case of a dispute over measured distances, it shall be incumbent upon the person(s) challenging the measurement to prove
otherwise.
(g) A map depicting the prohibited areas shall be created by the city and maintained by the city's police department. The city
shall review the map annually for changes. Said map will be available to the public at the city's police department or available on
the city's website or the city's police department website.
Sec. 8.806 Exceptions
(a) The person required to register in/or the database established the permanent residence or temporary residence and residency
prior to the adoption of this article has been consistently maintained and the person has complied with all of the sex offender
registration laws of the state, prior to the date of the adoption of this article;
(b) The place where children regularly congregate, as specified herein, within one thousand (1,000) feet of the permanent or
temporary residence of the person required to register on/in the database was opened after the person established the permanent or
temporary residence and complied with all sex offender registration laws of the state;
(c) The information on/in the database is incorrect, and, if corrected, this section would not apply to the person who was
erroneously listed on/in the database;
(d) The person required to register on/in the database was a minor when he or she committed the offense requiring such
registration and was not convicted as an adult;
(e) The person required to register is required to serve a sentence at a jail, prison, juvenile facility or other correctional
institution located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the real property comprising a school, child care facility, child care
institution, park or playground or other places where children regularly congregate;
(f) The person required to register is under eighteen (18) years of age or a ward under a guardianship, who resided with a
parent or guardian;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 227/414
(g) The person required to register has been exempted by a court order from registration as a sex offender under chapter 62,
Texas Code of Criminal Procedure;
(h) The person required to register has had the offense for which the sex offender registration was required, reversed on appeal
or pardoned;
(i) The person's duty to register on/in the database has expired; or
(j) Nothing in this provision shall require any person to sell or otherwise dispose of any real estate or home acquired or owned
prior to the conviction of the person as a sex offender.
(Ordinance 2012-05 adopted 2/7/12)
Sec. 8.807 Convicted Sex Offenders Shall Place a Sign in Yard
(a) Any person who has been convicted of a violation of Texas Penal Code, articles 21.08, 21.11, 22.011, 22.021, 25.02, and
43.25 regardless of whether the adjudication was deferred, in which the victim of the offense was less than 16 years of age and is
required to register with the state under the state registration provisions of Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, section 62.02 shall
place and permanently maintain a sign within 20 feet of the front entrance to their permanent or temporary residence that
indicates that a registered sex offender resides in the residence. The sign's legibility must be maintained at all times.
(b) Exceptions. A person is exempt from this provision, and does not commit a violation if this article if any of the following
apply:
(1) The person committed the offense described above prior to the date of adoption of this article and has complied
with all the sex offender registration laws of the state;
(2) The person established the permanent or temporary residence prior to the date of adoption of this article and has
complied with all the sex offender registration laws of the state;
(3) The person was a minor when he/she committed the offense as was not convicted as an adult; and
(4) The person is a minor.
(c) Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of
not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00).
(Ordinance 2015-10 adopted 12/1/15)
Sec. 8.808 Penalties
Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof may be fined an amount not to exceed $2,000.00 as allowed by law. Each day that a
violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. (Ordinance 2012-05 adopted
2/7/12)
CHAPTER 9
PERSONNEL
ARTICLE 9.100 LIBRARY BOARD
Sec. 9.101 Purpose
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 228/414
The library board exists for the purpose of providing to the city council and the library director with the advice of a panel of
citizens who are both well informed as a group about the library and who also has individuals represent diverse areas of
experience and concern, providing a spectrum of insight by which community needs and deserves as they relate to library
resources and services can be interpreted.
Sec. 9.102 Membership, Qualifications and Tenure
(a) The library board shall consist of eight members and shall have as officers a chairperson, a vice-chairperson and a
secretary-treasurer. Members shall be residents of the state who have resided within the corporate limits of the city for one year
preceding the date of their appointment. Members of the board, including the chairperson and the vice-chairperson thereof, shall
be appointed as such by the city council. The secretary-treasurer shall be appointed by the chairperson of the board.
(b) Members shall hold office for a period of two years from date of appointment or until a successor is appointed. However,
initially four members shall be appointed for two years and four members shall be appointed for one year, and provided further
that any appointment to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the normal expiration of its term, by resignation or otherwise, shall
expire on the date when the term of the initial appointee would have expired. Nothing herein shall be construed to preclude the
reappointment of any member or officer to the board.
Sec. 9.103 Meetings; Quorum
The library board shall meet monthly or more often at the call of the chairperson. Four members shall constitute a quorum
authorized to transact business for the board.
Sec. 9.104 Duties
As advisors on matters of the public interest in relation to the resources and services the city's library system and the library
advisory board shall advise the department and the council on; developing library policy, advise the department on long range
library service and development needs, stimulate and coordinate citizen interest in and support for the library, assist the library
director and the city council with the development of library facilities.
(Ordinance 2013-13 adopted 6/4/13)
ARTICLE 9.200 CEMETERY COMMITTEE*
Sec. 9.201 Creation of Committee
There is hereby created a committee of the city to be known as the cemetery committee. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title III,
Chapter 30, Section 30.15)
Sec. 9.202 Membership
The members of the cemetery committee shall be fixed at six (6) in number. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title III, Chapter 30,
Section 30.16)
Sec. 9.203 Term of Office
At the first organizational meeting of such cemetery committee, the membership of the committee shall draw lots for their term of
office, and two of such members shall serve for one year commencing on March 1, 1969, two of such members shall serve for a
term or two years from such date and two of such members shall serve for a term of three years from such date. Annually
thereafter, the city council shall appoint two members to serve on such committee each year to fill the vacancy caused by the
expiration of the term of office of such committee. In the event that a vacancy is created by death, resignation or inability on the
part of such committee member to serve, the city council shall make an interim appointment to fill out such unexpired term. (1995
Code of Ordinances, Title III, Chapter 30, Section 30.17)
Sec. 9.204 Organization
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 229/414
The cemetery committee shall annually, as soon after March 1 of each year, hold an organizational meeting and shall elect one of
their number chairperson of the committee, and one of its members to act as secretary-treasurer. In the event that the committee
shall so elect, it may at its option elect one member of such organization as secretary and another member of such organization as
treasurer.
(1) It shall be the duty of the chairperson to preside at all meetings, to countersign all checks given by the
committee in disbursing its funds, to see that all care reports are made, and to carry out and perform such other duties
as may be delegated to him by the committee.
(2) It shall be the duty of the secretary to take minutes of all meetings of the cemetery committee, to make out and
submit all required reports and to perform such other duties as may be delegated to him by the committee.
(3) It shall be the duty of the treasurer to keep and account for all funds belonging to the committee, to make
disbursement thereof when properly authorized by the committee and to faithfully account for all monies coming into
his hands and to perform such other duties as may be delegated to him by the committee.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title III, Chapter 30, Section 30.18)
Sec. 9.205 Duties
It shall be the duties of the cemetery committee to take charge and to maintain and see to the upkeep and improvement of the
Church Street Cemetery of the city. The committee shall handle and expend for such purposes all sums of money which may be
appropriated by the city council for the purpose of maintaining and improving such cemetery. The committee may also, if it sees
fit, solicit and accept voluntary contributions and donations for the maintenance, beautification and improvement of such
cemetery, and shall expend the funds so collected solely for the purpose for which they were donated. (1995 Code of Ordinances,
Title III, Chapter 30, Section 30.19)
Sec. 9.206 Reports
The cemetery committee shall report annually to the city council as to its activity and shall give a detailed accounting of the funds
received by the committee from the city, and the use and expenditure thereof, and shall make such other and further report of its
activities as such committee may deem relevant or that the city council may request. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title III, Chapter
30, Section 30.20)
Sec. 9.207 Audit
All funds of the city appropriated for the upkeep of such cemetery and the expenditure thereof shall be subject to audit by the city
auditor, as are all other funds of the city, and such audit shall be made annually or at any shorter period as may be deemed by the
city council and when requested to do so, such committee shall submit all of its books, records, vouchers, checks and other data to
the designated city auditor. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title III, Chapter 30, Section 30.21)
ARTICLE 9.300 JOINT AIRPORT ZONING BOARD
Sec. 9.301 Creation of Board
Subject to the like provisions being made by the commissioner's court of Gonzales County, Texas, by proper order, duly
promulgated and entered on its minutes, and as authorized by the provisions of the Airport Zoning Act, as amended, Tex. Loc.
Govt Code, §§ 241.001 et seq., there is hereby created a joint airport zoning board, to be known as the Gonzales-Gonzales County
Joint Airport Zoning Board, which shall have the powers and exercise the duties set forth in Tex. Loc. Govt Code, §§ 241.002 and
241.003. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title III, Chapter 30, Section 30.30)
Sec. 9.302 Composition; Chairperson
The Gonzales-Gonzales County Joint Airport Zoning Board shall be composed of five members, two to be appointed by the city
council, and two members to be appointed by the commissioner's court of Gonzales County, Texas. The fifth member shall be
elected by a majority of the members so appointed and the fifth member shall serve as chairperson of the Gonzales-Gonzales
County Joint Airport Zoning Board. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title III, Chapter 30, Section 30.31)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 230/414
ARTICLE 9.400 POLICE DEPARTMENT*
Division 1. General Provisions
Sec. 9.401 Arrest Without Warrant†
(a) A peace officer or any other person may, without a warrant, arrest an offender when the offense is committed in his
presence or within his view, if the offense is one classed as a felony or as an offense against the public peace.
(b) A peace officer may arrest an offender without a warrant for any offense committed in his presence or within his view.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title III, Chapter 31, Section 31.01)
Secs. 9.402 - 9.405 Reserved
Division 2. Auxiliary Police Force*
Sec. 9.406 Establishment
An auxiliary police force, to be known as “police reserve” is hereby established. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title III, Chapter 31,
Section 31.10)
Sec. 9.407 Auxiliary Police Force to be Separate and Distinct From Regular Force
The police force shall be separate and distinct from the regular force of the police department of the city. (1995 Code of
Ordinances, Title III, Chapter 31, Section 31.11)
Sec. 9.408 Composition
The police reserve force shall be composed of not more than 50 non-paid regular officers who have volunteered to join the
organization and whose applications for membership have been accepted, and who have complied with the rules, regulations and
orders provided for the conduct and control of the members thereof. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title III, Chapter 31, Section
31.12)
Sec. 9.409 Chief of Police to Control
The members of the police reserve shall be under the authority, control and command of the chief of police of the city, subject to
all of the provisions of this article. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title III, Chapter 31, Section 31.13)
Sec. 9.410 Applications for Membership; Approved Eligible List
(a) All applicants for positions with the police reserve force must apply in writing on a form prescribed by the chief of police
and approved by the city manager.
(b) Applicants for positions on the police reserve force will be accepted from an approved eligible list.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title III, Chapter 31, Section 31.14)
Sec. 9.411 Qualifications
All applicants for positions in the police reserve force must meet the following qualifications:
(1) Residence of the applicant;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 231/414
(2) Actual resident of the county;
(3) Proof of good character;
(4) Temperate habits;
(5) Freedom from communicable diseases;
(6) Physical ability to perform the duties of the position for which he seeks employment;
(7) Never has committed a felony; and
(8) Be certified by Texas Commission on Law Enforcement.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title III, Chapter 31, Section 31.15)
(9) Have 10 years full time paid experience as a peace officer.
(10) Pay all background investigation expenses, including but not limited to a psychological exam.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 9.412 Oath
All names upon the list of those eligible shall subscribe to an oath that he will observe and obey the Constitution of the United
States, the Constitution of this state, and the laws of this nation, this state and this city and that he will carry out the duties of a
member of the police reserve force of this city to the best of his ability. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title III, Chapter 31, Section
31.16)
Sec. 9.413 Duties
(a) The duties of the police force, subject at all times to the direction, supervision and control of the chief of police, shall be to
assist the regular members of the police department in the enforcement of law and in the maintenance of law and order during
periods of emergency designated by the chief of police. The chief of police may by order establish rules and regulations to govern
the police reserve force, to fix the specific duties of its members, and to provide for the maintenance of discipline. He may change
such orders from time to time, and may command members of the police reserve force to obey the instructions of regular police
officers in carrying out their orders.
(b) The chief of police may prescribe other duties than those mentioned herein to be performed by the police reserve force, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this article.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title III, Chapter 31, Section 31.17)
Sec. 9.414 Identification Cards
An identification card or such other insignia or evidence of identity as the chief of police may prescribe shall be issued to each
member, who must carry the card and other identification at all times while on duty, and he must surrender them upon the
termination of his membership. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title III, Chapter 31, Section 31.18)
Sec. 9.415 Removal or Resignation of Members
Membership of any person may be terminated by the chief of police at any time for any cause deemed sufficient by the chief of
police. Any member may resign from the police reserve force at any time, but it shall be his duty to notify the chief of police of
his resignation. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title III, Chapter 31, Section 31.19)
Sec. 9.416 Diminishing or Expanding Force
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 232/414
The chief of police may by order diminish or expand the membership of the police reserve force as exigency may require, within
the limits established. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title III, Chapter 31, Section 31.20)
Sec. 9.417 Carrying of Firearms
Members of the police reserve force shall while on duty carry firearms at the express written order of the chief of police. (1995
Code of Ordinances, Title III, Chapter 31, Section 31.21)
Sec. 9.418 Entering Private Property Without Consent
No member of the police reserve force shall break into or otherwise forcefully enter upon private property or enter the dwelling or
habitation of another person without the consent of the member of the police department of this city who then and there requests
his aid in the enforcement of the law. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title III, Chapter 31, Section 31.22)
Sec. 9.419 Power of Arrest
A member of the police reserve force shall have the following powers of arrest and none others:
(1) When an offense is committed in his presence or within his view, if the offense is one classed as a felony, or as
an offense against the public peace.
(2) Upon the representation of a credible person that a felony has been committed and that the offender is about to
escape, and there is not sufficient time to procure a warrant for such offender.
(3) When authorized by a warrant of arrest, and such warrant is in the actual possession of the member making the
arrest.
(4) To lend physical aid to any regular member of the police department in making any lawful arrest, when
authorized by the chief of police or requested by any regular member of the police department.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title III, Chapter 31, Section 31.23)
Sec. 9.420 Uniform and Badges
The chief of police shall prescribe the uniforms and badges for the members of the police reserve force and direct the manner in
which the same shall be worn. No person other than a member of the force shall wear such uniform or badge as may be
prescribed. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title III, Chapter 31, Section 31.26)
Sec. 9.421 Violation of Law Under Performance of Color of Duty
In addition to the penalties provided by the law, any violation of law under color of the performance of his duties as a member of
the police reserve force, and any breach of the rules and regulations established by the chief of police shall subject any member to
summary expulsion and the fact thereof may be published at the order of the chief of police. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title III,
Chapter 31, Section 31.25)
ARTICLE 9.500 PERSONNEL REGULATIONS
The city personnel regulations are set forth in a personnel policy manual on file in the office of the city secretary, containing all
resolutions, ordinances and agreements affecting personnel, including all those ordinances concerning city participation in the
Texas Municipal Retirement System pursuant to Tex. Gov't Code, §§851.001 through 851.006 (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title
III, Chapter 32, Section 32.10)
ARTICLE 9.600 TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM*
The provisions of the Texas Municipal Retirement System as adopted by the City of Gonzales are incorporated herein by
reference, and are on file in the office of the city secretary. (Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 9.700 HEALTH BENEFIT COVERAGE TO RETIREES
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 233/414
(a) The city hereby elects to provide health benefits coverage to its retirees through TML intergovernmental employee benefits
pool under the pool's interlocal agreement.
(b) The city hereby adopts the following definition for purposes of this article:
Retiree. A city employee eligible for retirement under the city's personnel policies and the city's retirement plan with TMRS.
(c) The city hereby adopts the following benefit plans to be provided to its retirees through the TML interlocal employee
benefits pool:
The medical plan adopted for retirees and their dependents.
(d) The interlocal agreement in effect between the city and the TML interlocal employee benefits pool provides that the board
of trustees may adopt rules and regulations. The rules and regulations of the TML intergovernmental employee benefits pool
allow the participating member entity to provide retiree medical coverage.
(e) This article will only apply to individuals retiring after its effective date. For individuals retiring after the effective date of
this article to qualify they must enroll for this coverage within thirty (30) days of their retirement.
(f) This article may be repealed or modified at any time, but will remain in effect for any employee retiring while it is in effect.
(Ordinance 2011-21 adopted 9/13/11)
CHAPTER 10
SUBDIVISION REGULATION
ARTICLE 10.100 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 10.200 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE†
Sec. 10.201 Adopted
The subdivision ordinance of the city, Ordinance 2013-32 adopted by the city on December 3, 2013, is included at the end of this
chapter as exhibit A. Due to the nature of the subdivision ordinance and the technicalities involved in adopting or amending it,
such ordinance is printed herein as enacted, with only nonsubstantive formatting and style changes. Capitalization, punctuation
and numbering of articles, sections and subsections have been retained as enacted. Subsequent amendments will be inserted in
their proper place and denoted by a history note following the amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates the
material is unchanged from the original. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected without notation. Any other material
added for purposes of clarification is enclosed in brackets. (Editorially supplied)
ARTICLE 10.300 FEES
Sec. 10.301 Platting fees
The city council hereby authorizes the collection of platting fees as follows:
Base Fee Per Lot/Acre
Minor plat $250.00 $3.00 lot; $5.00 acre
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 234/414
Vesting plat $250.00 $3.00 lot; $5.00 acre
Filing plat $250.00 $3.00 lot; $5.00 acre
Replat $250.00 $3.00 lot; $5.00 acre
Development plat $250.00 $3.00 lot; $5.00 acre
Amended plat $250.00 $3.00 lot; $5.00 acre
If in ETJ per lot/acre fees shall be $5.00 per lot and $10.00 per acre.
(Ordinance 2014-17 adopted 6/3/14)
EXHIBIT A
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE
Section 1. General Provisions
1.01. Title
This Ordinance and subsequent regulations of the City of Gonzales, Texas shall be known as, and may be cited and referred to as,
the “Subdivision Ordinance.”
1.02. Authority
This Subdivision Ordinance and subdivision regulations are adopted pursuant to the authority granted by the U.S. Constitution,
the Texas Constitution, and the laws of the State of Texas, specifically including Chapter 212 of the Texas Local Government
Code.
1.03. General
All property not subdivided into lots, blocks, and streets, or property to be resubdivided, within the City or within its jurisdiction
(i.e., the City Limits or Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ)) shall hereafter be laid out subject to the approval of the City as outlined
within this Subdivision Ordinance, and no other subdivision will be recognized by the City.
1.04. Purpose
These regulations shall be administered so as to achieve the following specific purposes:
A. Specific Purposes of the Subdivision Regulations
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 235/414
1. Provide for the orderly, safe and healthful development of the area within the City and its Extraterritorial
Jurisdiction (ETJ);
2. Promote the health, safety and general welfare of the community;
3. Establish orderly policies and procedures to guide development of the City;
4. Provide for the establishment of minimum specifications for construction and engineering design criteria for
public infrastructure[,] reduce inconveniences to residents of the area, and to reduce related unnecessary costs to
the City for correction of inadequate facilities that are designed to serve the public;
5. Ensure that development of land and subdivisions shall be of such nature, shape and location that utilization
will not impair the general welfare;
6. Protect against the dangers of fires, floods, erosion, landslides, or other such menaces;
7. Provide proper utilities and services for adequate drainage, water supply, and disposal of sanitary and
industrial waste; to furnish adequate sites, convenient to schools, parks, playgrounds, and other community
services, respecting topography and existing vegetation so that the natural beauty of the land shall be preserved;
8. Coordinate new development realistically and harmoniously with existing development;
9. Protect and conserve the value of land throughout the City;
10. Provide the most beneficial circulation of vehicle and pedestrian traffic throughout the City, and to provide
for the proper location and width of streets;
11. Establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for the development and redevelopment, provide
for the orderly layout and use of land;
12. Ensure proper legal descriptions and documentation of subdivided land;
13. Ensure public facilities with sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision are available for every
building site, and to provide public facilities for future development;
14. Ensure the adequacy of drainage facilities; and encourage the wise use and management of natural
resources throughout the City in order to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the community;
15. Preserve the topography of the City and ensure appropriate development with regard to natural features;
16. Ensure that new development adequately and fairly participates in the dedication and construction of
Public Improvements and infrastructure that are necessitated by or attributable to the development or that
provide value or benefit that makes the development feasible; and
17. Address other needs necessary for ensuring the creation and continuance of a healthy, attractive, safe and
efficient community that provides for the conservation, enhancement and protection of its human and natural
resources.
1.05. Applicability
A. General. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City to consider the subdivision and development of land, as subject to
the control of the City, in order to carry out the purpose of the Comprehensive Plan, and to promote the orderly, planned, efficient
and economical development of the City.
B. Subdivision and Development of Land Policies.
1. Land shall not be subdivided or developed until proper provision has been made for drainage, water, wastewater,
transportation and other facilities required by these regulations.
2. All public and private facilities and improvements shall be of at least the capacity necessary to adequately serve
the development and shall conform to and be properly related to the Comprehensive Plan of the City and the
Engineering Standards Manual (ESM).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 236/414
3. These regulations shall supplement, and facilitate the enforcement of, provisions and standards contained in the
Zoning Regulations and building codes adopted by the City.
C. Requirement to Plat. Platting is required for the following purposes:
1. To create a building site on a single lot or tract;
2. To construct or enlarge any exterior dimension of any building, structure, or improvement on land without an
existing Plat.[;]
3. To subdivide land to divide a lot or tract into two or more parcels for development of the parcels;
4. To combine lots or tracts;
5. To amend a Plat; or
6. To correct errors on an approved and recorded Plat.
D. Plat Required.
1. Subdivision Plats Required per LGC 212 Subchapter A (i.e., All plats except Development Plats).
a. In accordance with Texas Local Government Code (LGC) Section 212.004, the owner of a tract of land
located within the city limits or in the Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) who divides the tract in two (2) or more
parts to lay out a subdivision of the tract, including an addition to a municipality, to lay out suburban, building,
or other lots, or to lay out streets, alleys, squares, parks, or other parts of the tract intended to be dedicated to
public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent to the streets, alleys, squares,
parks, or other parts must have a Plat of the subdivision prepared.
b. A division of a tract under this subsection includes a division regardless of whether it is made by using a
metes and bounds description in a deed of conveyance or in a contract for a deed, by using a contract of sale or
other executory contract to convey, or by using any other method.
c. A division of land under this subsection does not include a division of land into parts greater than five (5)
acres, where each part has access and no Public Improvement is being dedicated.
2. Development Plats Required per LGC 212 Subchapter B (i.e., Development Plats only).
a. Any person who proposes the development (i.e., any new construction or the enlargement of any exterior
dimension of any building, structure, or improvement) of a tract of land located within the limits or in the
Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) of the City shall have a Development Plat of the tract prepared in accordance
with LGC 212 Subchapter B and this Subdivision Ordinance. (See Section 5.09 Development Plat of this
Ordinance for requirements for Development Plats.)
b. Whenever a property owner proposes to divide land within the City or its Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ)
into two (2) or more tracts, and claims exemption from LGC 212 Subchapter A for the purposes of development,
that results in parcels or lots all greater than five (5) acres in size, a Development Plat shall be required.
c. In the event that development of any tract of land is intended, and where no Public Improvement is
proposed to be dedicated, the Applicant shall first obtain approval of a Development Plat.
d. No Development Plat is required when the land has an approved Filing Plat, Minor Plat, Replat, or
Amending Plat.
E. Exemptions to the Requirement to Plat. The following are exemptions to the platting requirements in subsection 1.05.C
(above):
1. Use of existing cemeteries complying with all State and local laws and regulations;
2. Dedication of an easement or Right-of-Way by a separate document recordable in the county records if approved
by the City; and
3. Divisions of land created by order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 237/414
1.06. Compliance with City Plans and Ordinances
Compliance with all City ordinances pertaining to the subdivision and development of land, and the Comprehensive Plan (where
applicable), shall be required prior to approval of any Application pursuant to this Subdivision Ordinance. All such ordinances
and the Comprehensive Plan shall be construed to mean those documents as they exist or may be amended. It is the property
owner's responsibility to be familiar with, and to comply with, City ordinances, the Comprehensive Plan, and the provisions of
this Subdivision Ordinance.
A. Applicable City Codes, Ordinances, and Plans. Applicable City codes, ordinances, and plans with which all
Applications must comply include, but are not limited to, the following.
1. Comprehensive Plan (including all associated maps and plans);
2. Zoning Ordinance;
3. Parks or Trails Master Plans;
4. Building Codes;
5. Drainage System Design Requirements;
6. International Fire Code;
7. Stormwater Quality and Land Disturbance Requirements; and
8. Other Applicable portions of the Code of Ordinances.
1.07. Public Improvements Required
A. Requirements.
1. The subdivider shall furnish, install and/or construct the Public Improvements (e.g., water and wastewater
systems and the street and drainage facilities, including any offsite Public Improvements) necessary for the proper
development of the subdivision.
a. All such facilities shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the City's Engineering Standards
Manual, and any other standards, specifications, and drawings as may be hereafter adopted, approved by the City
Council and placed on file in the office of the City Secretary.
2. Where considered necessary by the City Manager, and/or as recommended by the Planning and Zoning
Commission or shown on the Comprehensive Plan, the facilities shall be sized in excess of that dictated by this
Subdivision Ordinance or the Engineering Standards Manual to provide for future growth and expansion.
a. The City Council shall establish policies whereby the City may participate in the difference in cost of the
facility as sized in the Comprehensive Plan and the cost of the facility as sized per the requirements of this
Subdivision Ordinance or the Engineering Standards Manual.
3. Development Agreement.
a. Cases that Require a Development Agreement[:]
i. The Subdivider shall be required to enter into a Development Agreement with the City that shall
govern the Subdivision if there are any public improvements, pro-rata payments, escrow deposits or other
future considerations, or variances are granted to this Subdivision Ordinance, or if the City participates in
the cost of any public improvements, or if there are nonstandard development regulations.
ii. This Development Agreement shall be based upon the requirements of this Subdivision Ordinance,
and shall provide the City with specific authority to complete the improvements required in the
Development Agreement in the event of failure by the developer, and to recover the full costs of such
measures.
b. The Development Agreement shall be a legally binding agreement between the City and the Subdivider and
shall specify the individual and joint responsibilities of both the City and the Subdivider.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 238/414
c. The Development Agreement shall contain:
i. As appropriate, provisions for pro-rata payments, City participation in community facilities, escrow
deposits or other payments for future facilities, variances granted to this chapter, and other particular
aspects of the proposed Subdivision;
ii. Authority for the City to withhold building permits, put a hold on construction and inspections in the
event of breach by the Subdivider;
iii. For financial security (see section 6.05.D Security for Completion of Improvements);
(a) Insurance requirements in accordance with the City's requirements for public works projects;
and
(b) An indemnification clause by which the Subdivider shall agree to hold the City harmless
against any claim arising out of the proposed Subdivision or any actions taken therein.
d. The City may provide a standard-form Development Agreement that may be approved by the City Manager.
In the event that either party desires not to enter into the standard-form Development Agreement, then a
Subdivision-specific Development Agreement will be negotiated and will be subject to City Council approval
before execution.
1.08. General Plat Requirements
A. Development Application. All submittals shall conform to the appropriate Development Application.
B. Application Fees. All Application fees shall be paid according to the Fee Schedule.
C. Zoning Regulations Requirements. All requirements pertaining to lot size, yard size, dwelling size, lot coverage, height,
parking, loading and screening contained in the current Zoning Regulations of the City shall be adhered to for development under
this Subdivision Ordinance.
D. Phased Development.
1. All phased developments shall be in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan.
2. The City may establish size limits and requirements for phased development.
3. A concept development plan for the entire site shall be prepared and shall accompany all submittals for a Vesting
Plat and Filing Plat.
4. Phased Developments shall coordinate with the surrounding land use plan and existing developments.
5. Each phase shall submit a Vesting Plat and Filing Plat.
E. Drainage. If provisions are necessary for drainage facilities on the unplatted future phases of the development, then the Plat
shall include separate instruments for (easements) off-site drainage needs and shall include appropriate notes and descriptions
providing the City the appropriate permissions and approvals needed for access and for maintaining and improving the drainage
system.
1.09. Special Provisions for Enforcement
A. Provisions.
1. Plat Filing Requirement.
a. A Subdivision Plat shall not be filed or record until it has been approved by the City and all Public
Improvements have been accepted by the City, and any such actual recording shall be void unless such approval
shall be endorsed on the face of the Plat as hereinafter provided.
b. The above subsection 1.09.A.1.a (above) shall not apply to a Minor Plat or an Amending Plat.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 239/414
2. Wastewater (Sanitary Sewer) Collection System Requirement.
a. No building permit shall be issued by the City for any structure on any lot without connection to the City's
existing or proposed wastewater facilities.
3. Filing Plat or Development Plat Required for Building Permits. No building permit shall be issued by the City for
any structure on a lot in a Subdivision for which a Filing Plat or Development Plat has not been approved and filed for
record, nor for any structure on a lot within a Subdivision that the standards contained herein or referred to herein have
not been complied with in full.
4. Compliance with Standards Required. The City shall not authorize any other person nor shall the City itself
repair, maintain, install or provide any streets or public utility services in any Subdivision for which the standards
contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full.
5. Dedications.
a. Refusal or denial of a Plat by the City Council shall be deemed a refusal by the City to accept the offered
dedications shown thereon.
b. Approval of a Plat shall not impose any duty upon the City concerning the maintenance or improvement of
any such dedicated parts until the proper authorities of the City have actually appropriated the same by final
acceptance.
c. Any such dedication, before or after actual appropriation may be vacated by the Council in any manner
provided by law.
6. Services Prohibited to Subdivision. The City shall not authorize any other person nor shall the City itself sell or
supply any utility service such as water, gas, electricity, telephone, cable, communication or wastewater service within
a Subdivision for which a Filing Plat has not been approved or filed for record, nor in which the standards contained
herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full.
7. Action in a Court. On behalf of the City, the City Attorney shall, when directed by the City Council, institute
appropriate action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance or the
standards referred to herein with respect to any violation thereof which occurs within any area subject to all or a part
of the provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance.
8. Abutting Owner or Lessee Action. In addition thereto, any abutting owner or lessee or other person prejudicially
affected by the violation of the terms of this Subdivision Ordinance may resort to any court of competent jurisdiction
for any writ or writs, or to obtain such relief, either in law or equity, as may be deemed advisable in these premises.
9. Noncompliant Subdivision or Subdivision without a Filing Plat. If any Subdivision exists for which a Filing Plat
has not been approved or in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been fully complied
with, the City Council shall pass a resolution reciting the facts of such noncompliance and failure to secure Filing Plat
approval, and reciting the fact that the provisions of this Section will apply to the Subdivision and the lots therein.
a. The City Secretary shall, when directed by the City Council, cause a certified copy of such resolution under
the corporate seal of the City to be filed in the Deed of Records of the County.
b. If full compliance and Filing Plat approval are secured after the filing of such resolution, the City Secretary
shall forthwith file an instrument, in the Deed of Records of the County stating that the provisions of this section
no longer apply.
1.10. Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ)
A. Subdivision Regulations Extend into the ETJ. Subdivision Regulations as they now exist or may hereafter be amended, are
hereby extended to all of the area lying within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City and the rules and regulations within said
Subdivision Regulations governing Plats and Subdivision of land shall be applicable to such area within said extraterritorial
jurisdiction from and after the date of final passage of this Subdivision Ordinance.
B. Subdividing. No person shall subdivide or plat any tract of land within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City except in
conformity with the provisions of these Subdivision Regulations.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 240/414
1.11. Subdivision Procedure Summary
Any owner or Developer of any lot, tract, or parcel of land located within the corporate limits of the City or within its
extraterritorial jurisdiction who wishes to subdivide such land shall conform to the following general procedures.
A. General Procedures.
1. Pre-Application Conference (Voluntary)
2. Vesting Plat
3. Construction Plans
4. Construction of improvements
5. City acceptance of improvements (Letter of Final Acceptance)
6. Filing Plat
B. Detailed Steps. The detailed steps with each phase of the Subdivision development procedure are covered in this
subsection, Section 5, Section 6, and Section 7.
Figure 1: Subdivision Procedure Summary
1.12. Violations and Fines
A. Subdivision Violations. Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or
who resists the enforcement of any of the provisions of the Subdivision Ordinance shall be fined not more than two thousand
dollars ($2,000.00) for each violation. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
Section 2. Definitions
2.01. Usage and Interpretation
A. Usage and Interpretation Rules. For the purpose of this Subdivision Ordinance certain terms or words defined as follows:
1. Words used in the present tense include the future tense;
2. The singular includes the plural;
3. The word “person” includes a corporation as well as an individual;
4. The term “shall” is always mandatory;
5. The term “may” is discretionary;
6. The male gender shall include the female and the neutral.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 241/414
B. Words and Terms not Expressly Defined. Words and terms not expressly defined herein are to be construed according to the
normally accepted meaning of such words or terms or, where no definition appears, then according to their customary usage in the
practice of municipal planning and engineering.
2.02. Words and Terms Defined
For the purpose of this Subdivision Ordinance, certain terms and words are herewith defined and shall have the meaning here
applied; any word not defined herein shall be determined by the City Council; to wit:
Abutting. Adjacent, adjoining and contiguous to. It may also mean having a lot line in common with a right-of-way or easement,
or with a physical improvement such as a street, waterline, park, or open space.
Access. A means of approaching or entering a property, or the ability to traverse a property (such as in the use of the phrase
“pedestrian access easement”).
Alley. A public Right-of-Way, not intended to provide the primary means of access to abutting lots, which is used primarily for
vehicular service access to the back or sides of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
Amending Plat. An Amending Plat applies minor revisions to a recorded plat consistent with provisions of State law, see Section
5.07 Amending Plat.
Apartment. A room or suite of rooms in a multifamily residence arranged, designed, or occupied as a place of residence by a
single family, individual, or group of individuals.
Applicant. The person or entity responsible for the submission of an Application. The Applicant must be the actual owner of the
property for which an Application is submitted, or shall be a duly authorized representative of the property owner. Also see
Developer.
Application. The package of materials, including but not limited to an Application Form, Plat, completed checklist, tax certificate,
Construction Plans, special drawings or studies, and other informational materials, that is required by the City to initiate City
review and approval of a development project.
Application Form. The written form (as provided by and as may be amended by the City Manager) that is filled out and executed
by the Applicant and submitted to the City along with other required materials as a part of an Application.
Approval.
a. Approval constitutes a determination by the official, board, commission or City Council responsible for such
determination that the Application is in compliance with the minimum provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance.
b. Such approval does not constitute approval of the engineering or surveying contained in the plans, as the design
engineer or surveyor that sealed the plans is responsible for the adequacy of such plans.
Arterial Street.
a. A street (also referred to as a thoroughfare) designated within the Comprehensive Plan.
b. A principal trafficway more or less continuous across the City or areas adjacent thereto and shall act as a principal
connecting street with highways as indicated in the Comprehensive Plan.
Base Flood. The flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, determined based upon
FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency) guidelines and as shown in the current effective Flood Insurance Study.
Block. A tract or parcel of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad Right-of-
Way, highway, stream, or corporate boundary lines.
Block Face. The portion of a Block that abuts a street.
Block Length. The length of the Block Face between two intersections.
Building. Any structure built for support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, personal property, records or other movable
property and when separated in a manner sufficient to prevent fire, each portion of such building shall be deemed a separate
building.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 242/414
Building Official. The Building Official of the City or his or her designee.
Building Permit. A permit issued by the City before a building or structure is started, improved, enlarged or altered as proof that
such action is in compliance with the City code.
Building Setback Line. The line within a property defining the minimum horizontal distance between a building or other structure
and the adjacent street Right-of-Way/property line.
Certificate of Occupancy. An official certificate issued by the City through the enforcement official which indicates conformance
with the City's rules and regulations and which authorizes legal use of the premises.
City. The City of Gonzales, Texas, together with all its governing and operating bodies.
City Attorney. The person(s) so designated by the City Council to provide oversight for and have legal responsibility for the City.
This term shall also include any designee of the City Attorney.
City Council. The duly elected governing body of the City of Gonzales, Texas.
City Engineer. The Licensed Professional Engineer or firm of Licensed Professional Consulting Engineers that has been
specifically designated as such by the City Council.
City Manager. The officially appointed and authorized City Manager of the City of Gonzales, Texas, and may include the City
Manager's duly authorized representative or designee, per the City Manager's discretion.
City Secretary. The person(s) so designated by the City Manager to provide clerical and official services for the City Council.
This term shall also include any designee of the City Secretary.
City's Engineering Official. The person(s) so designated by the City Manager to provide oversight for and have responsibility of
the City's Public Works Department. This term shall also include any designee of the City's Engineering Official or per the City
Manager the City Engineer (which may be a private consulting firm).
City's Planning Official. The person(s) so designated by the City Manager to provide oversight for and have responsibility of the
City's Planning and Development Department. This term shall also include any designee of the City's Planning Official. Also, this
term shall be inclusive of any future variations of the term, as deemed appropriate by the City Manager, such as “Director of
Planning and Development.”
Collector Street. A street which is continuous through several residential districts and is intended as a connecting street between
residential districts and Arterial Streets, highways or business districts.
Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City.
Comprehensive Plan.
a. The plan, including all revisions thereto, adopted by the City Council as the official policy regarding the guidance
and coordination of the development of land in the City.
b. The plan indicates the general location recommended for various land uses, transportation routes, public and
private buildings, streets, utilities, parks other public and private developments and improvements and population
projections.
c. The plan may consist but is not limited to the following plan elements: Future Land Use Plan, Mobility, Housing,
Livability, and Infrastructure.
Construction Details. A separate and stand-alone document not included within this Subdivision Ordinance that provides
technical construction drawings of the City's required Improvements, such as a “Standard Storm Drain Curb Inlet.” The
Construction Details document is developed and maintained by the City Manager.
Construction Plans. A set of drawings and/or specifications, including paving, water, wastewater, drainage, or other required
plans, submitted to the City for review in conjunction with a subdivision or a development.
Council. See City Council.
County. Gonzales County.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 243/414
Court. An open unoccupied space other than a yard, on the same lot with a building which is bounded on three (3) or more sides
by the building.
Crosswalk Way. A public Right-of-Way, four (4) feet or more in width between property lines, which provides pedestrian
circulation.
Cul-de-Sac. A short, residential street having but one vehicular access to another street, and terminated on the opposite end by a
vehicular turnaround.
Curb Level.
a. The level of the established curb in front of the building measured at the center of such front.
b. Where no curb has been established, the City Manager shall establish such curb or its equivalent for the purpose
of this Subdivision Ordinance.
Date of Adoption. The date of adoption of this Subdivision Ordinance shall be the date this ordinance becomes effective.
Dead-End Street. A street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one outlet.
Decision Maker. The City official or group, such as the City Manager, City Council, or Planning and Zoning Commission,
responsible for deciding action on an Application authorized by this Subdivision Ordinance.
Developer.
a. A person or entity, limited to the property owner or duly authorized representative thereof, who proposes to
undertake or undertakes the division, developments, or improvement of land and other activities covered by this
Subdivision Ordinance.
b. The word Developer is intended to include the terms Subdivider, property owner, and, when submitting platting
documents, Applicant.
Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings and/or other
structures, paving, drainage, utilities, storage, and agricultural activities.
Development Agreement. Agreement between the City and a Subdivider, which includes provisions for construction of Public
Improvements, City participation, pro-rata agreements, escrow deposits, and other provisions for the development of land. (See
section 6.05 Development Agreements and Security for Completion for details.)
Development Application. An Application, developed and updated by the City Manager, for any type of plan, permit, plat or
Construction Plans/drawings authorized or addressed by this Subdivision Ordinance. Also may be referred to as a permit within
the Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 245.
Development Application Handbook. A collection of Application Forms created, updated, and managed by the City Manager.
(See section 4.01.D for details.)
Development Plat. A Plat required prior to development (i.e., any new construction or the enlargement of any exterior dimension
of any building, structure, or improvement), in accordance with Local Government Code 212, Subchapter B (212.045), in lieu of
other Subdivision Plats (established in LGC 212, Subchapter A) required by this Subdivision Ordinance and in accordance with
Section 5.09 Development Plat.
Development Review Committee. The committee created by Section 3.04 Development Review Committee to review plats and to
recommend either approval or denial.
DRC. See Development Review Committee and Section 3.04 Development Review Committee.
Dwelling, Multifamily. Any building, or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased or let to be occupied as three or
more dwelling units or apartments, or which is occupied as a home or place of residence by three or more families living in
independent and separate housekeeping units.
Dwelling, Single-Family (attached - duplex). A building designed for occupancy for two (2) families living independently of each
other. A two family attached unit (also known as a duplex) has a lot line dividing the building and separating the building's two
(2) dwellings units onto two (2) separate lots.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 244/414
Dwelling, Single-Family (attached - townhouse). A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one or more sides by a party
wall or abutting separate wall, and which is designed for occupancy by one family and is located on a separate lot delineated by
front, side and rear lot lines.
Dwelling, Single-family (detached). A dwelling designed and constructed for occupancy by one family and located on a lot or
separate building tract and having no physical connection to a building located on any other lot or tract and occupied by one
family.
Dwelling Unit. One or more rooms, which are arranged, designed, used, or intended to be used for occupancy by a single family
or group of persons living together as a family or by a single person.
Easement.
a. Authorization by a property owner for another to use any designated part of the owner's property for a specified
purpose or use and evidenced by an instrument or plat filed with the County Clerk. Among other things, easements
may be used to install and maintain utility lines, drainage ditches or channels, or for other City or public services.
b. An area established for public purposes on private property upon which the City shall have the right to remove
and keep removed all or part of any buildings, fences, trees, shrubs, or other improvements or growths which in any
way endanger or interfere with the construction, maintenance, or efficiency of City systems.
c. The City shall at all times have the right of ingress and egress to and from and upon the said easements for the
purpose of constructing, reconstructing, inspecting, patrolling, maintaining, and adding to or removing all or part of its
respective systems without the necessity at any time or procuring the permission of anyone.
Easement, Common Access. An easement to provide shared access to and from commercial, and industrial[, and certain
residential developments,] owned and maintained by the owners of the property upon which the easement is located or as
otherwise provided by deed restrictions or the terms of the easement instrument.
Engineer. A person duly authorized under the provisions of the Texas Engineering Practice Act, as heretofore or hereafter
amended, to practice the profession of engineering and who is specifically qualified to design and prepare Construction Plans and
specifications for public works improvements.
Engineering Plans. See Construction Plans.
Engineering Standards Manual. A separate and stand-alone document or complication [compilation] of documents not included
within this Subdivision Ordinance, the Engineering Standards Manual (ESM) details specific engineering requirements (e.g.,
drainage criteria) for the construction of Public Improvements. The ESM is developed and maintained by the City Manager.
ESM. ESM is an abbreviation of Engineering Standards Manual.
ETJ. See Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ).
Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ). The unincorporated area, not a part of any other municipality, which is contiguous to the
corporate limits of the City, the outer limits of which are measured from the extremities of the corporate limits of the City
outward for the distance as stipulated in Chapter 42 of the Texas Local Government Code, according to the population of the City,
and in which area the City may regulate subdivisions and enjoin violation of provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance.
Fee Schedule. A listing of fees for various City Applications, which is prepared by the City Manager and approved by City
Council and may be amended periodically. The Fee Schedule is approved separately from this Subdivision Ordinance.
Filing Plat.
a. The one official and authentic map of any given subdivision of land prepared from actual field measurement and
staking of all identifiable points by a Surveyor or Engineer with the subdivision location referenced to a survey corner
and all boundaries, corners and curves of the land division sufficiently described so that they can be reproduced
without additional references.
b. The Filing Plat of any lot, tract, or parcel of land shall be recorded in the Deed Records of Gonzales County,
Texas.
c. A Filing Plat may also be referenced as a Record Plat or Final Plat.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 245/414
Final Acceptance. The acceptance by the City of all infrastructure improvements constructed by the Developer in conjunction
with the development of land.
Final Plat. See Filing Plat.
Floodplain. The area subject to be inundated by water from the Base Flood.
Floodway. A natural drainage area which accommodates the design flood for existing creeks and open drainageways.
Floor Area. The habitable area of a building that is served by a conditioned air system, but specifically excluding porches, patios,
breezeways, automobile storage areas, garages, workshops, attic storage areas and basements.
Frontage. All the property abutting on one (1) side of the street, or between two (2) intersecting streets, measured along the street
line.
Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association.
a. A formal nonprofit organization operating under recorded land agreements through which:
i. Each lot and/or property owner in a specific area is automatically a member; and
ii. Each lot or property interest is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share of the expense for
the organization's activities, such as the maintenance of common property; and
iii. The charge if unpaid, becomes a lien against the nonpaying member's property.
Improvement. Any manmade fixed item which becomes part of or placed upon real property, see also Public Improvement.
Infrastructure. All streets, alleys, sidewalks, storm drainage, water, and wastewater facilities, utilities, lighting, transportation, and
other facilities as required by the City.
Land Planner. A person(s) other than Surveyors or Engineers who also possess and can demonstrate a valid proficiency in the
planning of residential, commercial, industrial and other related developments; such proficiency often having been acquired by
education in the field of landscape architecture or other specialized planning curriculum and/or by actual experience and practice
in the field of land planning and who is a member of the American Planning Association.
Letter of Final Acceptance. Notification to an Applicant from the City Manager that all improvements are completed, inspected,
tested (if applicable), and determined by the City to be in conformance with this Subdivision Ordinance and with the City's
design/engineering standards and all improvements are accepted by the City or will be accepted contingent to the approval of a
Filing Plat.
Lot. Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings, together with such open spaces as are required
under this Subdivision Ordinance, and having its principal frontage upon a street or officially approved place.
Lot, Corner.
a. A lot situated at the junction of two or more streets.
b. A corner lot shall be deemed to front on the street on which it has its smallest dimensions, or as otherwise
designated by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Lot, Depth. The mean horizontal distance from the front street line to the rear line.
Lot, Interior. A lot, the sideline of which does not abut on any street.
Lot, Through. An interior lot having frontage on two streets. Such through lot shall provide a front yard on each street.
Lot Lines. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
Lot of Record. A lot which is part of a subdivision, a map of which has been recorded in the office of the County Clerk.
Lot Width. The mean horizontal distance between sidelines measured at right angles to the depth.
Major Subdivision Waiver. See Waiver, Major Subdivision.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 246/414
Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices. The Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices, or MUTCD defines the standards
used by road managers nationwide to install and maintain traffic-control devices on all public streets, highways, bikeways, and
private roads open to public traffic. The MUTCD is published by the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) under 23 Code of
Federal Regulations (CFR), Part 655, Subpart F.
Minor Plat. A plat dividing land into no more than four (4) lots that meets the submission and approval requirements of Section
5.05 Minor Plat. Such plat may be approved by the City Manager. Such plat is also considered a Filing Plat.
Minor Replat. Pursuant to Texas Local Government Code 212.0065, a Minor Replat is a Replat involving four or fewer lots
fronting on an existing street and not requiring the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities. See Section
5.06.G.2 Minor Replat details.
Minor Subdivision Waiver. See Waiver, Minor Subdivision.
Official Submission Date.
a. A calendar of official submission dates for subdivision related Applications requiring City review and approval
pursuant to Texas Local Government Code Chapter 212.
b. See section 4.02 Official Submission Date and Official Vesting Date for further details and standards.
Official Vesting Date.
a. Pursuant to Texas Local Government Code Chapter 245, an Application or plan for development is considered
filed on the date the Applicant delivers the Application or plan to the City or deposits the application or plan with the
United States Postal Service by certified mail addressed to the City.
b. See section 4.02 Official Submission Date and Official Vesting Date for further details and standards.
Park, Playground, or Community Center, Public. An open recreational facility or park owned and operated by a public agency
such as the City or the school district, and available to the general public.
Parkway. Within the Right-of-Way, the area between the property line and the nearest curb or edge of the roadway (if no curb
exists.) See Figure 2: Example of a Parkway for visual depiction of a parkway.
Figure 2: Example of a Parkway
Parking Space. Open space or garage space reserved exclusively for the parking of a vehicle.
Paved Driveways. Paved driveways are constructed of brick pavers, concrete pavers, hot-mix asphaltic concrete, or portland
cement concrete.
Pavement Width. The portion of a street available for vehicular traffic. Where curbs are laid, it is the portion between the face of
the curbs.
Perimeter Street. A street which abuts a parcel of land to be subdivided on one side.
Person. Person means an individual, firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, foundation, company or corporation.
Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City.
Plat.
a. A map or chart of the subdivision, lot or tract of land.
b. It shall include the term plan, plat or replat, in both singular or plural.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 247/414
Plat, Amending. See Amending Plat.
Plat, Development. See Development Plat.
Plat, Filing. See Filing Plat.
Plat, Minor. See Minor Plat.
Plat, Vesting. See Vesting Plat.
Preliminary Drainage Plan. This plan shows the watershed affecting the development and how the runoff from the fullydeveloped
watershed will be conveyed to, through, and from the development see section 7.14.I Preliminary Drainage Plan for
details.
Preliminary Plat. See Vesting Plat.
Preliminary Stormwater Management Plan. The purpose of the Preliminary SWMP is to identify permanent water quality feature
opportunities for Subdivision development, see Section 7.14.J Preliminary Stormwater Management Plan for details.
Preliminary SWMP. Preliminary SWMP is an abbreviation for Preliminary Stormwater Management Plan.
Preliminary Utility Plan. A plan detailing both Water Utility and Wastewater Utility requirements, see Section 7.12.C Preliminary
Utility Plan for details.
Premises. In referring to a sexually oriented business, premises means the building of the sexually oriented business.
Progress Towards Completion. Progress towards completion of the project shall include any one of the following:
a. An Application for a Filing Plat or plan for development is submitted;
b. A good-faith attempt is made to file with the City or County an Application for a permit necessary to begin or
continue towards completion of the project;
c. Costs have been incurred for developing the project including, without limitation, costs associated with roadway,
utility, and other infrastructure facilities designed to serve, in whole or in part, the project (but exclusive of land
acquisition) in the aggregate amount of five percent of the most recent appraised market value of the real property on
which the project is located;
d. Fiscal security is posted with a regulatory agency to ensure performance of an obligation required by the
regulatory agency; or
e. Utility connection fees for the project have been paid to a regulatory agency.
Public Improvement. Any Improvement, facility or service together with its associated public site, Right-of-Way or easement
necessary to provide transportation, storm drainage, public or private utilities, parks or recreational, energy or similar essential
public services and facilities, for which the City ultimately assumes the responsibility, upon a Letter of Final Acceptance being
issued, for maintenance, operation and/or ownership.
Record Drawings. A group of drawings or plans that depicts the final configuration of the installed or constructed improvements
of a development, improvements that have been verified by the contractor as their installation or construction occurs during
development. The Record Drawings shall reflect the Construction Plans (or working drawings) used, corrected, and/or clarified in
the field.
Record Plat. See Filing Plat.
Replat. The resubdivision of any or part or all of any block or blocks of a previously platted subdivision, addition, lot or tract, that
is beyond the definition of an Amending Plat and which does not require the vacation of the entire preceding plat. Such plat also
conforms to Section 5.06 Replat of this Subdivision Ordinance. A Replat can function as a Filing Plat for a property.
Residential District. Residential district means a single-family, patio home, duplex, townhouse, multifamily or mobile home
zoning district as defined in the zoning ordinance.
Residential Street. A street which is intended primarily to serve traffic within a neighborhood or limited residential district and
which is used primarily for access to abutting properties.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 248/414
Residential Use. Residential use means use of a structure as a residence.
Responsible Official. The City staff person who has been designated by the City Manager to accept a type of development
Application for filing, to review and make recommendations concerning such Applications, and where authorized, to initially
decide such Applications, to initiate enforcement actions, and to take all other actions necessary for administration of the
provisions of development Applications. Also includes any designee of the designated City staff person.
Retaining Wall. A nonbuilding, structural wall supporting soil loads and live and dead surcharge loads to the soil, such as
additional soil, structures and vehicles.
Right-of-Way.
a. A parcel of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street or alley.
b. A Right-of-Way may be used for other facilities and utilities, such as sidewalks, railroad crossings, electrical
communication, oil or gas, water or sanitary or storm sewer facilities, or for any other use.
c. The use of Right-of-Way shall also include parkways and medians outside of pavement.
d. For platting purposes, the term “Right-of-Way” shall mean that every Right-of-Way shown on a Filing Plat is to
be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such Right-of-Way and not included within the dimensions
or areas of such lots or parcels.
Setback Line. A line within a lot, parallel to and measured from a corresponding lot line, establishing the minimum required yard
and governing the placement of structures and uses on the lot.
Site Plan. A Site Plan is a detailed, scaled drawing of all surface improvements, structures, and utilities proposed for development
and is associated with the zoning ordinance.
Sketch Plat. A sketch or informal plan prepared prior to the preparation of the Vesting Plat describing the proposed design of the
subdivision to be reviewed during the pre-application review process.
Street. A public Right-of-Way that provides vehicular traffic access to adjacent lands.
Street Width. The shortest distance between the property or easement lines which delineate the Right-of-Way of a street.
Structure. Anything constructed or erected, which requires location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on
the ground, including, but not limited to advertising signs, billboards and poster panels, but exclusive of customary fences or
boundary of retaining walls, sidewalks and curbs.
Subdivider.
a. Any person or any agent thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision.
b. In any event, the term “subdivider” shall be restricted to include only the owner, equitable owner or authorized
agent of such owner or equitable owner, of land to be subdivided.
Subdivision.
a. The division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more parts or lots for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of sale or building development or transfer of ownership with the exception of transfer to heirs of an estate, and
shall include resubdivision.
b. Any other subdivision or resubdivision of land contemplated by the provisions of Chapter 212, Local
Government Code.
Subdivision Ordinance. The adopted Subdivision Ordinance of the City, as may be amended in the future, and may be referred as
“this Ordinance.”
Subdivision Plat. A Plat (e.g., Vesting Plat, Filing Plat, Minor Plat, Replat, or Amending Plat) established in LGC 212,
Subchapter A involving the subdividing of land in two (2) or more parts or the amending of a recorded Plat.
Subdivision Regulations. Any regulations and standards contained within the Subdivision Ordinance.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 249/414
Subdivision Waiver. Either a Minor Subdivision Waiver or Major Subdivision Waiver, see Section 8.01 Petition for Subdivision
Waiver.
Surveyor. A licensed State Land Surveyor or a Registered Public Surveyor, as authorized by the State to practice the profession of
surveying.
Thoroughfare. See Arterial Street.
Transportation Plan. The plan that guides the development of adequate circulation within the City, and connects the City street
system to regional traffic carriers. Also, referred to as the Thoroughfare Plan.
Usable Open Space. An area or recreational facility that is designed and intended to be used for outdoor living and/or recreation.
Usable Open Space may include recreational facilities, water features, required perimeter landscape areas, floodplain areas, and
decorative objects such as art work or fountains. Usable Open Space shall not include the following:
a. Walks,
b. Rooftops,
c. Buildings, except those portions or any building designed specifically for recreation purposes,
d. Parking areas,
e. Landscaped parking requirements,
f. Driveways,
g. Turnarounds, or
h. Rights-of-Way or easements for streets and alleys.
Utility Easement. See Easement, definition.
Vested Right. A right of an Applicant requiring the City to review and decide the Application under standards in effect prior to the
effective date of the standards of this Subdivision Ordinance and/or of any subsequent amendments.
Vested Rights Petition.
a. A request for relief from any standard or requirement of the Subdivision Regulations based on an assertion that
the Applicant (petitioner for relief) has acquired a Vested Right.
b. Such petition is regulated under Section 8.03 Subdivision Vested Rights Petition.
Vesting Plat.
a. The graphic expression of the proposed overall plan for subdividing, improving and developing a tract shown by
superimposing a scale drawing of the proposed land division on a topographic map and showing in plan view existing
and proposed drainage features and facilities, street layout and direction of curb flow, and other pertinent features with
notations sufficient to substantially identify the general scope and detail of the proposed development.
b. The Vesting Plat shall serve as a means for the City to review and study the proposed division of land and/or
improvements.
c. See Section 5.03 Vesting Plat.
Vision Clearance. A space left open and unobstructed by fences, structures, shrubs, trees or other plant life along streets at the
corner in front of the building line of lots contiguous to intersecting streets.
Waiver, Major Subdivision.
a. A significant change to both the standards and intent of the Subdivision Regulations, which involves Planning
and Zoning Commission and City Council approval.
b. See Section 8.01 Petition for Subdivision Waiver for details.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 250/414
Waiver, Minor Subdivision.
a. A minor change to the standards, but not the intent, of these Subdivision Regulations, which involves the City
Manager approval unless otherwise noted.
b. See Section 8.01 Petition for Subdivision Waiver for details.
Water Treatment Facility. The facility or facilities within the water supply system which can alter the physical, chemical, or
bacteriological quality of the water.
Yard.
a. An open space other than a court, on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
upward, except as otherwise provided herein.
b. In measuring to determine the width of a side yard, the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard, the least
horizontal distance between the lot line and the main building shall be used.
Yard, Front. A yard across the full width of a lot extending from the front line of the main building to the front street line of the
lot.
Yard, Rear. A yard extending across the full width of the lot and measured between the rear line of the lot and rear line of the
main building, except that area included in the side yard as defined below.
Yard, Side. A yard between the building and the sideline of the lot and extending from the front yard to the required minimum rear
yard.
Section 3. Development Review Bodies
3.01. City Council
A. Establishment. The City's Code of Ordinances establishes the standards governing the City Council within the charter.
B. Responsibilities. Table 1 is a summary of the City Council's responsibilities within the Subdivision Ordinance.
Table 1: City Council Responsibilities
5.03.J.4.b Appeal of the Commission's Decision on a Vesting Plat Extension
5.08.E Approving a Plat Vacation
8.01.C.1.b Approving an Appeal of a Minor Subdivision Waiver Decision
8.01.C.2 Approving a Major Subdivision Waiver
8.02.C.3 Approving a Subdivision Proportionality Appeal
8.03.F.4 Approving a Decision by City Council on a Subdivision Vested
Rights Petition
8.03.F.5 Approving an Appeal to the Council of a Decision on Subdivision
Vested Rights Petition
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 251/414
3.02. Planning and Zoning Commission
A. Establishment. The City's Code of Ordinances establishes the standards governing the Planning and Zoning Commission
within Chapter 14.
B. Responsibilities. Table 2 is a summary of the Planning and Zoning Commission's responsibilities within the Subdivision
Ordinance.
Table 2: Planning and Zoning Commission Responsibilities
5.03.J.4.a Appeal of the City Manager's Decision on a Vesting Plat
Extension
5.03.F Approving a Vesting Plat
5.04.H Approving a Filing Plat
5.05.H.1. Approving a Deferral to the Commission of a Minor Plat Decision
5.06.G Approving a Replat
5.09.I Approving a Development Plat
5.06.G.2.b.i Approving a Deferral to the Commission of a Minor Replat
Decision
5.07.G.1 Approving a Deferral to the Commission of an Amending Plat
Decision
8.01.C.1.b Recommending an Appeal of a Minor Subdivision Waiver
Decision
8.01.C.2.a Recommending a Major Subdivision Waiver
8.02.C.3 Recommending a Subdivision Proportionality Appeal
8.03.F.3 Approving a Decision by Commission on a Subdivision Vested
Rights Petition
3.03. City Manager
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 252/414
A. Responsibilities. Table 3 is a summary of the City Manager's responsibilities within the Subdivision Ordinance.
Table 3: City Manager Responsibilities
Subdivision Related Responsibilities
5.03.F[E] Reviewing a Vesting Plat
5.04.G Reviewing a Filing Plat
5.05.G Approving a Minor Plat
5.06.G Reviewing a Replat
5.06.G.2.b Approving a Minor Replat
5.07.F Approving an Amending Plat
5.08.D Recommending a Plat Vacation
5.09.I Reviewing a Development Plat
6.01 Approving Construction Plans
6.01 Approving an Extension of Construction Plans beyond Expiration
Date
6.02 Approving a Pre-Construction Meeting
6.03 Approving a Construction Release
6.05.C[-D] Approving Development Agreements and Security for Completion
6.06.A Approving Inspection of Public Improvements
7.13.A.2 Determining the Approved Means of Wastewater Collection and
Treatment
8.01.C.1 Approving a Minor Subdivision Waiver (as applicable)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 253/414
8.02.C Reviewing a Subdivision Proportionality Appeal
8.03.F.2 Approving a Decision by the Responsible Official on a
Subdivision Vested Rights Petition
3.04. Development Review Committee
A. Establishment. There is hereby created within and for the City a Development Review Committee (DRC) with the
responsibilities as hereinafter set forth.
B. Purpose.
1. The purpose of the DRC is to utilize the expertise of various City departments to review all Plats to ensure that
City regulations are met and to provide a recommendation for either approval or denial in a written report to the City
Manager.
2. Per the City Manager's discretion, the DRC shall review Plats to ensure that City regulations are met and provide
a recommendation for either approval or denial in a written report, on an as-needed basis.
C. Membership. The DRC members shall consist of at least one representative from the following City departments, as
appointed by the City Manager.
1. Planning and Development Department
2. Public Works Department
3. Fire Department
4. Parks and Recreation Department
5. Police Department
6. City's Engineering Official
7. Any other department per the City Manager's discretion.
D. Term. Members shall serve at the discretion of the City Manager.
E. Responsibilities. The City Manager shall be responsible for establishing meeting times, determining when the DRC has
finished review of a Plat, and coordinating the DRC's written report.
Table 4: Development Review Committee Responsibilities
Subdivision Related Responsibilities
5.03.E.2 Per the City Manager's discretion, review a Vesting Plat
5.04.G.2 Per the City Manager's discretion, review a Filing Plat
5.05.F.2 Per the City Manager's discretion, review a Minor Plat
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 254/414
5.06.G.1 Per the City Manager's discretion, review a Replat
5.06.G.2.b Per the City Manager's discretion, review a Minor Replat
5.07.E.2 Per the City Manager's discretion, review an Amending Plat
5.08.D.2 Per the City Manager's discretion, review a Plat Vacation
5.09.I Per the City Manager's discretion; review a Development Plat
3.05. Summary of Approval Authority of Fundamental Applications
Table 5: Summary of Approval Authority of Fundamental Applications
Application Type City Council Planning and
Zoning
Commission
City Manager Development
Review
Committee
Vesting Plat
Approve Review Review*
Filing Plat
Approve Review Review*
Minor Plat
Approve Review*
Deferral to the Commission of a Minor
Plat Decision
Approve
Replat
Approve Review Review*
Minor Replat
Approve Review*
Deferral to the Commission of a Minor
Replat Decision
Approve
Amending Plat
Approve Review*
Deferral to the Commission of an
Amending Plat Decision
Approve
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 255/414
Plat Vacation Approve Recommend Review*
Development Plat
Approve Review Review*
Construction Plans
Approve
Extension of Construction Plans
beyond Expiration Date
Approve
Pre-Construction Meeting
Approve
Construction Release
Approve
Development Agreements and Security
for Completion
Approve**
Approve**
Inspection of Public Improvements
Approve
Determining the Approved Means of
Wastewater Collection and Treatment
Approve
Minor Subdivision Waiver
Approve
Appeal of a Minor Subdivision Waiver
Decision
Approve Recommend
Major Subdivision Waiver Approve Recommend
Subdivision Proportionality Appeal Approve Recommend Review
Decision by the Responsible Official on
a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition
Approve
Decision by Commission on a
Subdivision Vested Rights Petition
Approve
Decision by City Council on a
Subdivision Vested Rights Petition
Approve
Recommend
Appeal to the Council of a Decision on
Subdivision Vested Rights Petition
Approve
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 256/414
*Indicates possible review
**City Council may authorize the City Manager to approve
Section 4. Application Submittal and Processing Procedures
4.01. General Application Processing
A. Initiation of Application.
1. Initiation by Owner or Owner's Agent.
a. Unless provided by this Subdivision Ordinance, any petition or Application may be initiated only by the
property owner, owner of an interest in the land, or by the owner's designated agent.
b. If the Applicant is a designated agent, the Application shall include a written statement from the property
owner authorizing the agent to file the Application on the owner's behalf.
c. The Responsible Official may require submission of documents, such as an affidavit from the owner, to
provide evidence of ownership or agency.
2. Initiation by City Manager. The City Manager can initiate any Application authorized under this Subdivision
Ordinance.
B. Waiver of Application Information. The Responsible Official may initially waive the submission of any information in the
Application and accompanying materials that are not necessary due to the scope and nature of the proposed activity.
C. Universal Application Contents.
1. Application Forms Generally. The City is hereby authorized to prepare Application Forms that include
information requirements, checklists, architectural or engineering drawing sizes, Applicant contact information, and
any other information necessary to show compliance with City codes.
2. Information for All Applications. All Applications shall contain the following information and shall be signed
under oath stating that the Applicant believes the information contained therein is true to the best of his or her
knowledge:
a. Identification of property owner and authorized agent;
b. Description of the property and the nature of the development that is the subject of the application;
c. Identification of all zoning classifications (inside the City only) for the property;
d. Identification of all pending legislative applications for the property;
e. Identification of decisions on all quasi-judicial or administrative Applications for the property that remain in
effect;
f. Identification of all accompanying Applications;
g. Identification of all pending or accompanying requests for relief;
h. Demonstration of compliance with prior approved permits; and
i. Application signed by the owner of an interest in the land subject to the Application, or the owner's
designated agent.
3. All Application Forms are available from the City Manager.
D. Development Application Handbook. The City Manager shall create, manage, and update a Development Application
Handbook, which shall be a collection of Application Forms that the City Manager has created per subsection 4.01.C.1 (above).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 257/414
E. Universal Application Fees.
1. Every Application shall be accompanied by the prescribed fees set forth in the adopted Fee Schedule.
2. The prescribed fee shall not be refundable, except when the City Council waives the Application fee for
resubmission of an approval that was denied.
3. The Fee Schedule may be amended from time to time per procedures established by the City Council.
F. Payment of all Indebtedness Attributable to the Subject Property.
1. No Application shall be accepted or reviewed for completeness from a person who owes delinquent taxes,
assessments, any fees, or is otherwise indebted to the City until the taxes, assessments, debts, or obligations shall have
been first fully discharged by payment, or until an arrangement has been made for the payment of such debts or
obligations.
2. It shall be the Applicant's responsibility to provide evidence or proof that all taxes, fees, etc. have been paid, or
that other arrangements have been made for payment of said taxes, fees, etc.
G. Modification of Applications. The Applicant may modify any complete Application following its Official Vesting Date and
prior to the expiration of the period, if any, during which the City is required to act on the Application.
1. Modifications Requested by the City. If the modification is for revisions requested by the City, and the
modification is received at least five (5) business days prior to the time scheduled for decision on the Application, then
the Application shall be decided within the period for decision prescribed by this Subdivision Ordinance.
2. Modifications not Requested by the City.
a. In all other instances (e.g., when the Applicant chooses to submit a revised Application of his/her own
accord because of a change in development decisions), submittal of a modified Application shall extend the time
for deciding the Application for a period equal to the time specified in this Subdivision Ordinance to decide the
original Application.
b. The extension of the time for deciding the Application shall commence on the date the modified
Application is submitted.
i. For Plat Applications, a modified Application shall be accompanied by a properly executed Waiver of
Right to 30-Day Action.
H. Action by Responsible Official.
1. Circulate and Compile Comments. After the determination of completeness has been established, the Responsible
Official shall circulate the Application to all other administrative officials and departments whose review is required
for a decision on the Application and shall compile the comments and recommendations of the officials.
2. Decision Rendered, If Applicable. The Responsible Official shall render a decision in the time prescribed for the
applicable Application, if the official is the Decision Maker for the Application.
3. Forward Application and Provide Notification.
a. In cases where the Responsible Official is not the Decision Maker, the Responsible Official shall forward
the Application for review to any advisory board/commission and the final Decision Maker, and shall prepare a
report to such board or commission, or to the City Council, including the compilation of any comments and
recommendations by other administrative officials.
b. The Responsible Official also shall prepare required notices and schedule the Application for decision
within the time and in the manner required by this Subdivision Ordinance.
I. Recommendation by Advisory Board/Commission. Unless otherwise prescribed within this Subdivision Ordinance, an
advisory board/commission that is required to offer a recommendation to the Decision Maker shall recommend one of the
following:
1. Recommend approval of the Application by the Decision Maker;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 258/414
2. Recommend approval of the Application with conditions; or
3. Recommend denial of the Application.
J. Action by the Decision Maker.
1. The Decision Maker for the Application shall approve, approve with conditions or deny the Application within
the time prescribed by this Subdivision Ordinance.
2. Unless otherwise prescribed by law or City Charter, where the Decision Maker is a board, commission or the City
Council, the Application shall be decided by majority vote of a quorum of the members of the board, commission or
the City Council.
K. Conditions. The initial or final Decision Maker may attach such conditions to the approval of an Application as are
reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with applicable requirements of this Subdivision Ordinance.
4.02. Official Submission Date and Official Vesting Date
A. Official Submission Date.
1. A calendar of official submission dates for subdivision related Applications requiring City review and approval
pursuant to Texas Local Government Code Chapter 212 (if applicable) shall be published by the City thirty (30)
calendar days prior to the beginning of each calendar year or within six (6) months after the adoption of this
Subdivision Ordinance.
2. This calendar shall specify one “official submittal date” for each month.
3. All Applications delivered to the City on a date other than a scheduled date shall be dated received on the next
Official Submission Date.
B. Official Vesting Date.
1. Pursuant to Texas Local Government Code Chapter 245, an Application or plan for development is considered
filed on the date the Applicant delivers the Application or plan to the City or deposits the application or plan with the
United States Postal Service by certified mail addressed to the City.
2. A certified mail receipt obtained by the Applicant at the time of deposit is prima facie evidence of the date the
Application or plan was deposited with the United States Postal Service.
3. Every Application or plan is subject to a determination of completeness by the Responsible Official for
processing the Application pursuant to section 4.04.B Determination of Completeness for Subdivision Related
Applications.
4.03. Pre-Application Conference
A. Purpose.
1. The Pre-Application Conference is intended to allow for the exchange of nonbinding information between the
Applicant and City Staff to ensure that the Applicant is informed of pertinent City development regulations and
processes.
2. The Pre-Application Conference provides an opportunity for the Applicant and City Staff to discuss major
development considerations such as utilities, roadways, drainage concerns, Comprehensive Plan elements, specific
neighborhood characteristics, and historic information.
3. This exchange of information is intended to promote an efficient and orderly review process.
B. Pre-Application Conference before the Submission of Plans and Applications.
1. Prior to formal submittal of any required plan or Application, the Applicant is encouraged to consult with the
City Manager, the Building Official, and any other pertinent City Staff in order for the Applicant to become familiar
with the City's development regulations and the development process.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 259/414
2. At the Pre-Application Conference, the Applicant may be represented by his/her land planner, engineer, surveyor,
or other qualified professional.
3. Pre-Application Conferences are encouraged for all Plats Applications, see Sections 5.03 through 5.08.
C. Vested Rights Waiver.
1. The Pre-Application Conference is optional and allows for the exchange of information between the Applicant
and City Staff. It is not the intent of the Pre-Application Conference to bind either the Applicant or City Staff to items
discussed at the meeting.
2. For consideration of a vested right to develop under previously adopted regulations, refer to section 8.03
Subdivision Vested Rights Petition.
3. A Pre-Application Conference shall not commence or be held unless the property owner, or Applicant as an
authorized agent of the property owner, signs a Vested Rights Waiver stating that no vested rights shall accrue from
any discussion that occurs at the Pre-Application Conference.
4. If the property owner does not sign a Vested Rights Waiver, no such conference shall be held, and the property
owner or his/her representatives may proceed with his/her Application submittal as he/she so chooses.
5. A copy of the Vested Rights Waiver form shall be available in the office of the City Manager.
4.04. Applicability, Completeness, and Expiration
A. Applicability. The following procedures shall apply to any subdivision related plan or Application that is required by the
City and is submitted in accordance with this Subdivision Ordinance.
B. Determination of Completeness for Subdivision Related Applications. Every required Application shall be subject to a
determination of completeness by the Responsible Official for processing the Application.
1. Acceptance Standards. The Application shall only be accepted by the Responsible Official for processing when it
is accompanied by all documents required by, and prepared in accordance with, the requirements of this Subdivision
Ordinance. A typographical error shall not, by itself, constitute an incomplete Application.
2. Acceptance Procedures. A determination of completeness of an Application shall be conducted in accordance
with the following procedures:
a. A determination of completeness shall be made by the Responsible Official not later than the tenth (10th)
business day, unless otherwise specified, after the Official Vesting Date.
b. If the submitted Application is incomplete, then the Applicant shall be notified in writing not later than the
tenth (10th) business day after the Official Vesting Date.
i. Such notice shall be served by depositing it in the U.S. Postal Service, or by electronic mail
transmission, before the tenth (10th) business day following submission of the Application.
ii. The notification shall specify the documents or other information needed to complete the Application,
and shall state the date the Application will expire (see subsection 4.04.E Expiration of a Subdivision
Related Application - Before Approval Decision) if the documents or other information are not provided to
the City.
c. An Application shall be deemed complete on the eleventh (11th) business day after the Application has been
received if notice is not served in accordance with subsection 4.04.B.2.b (above).
d. If the Application is determined to be complete, the Application shall be processed as prescribed by this
Subdivision Ordinance.
3. Acceptance shall not Constitute Compliance. A determination of completeness shall not constitute a
determination of compliance with the substantive requirements of this Subdivision Ordinance.
4. Acceptance shall not Guarantee Approval. There is no implied intent or guarantee that an accepted and completed
Application will be approved, if after the Application is deemed complete, it is determined that the Application does
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 260/414
not comply with this Subdivision Ordinance.
C. Resubmittal after Notification of Incompleteness.
1. If the Application is resubmitted after a notification of incompleteness, the Application shall be processed upon
receipt of the resubmittal.
2. The statutory 30-day time frame for Plat approvals shall begin on the date of the resubmittal.
3. To the extent that the information or documents submitted is not sufficient to enable the Decision Maker to apply
the criteria for approval, the Application may be denied on such grounds.
D. Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action. The City Manager shall be the Responsible Official to approve a Waiver of Right to 30-
Day Action.
1. Request. An Applicant may submit in writing a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action.
2. Received.
a. If the Applicant is requesting a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action, the Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action
must be received by the City Manager on or before the seventh (7th) calendar day prior to the Planning and
Zoning Commission meeting at which action would have to be taken (based on the 30-day requirement in State
law) on the Application.
b. Waiver requests that are not received by that day shall not be considered properly submitted, and action
shall be taken on the Application at such meeting as scheduled.
3. Requirements Maintained.
a. Submission of a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action, and acceptance of such waiver by the City as part of an
Application, shall not be deemed in any way a waiver to any requirement within this Subdivision Ordinance.
b. A waiver from requirements herein is a separate and distinct process (see section 8.01 Petition for
Subdivision Waiver).
E. Expiration of a Subdivision Related Application - Before Approval Decision. Pursuant to Texas Local Government Code
Chapter 245, a subdivision related Application shall automatically expire (ending all vesting claims) at the close of business on
the forty-fifth (45th) calendar day after the Application's Official Vesting Date, if:
1. The Applicant fails to provide documents or other information necessary to comply with the City's technical
requirements relating to the form and content of the permit Application;
2. The City provides to the Applicant, not later than the tenth (10th) business day after the date the Application is
filed, written notice that specifies the necessary documents or other information, and the date the Application will
expire if the documents or other information is not provided; and
3. The Applicant fails to provide the specified documents or other information necessary to comply with the City's
requirements relating to the Application within the time provided in the notification.
F. Vesting Begins on the Official Vesting Date. An Application shall be vested into the standards of the Subdivision Ordinance
in effect at the time of the Application's Official Vesting Date.
G. Right to 30-Day Action for Plats Applications Begins on the Official Submission Date. The statutory 30-day time frame for
Plat approvals, established by TLGC 212, shall commence on the Official Submission Date.
4.05. Processing, Action, and Notification Following Subdivision Application Decision
A. Action by the Responsible Official.
1. The Responsible Official for an Application shall initiate internal (i.e., City) review and assessment of the
Application following the City's development review procedures.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 261/414
2. The Responsible Official shall also, to the extent possible, work with the Applicant by advising on and
communicating revisions that may be necessary to bring the Application into compliance with City regulations in
preparation for consideration by the appropriate Decision Maker.
B. Decision. The Decision Maker for the Application shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the Application within
the time period prescribed by these Subdivision Regulations.
C. Conditions Attached. The Decision Maker may attach such conditions to the approval of an Application as are reasonably
necessary to ensure compliance with all applicable requirements of these Subdivision Regulations, in which case the Application
is considered denied until the conditions are satisfied.
D. Notification of Decision. The City shall send written notice within fourteen (14) calendar days following the date of a
decision on an Application.
E. Notification of Appeal. Whenever [an] appeal is taken from a final decision on an Application following a public hearing, or
whenever the City is to consider revocation of an Application that was obtained following a public hearing, personal notice of the
appeal or revocation proceeding shall be provided to the Applicant.
4.06. Public Hearings for Replat and Plat Vacation Applications
A. Setting the Hearing.
1. When the Responsible Official determines that an Application is complete and that a public hearing is required by
these Subdivision Regulations (see section 5.06.B (Replat) and section 5.08.C (Plat Vacation)) or by State law, the
official shall cause notice of such hearing to be prepared and made in accordance with State law.
2. The time set for the public hearing shall conform to the time periods required by Sections 5.06.B (Replat) and
5.08.C (Plat Vacation) in these Subdivision Regulations and by State law.
B. Conduct of the Hearing.
1. The public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with State law.
2. Any person may appear at the public hearing and submit evidence, either individually or as a representative of an
organization.
3. Each person who appears at a public hearing shall state his or her name and address, and if appearing on behalf of
an organization or Applicant, state the name of the organization or Applicant for the record.
C. Record of Proceedings. The board/commission conducting the hearing shall record the proceedings using standard
municipal recordkeeping procedures.
D. Notice Requirements for Replats.
1. Published Notice for Replats.
a. Whenever published notice of a public hearing for a Replat approval before the Council and/or Commission
is required under State law, or this Subdivision Ordinance, the Responsible Official shall cause notice to be
published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City before the fifteenth (15th) calendar day before the
date set for the required hearing.
b. The notice shall set forth the date, time, place and purpose of the hearing, and identification of the subject
property, where the decision concerns an individual tract or parcel of land.
2. Personal Notice for Replats.
a. Notification by Mail. Whenever personal notice of a Replat public hearing is required by State law or this
Subdivision Ordinance before the Council and/or Commission, the City Manager shall cause notice to be sent by
regular mail before the tenth (10th) calendar day before the hearing date to the following:
i. Each owner of real property located within the original subdivision within two hundred feet (200') of
the exterior boundary of the property in question, and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 262/414
ii. The Applicant and/or property owner.
b. Notification Details. The notice shall set forth the name of the Applicant, the time, place and purpose of the
hearing, identification of the subject property.
i. Notice shall be sent to each owner indicated on the most recently approved municipal tax roll for land
inside the City limits, and, when required by State law, on the most recently approved County tax roll for
land in the extraterritorial jurisdiction. For recently annexed land that is not included on the most recently
approved City or County tax roll, notice may be given by publication.
ii. Notice shall be considered served by depositing the notice, properly addressed and first-class postage
prepaid, in the United States mail.
E. Notice Requirements for Plat Vacations.
1. Published notice of the public hearing on the Plat Vacation Application shall be given in accordance with [this]
section 4.06 Public Hearings for Replat and Plat Vacation Applications and State law.
2. The hearing shall be conducted by the City Council.
4.07. Amendments and Expiration to Approved Subdivision Applications
A. Amendments/Revisions to an Approved Subdivision Application. Unless another method is expressly provided by these
Subdivision Regulations, any request to amend or revise an approved Application shall be considered a new Application, which
must be decided in accordance with the procedures governing the original Application and the standards in effect at the time such
new Application is filed with the City.
B. Expiration of an Approved Subdivision Application.
1. Subdivision Application Expiration - Two (2) Years. Unless otherwise expressly provided by these Subdivision
Regulations, an approved Application shall automatically expire two (2) years following the approval date of the
Application (see section 6.01.G Expiration Date for Construction Plans for expiration of Construction Plans), and shall
become null and void, and all activities under the Application thereafter shall be deemed in violation of these
Subdivision Regulations, if:
a. The Applicant fails to satisfy any condition that was imposed by these Subdivision Regulations or as part of
the approval of the Application or that was made under the terms of any Development Agreement, within the
time limits established for satisfaction of such condition or term; or
b. The Applicant fails to submit a subsequent complete Application required by these Subdivision Regulations
within the time so required; or
c. A Development Agreement (section 6.05 Development Agreements and Security for Completion) is not
approved for the development.
2. Applications with No Time Limit. If no time limit for satisfaction of conditions is specified in the decision on the
Application or in the regulations governing, the time shall be presumed to be two (2) years following the date the
Application was approved.
3. Applications with Vested Right. Unless a different date is determined pursuant to and upon review of a vested
rights petition, an Application approved prior to the effective date of these Subdivision Regulations shall expire in
accordance with the terms of the regulations in effect at the time the Application was filed.
C. Effect of Expiration.
1. Upon the expiration of an approved Application, all previously approved Applications for the same land shall
also expire on the expiration date if the filing of an Application was required to avoid expiration for the previously
approved Application(s).
2. Thereafter, a new Application must be submitted for consideration and approval subject to regulations in effect at
the time the new Application is filed.
Section 5. Platting Requirements
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 263/414
5.01. General Subdivision and Platting Procedures
A. Plats Required for Land Subdivision. A Filing Plat or Minor Plat shall be approved prior to any land division that is subject
to these regulations and prior to commencement of any new development.
B. Replats and Amending Plats.
1. Replat. A Replat, in accordance with State law, and the provisions of Section 5.06 Replat shall be required any
time a platted, recorded lot is further divided or expanded, thereby changing the boundary and dimensions of the
property.
2. Amending Plat. In the case of minor revisions to recorded Plats or lots, an Amending Plat may also be utilized if
in accordance with Section 38-22 [5.07] Amending Plat.
C. Zoning.
1. Conformance with Existing Zoning. All Applications shall be in conformance with the existing zoning on the
property.
2. Request to Rezone First. If an Applicant seeks to amend the zoning for the property, the request to rezone the
land shall be submitted and approved prior to acceptance of an Application for filing of a plat, unless as otherwise
provided below.
a. The Applicant may request approval from the City Manager to submit an Application simultaneous with the
zoning change request, in which case the Application for the zoning amendment shall be acted upon first,
provided that the Application is accompanied by a properly executed Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action (due to
the more lengthy time frame necessary to advertise and process zoning Applications).
b. In the event that the requested zoning amendment is denied, the Plat Application shall also be rejected or
denied.
3. Zoning Ordinance Site Plan Approval. Where Site Plan approval is required by the Zoning Ordinance prior to
development, no Application for a Filing Plat approval shall be accepted for filing until a Site Plan has been approved
for the land subject to the proposed Plat.
5.02. Pre-Application Conference
See section 4.03 Pre-Application Conference.
5.03. Vesting Plat
A. Purpose. The purpose of a Vesting Plat shall be to determine the general layout of the subdivision, the adequacy of public
facilities needed to serve the intended development, and the overall compliance of the land division with applicable requirements
of these Subdivision Regulations.
B. Applicability. No subdivision of land shall be allowed without proper submittal, approval, and adoption of a Vesting Plat.
C. Exceptions.
1. A Vesting Plat is not required when a Minor Plat is submitted (refer to section 5.05 Minor Plat).
2. A Filing Plat in accordance with section 5.04 Filing Plat, along with Construction Plans in accordance with
section 6.01 Construction Plans, may be submitted in lieu of a Vesting Plat if a Development Agreement and
appropriate surety (see section 6.05 Development Agreements and Security for Completion) are submitted along with
the Application.
D. Accompanying Applications.
1. Preliminary and Other Types of Plans. An Application for a Vesting Plat shall be accompanied by the following:
a. Preliminary Drainage Plan (Section 7.14.I);
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 264/414
b. Preliminary Stormwater Management Plan (Section 7.14.J);
c. Preliminary Utility Plan (Section 7.12.C); and
d. Other plans if deemed necessary for thorough review by the City Manager, such as a Planned Development
Master Plan.
Approval of each shall be separate and in accordance with this section 5.03 Vesting Plat.
2. Current Title Commitments. The Applicant shall furnish with the Application to the City a current title
commitment issued by a title insurance company authorized to do business in Texas, a title opinion letter from an
attorney licensed to practice in Texas, or some other acceptable proof of ownership, identifying all persons having an
ownership interest in the property subject to the Vesting Plat.
E. Review by City Manager. The City Manager shall:
1. Initiate review of the plat and materials submitted (including the required Preliminary Drainage Plan, Preliminary
Stormwater Management Plan, and Preliminary Utility Plan).
2. Request written comments from the Development Review Committee (DRC), if deemed necessary.
3. Make available Plats and reports to the Commission for review.
4. Upon determination that the Application is ready to be acted upon, schedule the Vesting Plat for consideration on
the agenda of the next available meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
F. Action by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Commission shall:
1. Review the Vesting Plat Application, the findings of the City Manager, and any other information available.
a. From all such information, the Commission shall determine whether the Vesting Plat conforms to these
Subdivision Regulations.
2. Act within thirty (30) calendar days following the Official Submission Date, unless the Applicant submits a
Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action as outlined in section 4.04.D.
a. If no decision is rendered by the Commission within the thirty (30) day period described above or such
longer period as may have been agreed upon, the Vesting Plat, as submitted, shall be deemed approved by the
Commission.
3. Take one of the following actions:
a. Approve the Vesting Plat;
b. Approve the Vesting Plat with conditions, which shall mean that the Vesting Plat shall be considered to have
been approved once such conditions are fulfilled and until the conditions are satisfied, it is considered denied; or
c. Deny the Vesting Plat.
G. Criteria for Approval. The following criteria shall be used by the Commission to determine whether the Application for a
Vesting Plat shall be approved, approved with conditions, or denied:
1. All Plats must be drawn to conform to the zoning regulations currently applicable to the property. If a zoning
change for the property is proposed, then the zoning change must be completed before the approval of any Vesting
Plats/Filing Plats;
2. No Plat or Replat may be approved that leaves a structure located on a remainder lot.
3. The Vesting Plat is consistent with any approved Development Agreement;
4. The proposed provision and configuration of Public Improvements including, but not limited to, roads, water,
wastewater, storm drainage, park facilities, open spaces, habitat restoration, easements and Right-of-Way are adequate
to serve the development, meet applicable standards of these Subdivision Regulations, and conform to the City's
adopted master plans for those facilities;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 265/414
5. The Vesting Plat has been duly reviewed by applicable City staff;
6. The Vesting Plat conforms to design requirements and construction standards as set forth in the Engineering
Standards Manual;
7. The Vesting Plat is consistent with the adopted Comprehensive Plan, except where application of the Plan may
conflict with State law;
8. The proposed development represented on the Vesting Plat does not endanger public health, safety or welfare;
and
9. The Vesting Plat conforms to the City Manager's subdivision Application checklists.
H. Effect of Approval.
1. Approval of a Vesting Plat shall allow the Applicant to proceed with the development and platting process by
submitting Construction Plans (section 6.01) and a Filing Plat (section 5.04).
2. Approval of the Vesting Plat shall be deemed general approval of the subdivision's layout only, and shall not
constitute approval or acceptance of Construction Plans or a Filing Plat.
I. Expiration.
1. Two-Year Validity.
a. The approval of a Vesting Plat shall remain in effect for a period of two (2) years following the date of
approval, during which period the Applicant shall submit and receive approval for Construction Plans and a
Filing Plat for the land area shown on the Vesting Plat.
b. If Construction Plans and a Filing Plat Application have not been approved within the two (2) year period,
the Vesting Plat shall expire.
2. Relationship to Construction Plans. A Vesting Plat shall remain valid for the period of time in which approved
Construction Plans are valid (section 6.01.G. Expiration Date for Construction Plans).
3. Action on Filing Plat. Should a Filing Plat Application be submitted within the two (2) year period, but not be
acted upon by the Commission within the two (2) year period, the Vesting Plat shall expire unless an extension is
granted as provided in subsection 5.03.J Vesting Plat Extension.
4. Void If Not Extended. If the Vesting Plat is not extended as provided in subsection 5.03.J Vesting Plat Extension,
it shall expire and shall become null and void.
J. Vesting Plat Extension. A Vesting Plat may be extended for a period not to exceed one (1) year beyond the Vesting Plat's
initial expiration date. A request for extension shall be submitted to the City Manager in writing at least thirty (30) calendar days
prior to expiration of the Vesting Plat, and shall include reasons why the Vesting Plat should be extended.
1. Decision by the City Manager.
a. The City Manager will review the extension request and shall approve it, approve it with conditions, or deny
the extension request within thirty (30) calendar days following the Official Vesting Date of the request.
b. Should the City Manager fail to act on an extension request within thirty (30) calendar days, the extension
shall be deemed to be approved.
2. Considerations. In considering an extension, the City Manager shall consider whether the following conditions
exist:
a. A Filing Plat has been submitted and/or approved for any portion of the property shown on the Vesting Plat;
b. Construction Plans have been submitted and/or approved for any portion of the property shown on the
Vesting Plat;
c. Construction is occurring on the subject property;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 266/414
d. The Vesting Plat complies with new ordinances that impact the health, safety and general welfare of the
community; and/or
e. If there is a need for a park, school or other public facility or improvement on the property.
3. Conditions.
a. In granting an extension, the City Manager may impose such conditions as are needed to ensure that the
land will be developed in a timely fashion and that the public interest is served.
b. Any extension may be predicated upon compliance with new development regulations and/or the Applicant
waiving any vested rights.
4. Appeal of Denial for Extension.
a. Appeal of the City Manager's Decision on a Vesting Plat Extension
i. The denial of an extension by the City Manager may be appealed to the Commission.
ii. A written request for such appeal shall be received by the City Manager within fourteen (14) calendar
days following the denial.
iii. The Commission shall hear and consider such an appeal within thirty (30) calendar days following
receipt of the appeal request by the City Manager.
b. Appeal of the Commission's Decision on a Vesting Plat Extension.
i. The denial of an extension by the Commission may be appealed to the City Council.
ii. A written request for such appeal shall be received by the City Manager within fourteen (14) calendar
days following the denial.
iii. The City Council shall hear and consider such an appeal within thirty (30) calendar days following
receipt of the appeal request by the Planning and Development Department.
iv. The decision of the City Council is final.
K. Amendments to Vesting Plats Following Approval.
1. Minor Amendments to Vesting Plats.
a. Minor amendments to the design of the subdivision subject to an approved Vesting Plat may be incorporated
in an Application for approval of a Filing Plat without the necessity of filing a new Application for reapproval of
a Vesting Plat.
b. Minor amendments may only include minor adjustments in street or alley alignments, lengths and paving
details, and minor adjustments to lot lines that:
i. Do not result in creation of additional lots or any nonconforming lots (such as to zoning standards),
and
ii. Are consistent with approved prior Applications.
2. Major Amendments to Vesting Plats. All other proposed changes to the design of the subdivision subject to an
approved Vesting Plat shall be deemed major amendments that require submittal and approval of a new Application
for approval of a Vesting Plat (including new fees, new reviews, new Official Vesting Date, new Official Submission
Date etc.) before approval of Construction Plans and/or a Filing Plat.
3. Determination of Minor or Major Amendment. The City Manager shall make a determination of whether
proposed amendments are deemed to be minor or major, thereby requiring new submittal of a Vesting Plat.
5.04. Filing Plat
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 267/414
A. Purpose. The purpose of a Filing Plat is to ensure:
1. That the proposed Subdivision and development of the land is consistent with all standards of these Subdivision
Regulations pertaining to the adequacy of public facilities,
2. That Public Improvements to serve the Subdivision or development have been installed and accepted by the City,
or that provision for such installation has been made, and
3. That all other City requirements and conditions have been satisfied or provided for to allow the Filing Plat to be
recorded.
B. Applicability. No subdivision of land shall be allowed without proper submittal, approval, and adoption of a Filing Plat.
C. Exceptions. A Filing Plat is not required when a Minor Plat is submitted (refer to section 5.05 Minor Plat).
D. Ownership.
1. The Applicant shall furnish with the Application to the City a current title commitment issued by a title insurance
company authorized to do business in Texas, a title opinion letter from an attorney licensed to practice in Texas, or
some other acceptable proof of ownership, identifying all persons having an ownership interest in the property subject
to the Filing Plat.
2. The Filing Plat shall be signed by each owner, or by the representative of the owners authorized to sign legal
documents for the owners and lienholder, effectively denoting that they are consenting to the platting of the property
and to the dedications and covenants that may be contained in the Filing Plat.
E. Accompanying Applications.
1. An Application for a Filing Plat may be accompanied by Construction Plans if also accompanied by a
Development Agreement and appropriate surety in accordance with section 6.05 Development Agreements and
Security for Completion.
2. Approval of each shall be separate and in accordance with this Section 5.04 Filing Plat and with Section 6.01
Construction Plans.
F. Prior Approved Vesting Plat. The Filing Plat and all accompanying data shall conform to the approved Vesting Plat, or as the
Vesting Plat may have been amended subsequently Section 5.03.K Amendments to Vesting Plats Following Approval, if
applicable, incorporating all conditions imposed or required, if applicable.
G. Review by City Manager. The City Manager shall:
1. Initiate review of the plat and materials submitted,
2. Request written comments from [the] Development Review Committee (DRC), if deemed necessary,
3. Make available Plats and reports to the Commission for review, and
4. Upon determination that the Application is ready to be acted upon, schedule the Filing Plat for consideration on
the agenda of the next available meeting of the Commission.
H. Action by Planning and Zoning Commission. The Commission shall:
1. Review the Filing Plat Application, the findings of the City Manager, and any other information available.
a. From all such information, the Commission shall determine whether the Filing Plat conforms to the
applicable regulations of these Subdivision Regulations.
2. Act within thirty (30) calendar days following the Official Submission Date, unless the Applicant submits a
Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action as outlined in section 4.04.D.
a. If no decision is rendered by the Commission within the thirty (30) day period described above or such
longer period as may have been agreed upon, the Filing Plat, as submitted, shall be deemed to be approved by
the Commission.
3. Take one of the following actions:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 268/414
a. Approve the Filing Plat;
b. Approve the Filing Plat with conditions, which shall mean that the Filing Plat shall be considered to have
been approved once such conditions are fulfilled, and until the conditions are satisfied, it is considered denied; or
c. Deny the Filing Plat.
4. A motion to approve a Filing Plat shall be subject to the following conditions, whether or not stated in the motion
to approve:
a. All required fees shall be paid.
b. All covenants required by ordinances have been reviewed and approved by the City.
c. On-site easements and rights-of-way have been dedicated and filed of record and properly described and
noted on the proposed plat.
d. All required abandonments of public rights-of-way or easements that must be approved by the City Council
and the abandonment ordinance numbers are shown on the plat.
e. Original tax certificates have been presented from each taxing unit with jurisdiction of the real property
showing the current taxes are paid.
I. Filing Plat Criteria for Approval. The following criteria shall be used by the Commission to determine whether the
Application for a Filing Plat shall be approved, approved with conditions, or denied.
1. With Prior Approved Vesting Plat.
a. The Filing Plat conforms to the approved Vesting Plat except for minor amendments that are authorized
under Section 5.03.K Amendments to Vesting Plats Following Approval and that may be approved without the
necessity of revising the approved Vesting Plat;
b. All conditions imposed at the time of approval of the Vesting Plat, as applicable, have been satisfied;
c. The Construction Plans conform to the requirements of Section 6.01 Construction Plans and have been
approved by the City Manager;
d. Where Public Improvements have been installed, the improvements conform to the approved Construction
Plans and have been approved for acceptance by the City Manager;
e. Where the City Manager has authorized Public Improvements to be deferred, a Development Agreement
has been executed and submitted by the property owner in conformity with Section 6 Construction Plans and
Procedures;
f. The final layout of the Subdivision or development meets all standards for adequacy of public facilities
contained in this Subdivision Ordinance;
g. The Plat conforms to design requirements and construction standards as set forth in the Engineering
Standards Manual; and
h. The plat conforms to City Manager's subdivision Application checklists and Subdivision Ordinance
regulations.
2. Without Prior Approved Vesting Plat.
a. The Filing Plat conforms to all criteria for approval of a Vesting Plat;
b. The Construction Plans conform to the requirements of Section 6.01 Construction Plans and have been
approved by the City Manager;
c. A Development Agreement with surety for installation of Public Improvements has been prepared and
executed by the property owner in conformance with Section 6 Construction Plans and Procedures;
d. The final layout of the Subdivision or development meets all standards for adequacy of public facilities
contained in this Subdivision Ordinance; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 269/414
e. The Filing Plat conforms to the City Manager's subdivision Application checklist and Subdivision
Ordinance regulations.
J. Procedures for Filing Plat Recordation upon Approval. The Applicant shall supply to the City Manager the required number
of signed and executed copies of the Filing Plat that will be needed to file the Plat, upon approval, with the County (in the
County's required format) at least seven (7) calendar days prior to the meeting at which it will be considered for approval.
1. General.
a. Signatures. After approval of the Filing Plat, the City Manager shall procure the appropriate City signatures
on the Filing Plat.
b. Recording upon Performance. The Filing Plat shall be recorded after:
i. The Filing Plat is approved by the City;
ii. All required Public Improvements have been completed and accepted by the City or a Development
Agreement has been executed and appropriate surety provided in accordance with Section 6.05
Development Agreements and Security for Completion; and
iii. All County filing requirements are met.
2. Submittal of Filing Plat Where Improvements Installed. Where all required Public Improvements have been
installed prior to recording of the Filing Plat, the Applicant shall meet all requirements in accordance with Section 6
Construction Plans and Procedures.
3. Submittal of Filing Plat Where Improvements Have Not Been Installed. Where some or all required Public
Improvements are not yet completed in connection with an approved Filing Plat, the Applicant shall submit the Filing
Plat as approved, revised to reflect any conditions imposed as part of approval.
4. Update of Proof of Ownership. If there has been any change in ownership since the time of the Proof of
Ownership provided under subsection 5.04.D Ownership (above), the Applicant shall submit a new consent agreement
executed by each owner and lienholder consenting to the platting of the property and the dedications and covenants
contained in the Plat.
K. Effect of Approval. The approval of a Filing Plat:
1. Supersedes any prior approved Vesting Plat for the same land.
2. If applicable, authorizes the Applicant to install any improvements in public Right-of-Way in conformance with
approved Construction Plans and under a Development Agreement (refer to Section 6 Construction Plans and
Procedures).
3. Authorizes the Applicant to seek section 6.03 Construction Release and/or issuance of a Building Permit.
L. Revisions Following Recording/Recordation. Revisions may only be processed and approved as a Replat, Minor Replat, or
Amending Plat, as applicable.
M. Signature Blocks. Unless otherwise modified by the City Manager, the following signature blocks shall be used in
conjunction with the Filing Plat.
1. Certificate of Surveyor.
CERTIFICATE OF SURVEYOR
STATE OF TEXAS §
COUNTY OF GONZALES §
I, the undersigned, a (Licensed Professional Engineer/Registered Professional Surveyor) in the State of Texas,
hereby certify that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made
under my supervision on the ground.
(Engineer's or Surveyor's Seal)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 270/414
____________________________________
Licensed Professional Engineer
or Registered Professional Surveyor
Date
STATE OF TEXAS §
COUNTY OF GONZALES §
BEFORE ME, the undersigned authority, on this day personally appeared, known to me to be the person whose
name is subscribed to the foregoing instrument, and acknowledged to me that he executed the same for the
purposes and considerations therein stated.
Given under my hand and seal of office this _______ day of __________, 20_____.
____________________________________
Notary Public in and for the State of Texas
____________________________________
Type or Print Notary's Name
My Commission Expires:_____________
2. Owner's Statement for Fire Lane Easement.
OWNER'S STATEMENT FOR FIRE LANE EASEMENT
The undersigned covenants and agrees that he/she (they) shall construct upon the fire lane easements, as
dedicated and shown hereon, a fire lane in accordance with the Fire Code and City standards and that he/she
(they) shall maintain the same in a state of good repair at all times in accordance with City Ordinance. The fire
lane easement shall be kept free of obstructions in accordance with the City Ordinance. The maintenance of
pavement in accordance to City Ordinance of the fire lane easements is the responsibility of the owner. The
owner shall identify the fire lane in accordance with City Ordinance. The Chief of Police or his/her duly
authorized representative is hereby authorized to cause such fire lane and utility easements to be maintained free
and unobstructed at all times for fire department and emergency use[.]
Owner (Printed Name): __________________________
Owner (Signature): __________________________
Date: __________________________
3. Owner's Acknowledgement and Dedication.
OWNER'S ACKNOWLEDGEMENT AND DEDICATION
STATE OF TEXAS §
COUNTY OF GONZALES §
I (we), the undersigned, owner(s) of the land shown on this plat within the area described by metes and bounds
as follows:
(Metes and Bounds Description of Boundary)
and designated herein as the _________________ Subdivision to the City of Gonzales, Texas, and whose name
is subscribed hereto, hereby dedicate to the public use forever by fee simple title, free and clear of all liens and
encumbrances, all streets, thoroughfares, alleys, parks, and trails, and to the public use forever easements for
sidewalks, storm drainage facilities, floodways, water mains, wastewater mains and other utilities, and any other
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 271/414
property necessary to serve the plat and to implement the requirements of the platting ordinances, rules, and
regulations thereon shown for the purpose and consideration therein expressed.
Owner (Printed Name): __________________________
Date: __________________________
STATE OF TEXAS §
COUNTY OF GONZALES §
BEFORE ME, the undersigned authority in and for __________ County, Texas, on this day personally appeared
______________________, known to me to be the person and officer whose name is subscribed to the foregoing
instrument and acknowledged to me that he/she is ___________________, and that he/she is authorized to
execute the foregoing instrument for the purposes and consideration therein expressed, and in the capacity
therein stated.
Given under my hand and seal of office this _______ day of __________, 20_____.
____________________________________
Notary Public in and for the State of Texas
____________________________________
Type or Print Notary's Name
My Commission Expires:_____________
4. Lienholder's Ratification of Plat Dedication.
LIENHOLDER'S RATIFICATION OF PLAT DEDICATION
STATE OF TEXAS §
COUNTY OF GONZALES §
Whereas, ______________, acting by and through the undersigned, its duly authorized agent, is the lienholder of
the property described hereon, does hereby ratify all dedications and provisions of this plat as shown.
Lien holder: __________________________
Date: __________________________
STATE OF TEXAS §
COUNTY OF GONZALES §
BEFORE ME, the undersigned authority in and for ______________ County, Texas, on this day personally
appeared _______________________, known to me to be the person and officer whose name is subscribed to
the foregoing instrument and acknowledged to me that he/she is ____________________, and that he/she is
authorized to execute the foregoing instrument for the purposes and consideration therein expressed, and in the
capacity therein stated.
Given under my hand and seal of office this _______ day of __________, 20_____.
____________________________________
Notary Public in and for the State of Texas
____________________________________
Type or Print Notary's Name
My Commission Expires:_____________
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 272/414
5. Certificate of Filing Plat Approval. (For Filing Plats with Required Public Improvements Installed After
Approval.)
CERTIFICATE OF FILING PLAT APPROVAL
(FOR FILING PLATS WITH REQUIRED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS INSTALLED AFTER APPROVAL)
Approved
____________________________________ _____________
Chairman, Planning and Zoning Commission Date
City of Gonzales, Texas
The undersigned, the City Secretary of the City of Gonzales, Texas, hereby certifies that the foregoing Filing Plat
of the _____________________ Subdivision or Addition to the City of Gonzales was submitted to the Planning
and Zoning Commission on the __________ day of ___________, _________, and the Commission, by formal
action, then and there accepted the Filing Plat and hereby authorizes the developer to proceed with the
construction of public works improvements and infrastructure as indicated on the accompanying construction
plans, and said Commission further authorizes the Chairman of the Planning and Zoning Commission to note the
acceptance thereof by signing his/her name as hereinabove subscribed.
Witness by hand this _________ day of ___________, 20_____.
____________________________________
City Secretary
City of Gonzales, Texas
6. Certificate of Filing Plat Approval. (For Filing Plats with Required Public Improvements Installed Before
Approval.)
CERTIFICATE OF FILING PLAT APPROVAL
(FOR FILING PLATS WITH REQUIRED PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS INSTALLED BEFORE APPROVAL)
Approved
____________________________________ _____________
Chairman, Planning and Zoning Commission Date
City of Gonzales, Texas
The undersigned, the City Secretary of the City of Gonzales, Texas, hereby certifies that the foregoing Filing Plat
of the _____________________ Subdivision or Addition to the City of Gonzales was submitted to the Planning
and Zoning Commission on the __________ day of ___________, _________, and the Commission, by formal
action, then and there accepted the Filing Plat and public works improvements and infrastructure, and said
Commission further authorizes the Chairman of the Planning and Zoning Commission to note the acceptance
thereof by signing his/her name as hereinabove subscribed.
Witness by hand this _________ day of ___________, 20_____.
____________________________________
City Secretary
City of Gonzales, Texas
7. Certificate of Completion and Authorization to File.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION AND AUTHORIZATION TO FILE
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 273/414
Approved
____________________________________ _____________
Chairman, Planning and Zoning Commission Date
City of Gonzales, Texas
The undersigned, the City Secretary and the City of Gonzales, Texas, hereby certifies that the foregoing Filing
Plat of the ____________ Subdivision or Addition to the City of Gonzales was submitted to the Planning and
Zoning Commission on the __________ day of ___________, _________, and the Commission, by formal
action, then and there accepted the fee simple dedication of streets, thoroughfares, alleys, and parks to the public
use forever and dedication of easements for trails, sidewalks, storm drainage facilities, floodways, water mains,
wastewater mains and other utilities, and any other property necessary to serve the plat and to implement the
requirements of the platting ordinances, rules, and regulations as shown and set forth in and upon said plat, that
the public works and infrastructure improvements have been completed in accordance with the construction
plans, have been tested and have been accepted by the City, that the Filing Plat is now acceptable for filing with
Gonzales County and said Commission further authorized the Chairman of the Planning and Zoning
Commission to note the acceptance thereof by signing his/her name as hereinabove subscribed.
Witness by hand this _________ day of ___________, 20_____.
____________________________________
City Secretary
City of Gonzales, Texas
5.05. Minor Plat
A. Purpose. The purpose of a Minor Plat is to simplify divisions of land under certain circumstances as outlined in Texas Local
Government Code Section 212.0065.
B. Applicability. An Application for approval of a Minor Plat may be filed only in accordance with State law, when all of the
following circumstances apply:
1. The proposed division results in four (4) or fewer lots;
2. All lots in the proposed Subdivision front onto an existing public street and the construction or extension of a
street or alley is not required to meet the requirements of these Subdivision Regulations; and
3. Except for Right-of-Way widening and easements, the plat does not require the extension of any municipal
facilities to serve any lot within the Subdivision.
C. Application Requirements. The requirements for the submittal of a Minor Plat shall be determined by the City Manager.
D. Additional Requirements. To be considered a Minor Plat it must also meet the following requirements:
1. The proposed Plat shall be for the Subdivision of one lot into four (4) or fewer lots.
2. The person, firm or corporation owning the property shall not have more than one Minor Plat approved during
any twelve (12) month period.
3. The person, firm or corporation presenting the proposed Plat shall dedicate all easements and Right-of-Way as
required elsewhere in these regulations.
4. Private wells and private wastewater treatment facilities that meet the current City health standards shall be
considered adequate when existing public water and wastewater lines are not within one hundred (100) feet of the
proposed Plat.
E. Minor Plat Criteria for Approval. The following criteria shall be used to determine whether the Application for a Minor Plat
shall be approved, approved with conditions, or denied:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 274/414
1. The Minor Plat is consistent with all zoning requirements for the property (if applicable), any approved
Development Agreement (if applicable), and all other requirements of these Subdivision Regulations that apply to the
Plat;
2. All lots to be created by the plat already are adequately served by improved public street access and by all
required City utilities and services and by alleys, if applicable;
3. The ownership, maintenance and allowed uses of all designated easements have been stated on the Minor Plat;
and
4. Except for Right-of-Way widening and easements, the plat does not require the extension of any municipal
facilities to serve any lot within the subdivision.
F. Review by City Manager. The City Manager shall:
1. Initiate review of the plat and materials submitted; and
2. Request written comments from the Development Review Committee (DRC), if deemed necessary.
G. Action by City Manager. The City Manager shall:
1. Determine whether the Minor Plat meets the regulations of these Subdivision Regulations.
2. Act within thirty (30) calendar days following the Official Submission Date, unless the Applicant submits a
Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action as outlined in section 4.04.D.
a. If no decision is rendered by the City Manager, or if the City Manager has not deferred the Application to
the Planning and Zoning Commission for decision, within the thirty (30) day period described above or such
longer period as may have been agreed upon, the Minor Plat, as submitted, shall be deemed to be approved.
3. Take one of the following actions:
a. Approve the Minor Plat;
b. Approve the Minor Plat with conditions, which shall mean that the Minor Plat shall be considered to have
been approved once such conditions are fulfilled and until the conditions are satisfied, it is considered denied; or
c. Defer the Minor Plat to the Planning and Zoning Commission for consideration prior to expiration of the
required 30-day approval period unless a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action is submitted in accordance with
section 4.04.D.
H. Deferral of Decision of a Minor Plat Application.
1. Deferral to the Commission of a Minor Plat Decision. Per subsection 5.05.G.3.c (above), if the City Manager
defers the Minor Plat Application to the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Commission shall consider the
Application at a regular meeting no later than thirty (30) calendar days after the date on which the City Manager
deferred the Application to the Commission. The Commission shall, upon simple majority vote, take one of the
following actions:
a. Approve the Minor Plat;
b. Approve the Minor Plat with conditions, which shall mean that the Minor Plat shall be considered to have
been approved once such conditions are fulfilled and until the conditions are satisfied, it is considered denied; or
c. Deny the Minor Plat.
I. Procedures for Minor Plat Recordation Following Approval. The procedures for recordation of a Minor Plat shall be the same
as the procedures for recordation of a Filing Plat, as outlined in Section 5.04.J Procedures for Filing Plat Recordation upon
Approval.
J. Revisions Following Approval. Revisions may only be processed and approved as a Replat, Minor Replat, or Amending Plat,
as applicable.
5.06. Replat
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 275/414
A. Purpose and Applicability.
1. A Replat of all or a portion of a recorded Plat may be approved in accordance with State law without vacation of
the recorded Plat, if the Replat:
a. Is signed and acknowledged by only the owners of the property being replatted;
b. Is approved after a public hearing; and
c. Does not propose to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions previously incorporated in the recorded
Plat.
2. A Replat shall be subject to approval by the Commission.
B. General Notice and Public Hearing Requirements.
1. Published notice of the public hearings on the Replat Application shall be given in accordance with section 4.06
Public Hearings for Replat and Plat Vacation Applications, if applicable.
a. See specific notice and hearing requirements for “Certain” Replats in subsection 5.06.F.2 Notice and Public
Hearing Requirements for “Certain” Replats (below).
2. A public hearing shall be conducted by the Commission on all Replat Applications.
C. Application. The Application for a Replat of a Subdivision shall meet all Application requirements of a Filing Plat. The
Applicant shall acknowledge that the Replat will not amend or remove any covenants or restrictions previously incorporated in
the recorded Plat.
D. Partial Replat Application. If a Replat is submitted for only a portion of a previously platted subdivision, the Replat must
reference the previous Subdivision name and recording information, and must state on the Replat the specific lots which are being
changed along with a detailed “Purpose for Replat” statement.
E. Criteria for Approval.
1. The Replat of the Subdivision shall meet all review and approval criteria for a Filing Plat.
2. The Replat document shall be prepared by a Registered Professional Land Surveyor.
F. Additional Requirements for “Certain” Replats.
1. Applicability of “Certain” Replats. Pursuant to Texas Local Government Code Chapter 212.015, a Replat without
vacation of the preceding Plat must conform to the requirements of this subsection 5.06.F Additional Requirements for
“Certain” Replats if:
a. During the preceding five (5) years, any of the area to be replatted was limited by an interim or permanent
zoning classification to residential use for not more than two (2) residential units per lot; or
b. Any lot in the preceding plat was limited by deed restrictions to residential use for not more than two (2)
residential units per lot.
2. Notice and Public Hearing Requirements for “Certain” Replats. Notice of the required public hearing shall be
given before the fifteenth (15th) calendar day before the date of the hearing by:
a. Publication in an official newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in the applicable City or
unincorporated area (as applicable) in which the proposed Replat property is located; and
b. Written notice, with a copy of Section 212.015(c) of the Texas Local Government Code (as amended)
attached, forwarded by the City to the owners of lots that are in the original Subdivision and that are within two
hundred feet (200') of the lots to be replatted, as indicated on the most recently approved municipal tax roll or in
the case of a Subdivision within the ETJ, the most recently approved applicable county tax roll of the property
upon which the Replat is requested. The written notice may be delivered by depositing the notice, properly
addressed with postage prepaid, in a post office or postal depository within the boundaries of the City.
3. Protest.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 276/414
a. If the Replat Application is accompanied by a waiver petition (per section 8.01 Petition for Subdivision
Waiver) and is protested in accordance with this subsection 5.06.F.3 Protest), approval of the Replat shall require
the affirmative vote of at least three-fourths of the voting members of the Commission present at the meeting.
b. For a legal protest, written instruments signed by the owners of at least twenty percent (20%) of the area of
the lots or land immediately adjoining the area covered by the Replat Application and extending two hundred
feet (200') from that area, but within the original Subdivision, must be filed with the Commission prior to the
close of the public hearing.
c. The area of streets and alleys shall be included in the area computations.
G. Replat Review and Approval.
1. Replat. The review and approval processes for a Replat shall be the same as the review and approval processes
for a Filing Plat (except for the special public hearing and notice requirements described in subsection 5.06.F.2 Notice
and Public Hearing Requirements for “Certain” Replats (above)).
2. Minor Replat.
a. Pursuant to Texas Local Government Code 212.0065, a Replat involving four (4) or fewer lots fronting on
an existing street and not requiring the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities (i.e., a
Minor Replat) may be approved by the City Manager in accordance with this Section 5.06 Replat.
b. Prior to taking action on a proposed Minor Replat, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold at least
one public hearing thereon. Otherwise, the review and approval process shall be the same as section 5.05 Minor
Plat, including:
i. Deferral to the Commission of a Minor Replat Decision.
H. Effect. Upon approval of the Application, the Replat may be recorded and is controlling over the previously recorded Plat
for the portion replatted.
5.07. Amending Plat
A. Purpose. The purpose of an Amending Plat shall be to provide an expeditious means of making minor revisions to a
recorded Plat consistent with provisions of State law.
B. Applicability. The procedures for an Amending Plat shall apply only if the sole purpose of the Amending Plat is to achieve
one or more of the following Purposes:
1. Error Corrections or Administrative Adjustments.
a. Correct an error in a course or distance shown on the preceding Plat.
b. Add a course or distance that was omitted on the preceding Plat.
c. Correct an error in a real property description shown on the preceding Plat.
d. Indicate monuments set after the death, disability or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor
responsible for setting monuments.
e. Show the location or character of a monument that has been changed in location or character or that is
shown incorrectly as to location or character on the preceding Plat.
f. Correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or omission previously approved by the municipal
authority responsible for approving Plats, including lot numbers, acreage, street names, and identification of
adjacent recorded Plats.
g. Correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between two adjacent lots if:
i. Both lot owners join in the Application for amending the Plat;
ii. Neither lot is abolished;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 277/414
iii. The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; and
iv. The amendment does not have a material adverse effect on the property rights of the other owners in
the Plat.
2. Relocate Lot Lines.
a. Relocate a lot line to eliminate an inadvertent encroachment of a building or other improvement on a lot line
or easement.
b. Relocate one or more Lot Lines between one or more adjacent lots if:
i. The owners of all those lots join in the Application for amending the Plat;
ii. The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions; and
iii. The amendment does not increase the number of lots.
3. Replatting.
a. Make necessary changes to the preceding Plat to create six (6) or fewer lots in the Subdivision or a part of
the Subdivision covered by the preceding Plat if:
i. The changes do not affect applicable zoning and other regulations of the municipality;
ii. The changes do not attempt to amend or remove any covenants or restrictions; and
iii. The area covered by the changes is located in an area that the City has approved, after a public
hearing, as a residential improvement area (per State law, TLGC 212.016).
b. Replat one or more lots fronting on an existing street if:
i. The owners of all those lots join in the Application for amending the Plat;
ii. The amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions;
iii. The amendment does not increase the number of lots; and
iv. The amendment does not create or require the creation of a new street or make necessary the
extension of municipal facilities.
C. Certificates of Correction. Certificates of Correction are prohibited.
D. Notice Not Required. The approval and issuance of an Amending Plat shall not require notice, hearing or approval of other
lot owners.
E. Review by City Manager. The City Manager shall:
1. Initiate review of the plat and materials submitted; and
2. Request written comments from the Development Review Committee (DRC), if deemed necessary.
F. Action by City Manager. The City Manager shall:
1. Determine whether the Amending Plat meets the regulations of these Subdivision Regulations.
2. Act within thirty (30) calendar days following the Official Submission Date, unless the Applicant submits a
Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action as outlined in section 4.04.D.
3. Take one of the following actions:
a. Approve the Amending Plat;
b. Approve the Amending Plat with conditions, which shall mean that the Amending Plat shall be considered
to have been approved once such conditions are fulfilled and until the conditions are satisfied, it is considered
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 278/414
denied; or
c. Defer the Amending Plat to the Commission for consideration prior to expiration of the required 30-day
approval period unless a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action is submitted in accordance with section 4.04.D.
G. Deferral of Decision on an Amending Plat Application.
1. Deferral to the Commission of an Amending Plat Decision. Per subsection 5.07.F.3.c (above), if the City
Manager defers the Amending Plat Application to the Planning and Zoning Commission, the Commission shall
consider the Application at a regular meeting no later than thirty (30) calendar days after the date on which the City
Manager deferred the Application to the Commission. The Commission shall, upon simple majority vote, take one of
the following actions:
a. Approve the Amending Plat;
b. Approve the Amending Plat with conditions, which shall mean that the Amending Plat shall be considered
to have been approved once such conditions are fulfilled and until the conditions are satisfied, it is considered
denied; or
c. Deny the Amending Plat.
5.08. Plat Vacation
A. Purpose. The purpose of a Plat Vacation is to provide an expeditious means of vacating a recorded Plat in its entirety,
consistent with provisions of State law.
B. Initiation of a Plat Vacation.
1. By Property Owner. The property owner of the tract covered by a Plat may submit an Application to vacate the
Plat at any time before any lot in the Plat is sold.
2. By All Lot Owners. If lots in the Plat have been sold, an Application to vacate the plat must be submitted by all
the owners of lots in the Plat.
3. City Council. If the City Council, on its own motion, determines that the Plat should be vacated in the interest of
and to protect the public's health, safety and welfare; and:
a. No lots within the approved Plat have been sold within five (5) years following the date that the Filing Plat
was approved by the City; or
b. The property owner has breached a Development Agreement, and the City is unable to obtain funds with
which to complete construction of Public Improvements, except that the vacation shall apply only to lots owned
by the property owner or its successor; or
c. The Plat has been of record for more than five (5) years, and the City Council determines that the further
sale of lots within the Subdivision or addition presents a threat to public health, safety and welfare, except that
the vacation shall apply only to lots owned by the property owner or its successors.
C. Notice. Published notice of the public hearing shall be given in accordance with section 4.06 Public Hearings for Replat and
Plat Vacation Applications.
D. Review and Recommendation by the City Manager. The City Manager shall:
1. Initiate review of the Plat Vacation Application and materials submitted;
2. Request written comments from the Development Review Committee (DRC), if deemed necessary; and
3. Recommend action on Plat Vacation to the City Council.
E. Action by the City Council. The City Council shall:
1. Review the Plat Vacation Application, the findings of the City Manager, and any other information available.
From all such information, the City Council shall make a finding as to whether or not the plat should be vacated.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 279/414
2. Take one of the following actions:
a. Approve the Plat Vacation;
b. Approve the Plat Vacation with conditions, which shall mean that the Plat Vacation shall be considered to
have been approved once such conditions are fulfilled and until the conditions are satisfied, it is considered
denied; or
c. Deny the Plat Vacation.
3. The City Council's decision on a Plat Vacation shall be final.
F. Procedures for Recordation Following Approval.
1. If the City Council adopts a resolution vacating a plat in whole, it shall record a copy of the resolution in the
County Clerk's Office.
2. If the City Council adopts a resolution vacating a plat in part, it shall cause a revised Filing Plat to be recorded
along with the resolution which shows that portion of the original plat that has been vacated and that portion that has
not been vacated.
G. Effect.
1. On the execution and recording of the vacating instrument, the previously filed plat shall have no effect.
a. Regardless of the City Council's action on the petition, the property owner(s) or Developer will have no
right to a refund of any monies, fees or charges paid to the City nor to the return of any property or consideration
dedicated or delivered to the City except as may have previously been agreed to by the City Council.
2. The Plat is vacated when a signed, acknowledged instrument declaring the Plat vacated is approved and recorded
in the manner prescribed for the original Plat.
3. The City Council, at its discretion, shall have the right to retain all or specific portions of road Right-of-Way or
easements shown on the Plat being considered for vacation. However, the City Council shall consider Plat Vacation
upon satisfactory conveyance of easements and/or Right-of-Way in a separate legal document using forms provided by
the City Attorney's office.
5.09. Development Plat
A. Purpose. The purpose of a Development Plat is to ensure the adequacy of public facilities needed to serve the intended
development and the overall compliance of such development with applicable requirements of this Subdivision Ordinance.
B. Authority. This Section 5.09 is adopted pursuant to the Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 212, Subchapter B, Sections
212.041 through 212.050, as amended.
C. Applicability.
1. To Whom Development Plat Regulations Apply. Any person who proposes the development of a tract of land
located within the limits or in the Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) of the City must have a Development Plat of the
tract prepared in accordance with LGC 212 Subchapter B and this Subdivision Ordinance, unless a Development Plat
is not required in accordance with subsection 5.09.D Exceptions (below).
2. The Term “Development.” For purposes of this Section 5.09, “development” means the new construction or the
enlargement of any exterior dimension of any building, structure, or improvement.
3. Cases Where Development Plat Regulations Apply. Development Plat regulations shall apply to any land lying
within the City or within its Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) in the following circumstances:
a. The development of any tract of land that has not been platted or replatted prior to the effective date of this
Subdivision Ordinance, unless expressly exempted herein; or
b. The development of any tract of land for which the property owner claims an exemption from the City's
subdivision requirements, including requirements to replat, which exemption is not expressly provided for in
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 280/414
subsection 5.09.D Exceptions (below); or
c. The development of any tract of land for which the only access is a private easement or street; or
d. The division of any tract of land resulting in parcels or lots each of which is greater than five (5) acres in
size, and where no public improvement is proposed to be dedicated or constructed.
D. Exceptions. A Development Plat is not required:
1. When the land has an approved Filing Plat, Minor Plat, Replat, or Amending Plat; or
2. For bona fide agricultural activities; or
3. For construction of agricultural accessory structures and related development activities.
E. Prohibition on Development. No development shall commence, nor shall any building permit, utility connection permit,
electrical connection permit or similar permit be issued for any development or land division subject to this Section 5.09 until a
Development Plat has been approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission and submitted to the City for filing at the County.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section, the City shall not require building permits or otherwise enforce the City's Building
Code in the City's Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ) in relation to any Development Plat required by this Subdivision Ordinance.
F. Required Information for all Development Plat Applicants. All Applications shall be submitted with the required information
as stated on the Application Form. Information required shall be the same as required for a Filing Plat. In addition to this
information, a Development Plat shall:
1. Be prepared by a Registered Professional Land Surveyor as a boundary survey;
2. Clearly show the boundary of the Development Plat;
3. Clearly show each existing or proposed building, structure, or improvement or proposed modification of the
external configuration of the building, structure, or improvement involving a change of the building, structure, or
improvement;
4. Clearly show each easement and right-of-way within or abutting the boundary of the surveyed property;
5. Clearly show the dimensions of each street, sidewalk, alley, square, park, or other part of the property intended to
be dedicated to public use or for the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting on or adjacent to the street, sidewalk,
alley, square, park, or other part; and
6. Be accompanied by the required number of copies of the Development Plat, a completed Application Form, the
required submission fee (per the City's current Fee Schedule), and a certificate or some other form of verification from
the County appraisal district showing that all taxes have been paid on the subject property and that no delinquent taxes
exist against the property.
G. Accompanying Applications. An Application for a Development Plat may be accompanied by an application for rezoning
approval. The rezoning Application shall be decided first. The applicant must execute a Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action (see
Section 4.04.D) that is mandated by the State for general approval of Plats, including Development Plat approval.
H. Development Plat Criteria for Approval. The following criteria shall be used to determine whether the application for a
Development Plat shall be approved, approved with conditions, or denied.
1. The proposed development conforms to all City plans, including but not limited to, the Comprehensive Plan,
utility plans and applicable capital improvements plans;
2. The proposed development conforms to the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance (if located within the City's
corporate limits) and this Subdivision Ordinance;
3. The proposed development is adequately served by public facilities and services, in conformance with City
regulations;
4. Appropriate agreements for acceptance and use of public dedications to serve the development have been
tendered; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 281/414
5. The proposed development conforms to the design and improvement standards contained in this Subdivision
Ordinance, Engineering Standards Manual, and any other applicable codes or ordinances of the City that are related to
development of a land parcel.
I. Development Plat Review and Approval. The review and approval procedure for a Development Plat shall be the same as the
review and approval processes for a Filing Plat (see Section 5.04 Filing Plat).
J. Effect. Upon approval, the Development Plat shall be filed at the County by the City in the same manner as prescribed for a
Filing Plat (see Section 5.04 Filing Plat).
Section 6. Construction Plans and Procedures
6.01. Construction Plans
A. Purpose. To require that Public Improvements be installed to serve a development in accordance with all Subdivision
Regulations.
B. Submitting Plans.
1. Plans shall be submitted in accordance with the City Manager's requirements, as provided in the Development
Application Handbook. Incomplete Construction Plans shall not be accepted and such plans shall be returned to the
Applicant.
2. In addition to the requisite number of hard copies, Construction Plans shall also be prepared and submitted
electronically oriented in Texas State Plane grid coordinates (U.S. Survey Foot), Grid North, South Central Zone
(4204), NAD 83, at an elevation datum based on NAVD 88.
C. Responsible Official and Decision Authority for Construction Plans.
1. Review and Approval Action. The City Manager shall be the Responsible Official for review and approval of
Construction Plans.
2. Outside Review. If an outside consultant is contracted to review Construction Plans, then the Applicant shall
reimburse the City for the review fees.
3. Decision Maker Options. In this capacity, therefore, the City Manager shall approve, approve subject to
modifications, or deny the Construction Plans.
D. Approval Required and Timing of Construction. Construction Plans must be approved in accordance with this Section 6
Construction Plans and Procedures prior to the approval and/or recordation of the Filing Plat, unless otherwise stated within this
Subdivision Ordinance.
E. Criteria for Approval. The City Manager shall approve Construction Plans if:
1. The Construction Plans are consistent with the approved Vesting Plat, or the proposed Filing Plat; and
2. The Construction Plans conform to the subject property's zoning and any planned development (PD) standards
(including zoning design standards), and to the standards for adequate public facilities, contained in these Subdivision
Regulations and all other applicable City codes.
F. Effect. Approval of Construction Plans authorizes the Applicant to:
1. Schedule a Pre-Construction Meeting (section 6.02); and
2. Apply for Construction Release (section 6.03).
G. Expiration Date for Construction Plans. The approval of Construction Plans shall remain in effect for a period of one (1)
year from the date of approval, or for the duration of construction of the project, provided that progress toward completion of the
project continues to be demonstrated, unless the Construction Plans are extended in accordance with subsection 6.01.H Extension
of Construction Plans beyond Expiration Date.
H. Extension of Construction Plans beyond Expiration Date.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 282/414
1. General.
a. Construction Plans may be extended for a period of six (6) additional months beyond the expiration date.
b. A request must be made in writing to the City Manager for such extension prior to expiration of the plans,
and shall include reasons why the plans should be extended.
2. Decision by the City Manager.
a. The City Manager will review the extension request, and shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny
the extension request within thirty (30) calendar days following the date of the extension request.
b. Should the City Manager fail to act on an extension request within thirty (30) calendar days, the extension
shall be deemed to be approved.
3. Consideration. The City Manager shall extend Construction Plans approval for a period of six (6) additional
months beyond the expiration date if:
a. A Filing Plat has been submitted, approved or filed of record for any portion of the property shown on the
Construction Plans;
b. The Construction Plans comply with new ordinances (i.e., ordinances that have been adopted after approval
of the original Construction Plans) that impact the health, safety and general welfare of the City;
c. Demonstrable forward progress has been made to proceed with construction or required improvements; and
d. A Development Agreement (Section 6.05 Development Agreements and Security for Completion), if
applicable, is still valid and in full effect.
4. Conditions. In granting an extension, the City Manager may impose such conditions as are needed to ensure that
the land will be developed in a timely fashion and that the public interest is served. Any extension may be predicated
upon compliance with new development regulations and/or the Applicant waiving any vested rights.
5. Total Extension. A second six (6) month extension may be requested using the same process outlined above.
Figure 10: Construction Plan Process
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 283/414
6.02. Pre-Construction Meeting
A. Requirement.
1. The Applicant(s) shall attend a Pre-Construction Meeting with the City Manager following the approval of
Construction Plans and prior to commencement of any construction on the property.
2. The City Manager shall require three (3) business days to schedule a Pre-Construction Meeting.
B. Purpose.
1. Discussion of Procedures. The purpose of the Pre-Construction Meeting is to discuss administrative,
communication, and operating procedures for project construction prior to Construction Release or issuance of a
Building Permit.
2. Review of Criteria. A list of typical inspection items, procedures, and acceptance criteria for items in public
Right-of-Way and easements will also be furnished to the Applicant.
C. Notice. The Applicant shall receive written notice from the City Manager that Construction Plans have been approved and
that the project is eligible for a Pre-Construction Meeting.
D. Effect.
1. Following the Pre-Construction Meeting and upon approval of the Construction Plans and full compliance with
all pre-construction requirements, the City Manager shall authorize Construction Release, allowing the Applicant to
commence with construction of the project.
2. The Applicant may also be issued a Building Permit, if appropriate, provided that a Building Permit Application
has been submitted and approved and all other Building Permit requirements have also been met.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 284/414
6.03. Construction Release
1. Requirements for a Construction Release.
a. Upon approval of the Vesting Plat and/or the Construction Plans, receipt of all documentation (e.g., insurance
information, bonds, etc.) and fees, and after the Pre-Construction Meeting with City staff and a franchise utility
representative, the City Manager shall release the plans for construction if all City requirements pertaining to
construction have been met.
b. The Construction Release shall remain in effect for a period of one (1) year from the date of issuance, or for the
duration of construction of the project, provided that progress toward completion of the project continues to be
demonstrated.
2. Construction Release Expiration and Extension. Expiration, and possible extension, of the Construction Release shall be the
same as for the Construction Plans (see Sections 6.01.G and 6.01.H).
6.04. Timing of Public Improvements
A. Completion Prior to Filing Plat Approval and Recordation.
1. Completion of all required Public Improvements, in accordance with the approved Vesting Plat and the approved
Construction Plans, shall occur prior to Filing Plat approval and recordation.
2. A Filing Plat shall not be accepted for filing, nor shall it be considered for approval, prior to completion of such
improvements except as provided in subsection 6.04.B Completion after Filing Plat Approval and Recordation).
B. Completion after Filing Plat Approval and Recordation.
1. The City Manager, upon written request by the Applicant, may allow construction of Public Improvements after
Filing Plat approval and recordation.
2. Postponement of Public Improvements shall be conditioned on execution of a Development Agreement and
provision of security, in accordance with Section 6.05 Development Agreements and Security for Completion.
3. It shall be at the City Manager's discretion to determine whether postponing construction of Public Improvements
until after Filing Plat approval and recordation is appropriate, and therefore, whether financial guarantee is acceptable
through a Development Agreement.
4. All construction of the required Public Improvements shall be completed within two (2) years of construction
release, an extension may be granted by the city council for up to one (1) year.
C. Deferral of Obligation. The City Manager may defer the Developer's obligation to construct, Public Improvements to serve a
new development upon execution of a Development Agreement and upon provision of adequate security (see Section 6.05
Development Agreements and Security for Completion).
D. Phased Development. If the development is being platted and constructed in phases, improvements shall be completed as
platted areas are approved and phases are constructed.
E. Easements for Utility Providers.
1. The Applicant is responsible for contacting all utility providers prior to beginning construction, and for securing
all necessary easements for same prior to Filing Plat approval and recordation.
2. The Applicant's engineer shall provide the City Manager with written certification that all necessary easements
are secured for the various utility providers, and such easements shall be shown on the Filing Plat with the recording
information for each.
F. Off-Site Easements.
1. All necessary off-site easements required for installation of required off-site Public Improvements to serve the
development shall be acquired by the Applicant prior to the Pre-Construction Meeting (see Section 6.02 Pre-
Construction Meeting), or prior to approval and recordation of the Filing Plat, whichever occurs first.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 285/414
2. Off-site easements shall be conveyed and recorded at the County by an instrument approved by the City.
3. If the property on which the off-site easement is required has been platted, a separate instrument shall be required
to dedicate the easement.
4. The Applicant shall be responsible for the acquisition of all required off-site easements. If the Applicant is unable
to acquire the necessary off-site easements, the Applicant may request assistance from the City. The Applicant shall
provide the City with easement or Right-of-Way survey documents and exhibits, documentation, including evidence of
a reasonable offer made to the affected property owner. Upon receiving a written request for assistance, the City may
secure the services of a Right-of-Way agent, at the developer's cost. The City may secure easements through eminent
domain proceedings, should the City deem it appropriate.
5. The Applicant shall reimburse the City for the costs of acquiring the necessary easements including but not
limited to attorney's fees and costs.
6.05. Development Agreements and Security for Completion
A. Development Agreements.
1. When any of the required Public Improvements will be postponed and constructed after Filing Plat approval and
recordation, the Filing Plat shall not be accepted for filing, nor shall it be approved, unless and until the Applicant
enters into a Development Agreement of standardized format approved by the City by which the Applicant:
a. Will complete the improvements;
b. Warrants the improvements for a period of two (2) years following final acceptance by the City;
c. Provides a maintenance bond in the amount of one hundred and ten percent (110%) of the costs of the
improvements for such period to ensure the repair and replacement of all defects due to faulty materials and
workmanship that appear within the two-year period following date of acceptance;
d. Provides provisions (e.g., performance and payment bonds) for securing the obligations of the agreement
consistent with subsection 6.05.D Security for Completion of Improvements (below); and
e. Outlines other terms and conditions as are agreed to by the Applicant and the City, or as may be required by
these Subdivision Regulations, including insurance requirements and covenants to comply with other ordinances
of the City.
2. Exception.
a. If escrow is provided in agreement with subsection 6.05.E (Escrow Policies and Procedures) (below), then
the requirement for a Development Agreement may be waived by the City Manager.
B. Development Agreements to Run with the Land.
1. The Development Agreement shall provide that the covenants and other items of agreement contained therein
shall run with the land and shall bind all successors, heirs and assignees of the Applicant.
2. All existing owners shall be required to execute the agreement or provide written consent to the covenants and
other items contained in the agreement.
C. Development Agreement Decision by the City Council.
1. The City Manager shall review all Development Agreements.
2. The City Manager shall recommend an action to the City Council for all Development Agreements.
3. The Development Agreement shall require the approval of the City Council. The City Council may approve,
approve with conditions, or deny a Development Agreement.
a. The City Council may authorize the City Manager to approve specific Development Agreements on behalf
of the City Council. In the event of a disagreement between the City staff and the Subdivider concerning
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 286/414
stipulations of the Development Agreement, the Subdivider may request City Council approval of alternative
provisions.
D. Security for Completion of Improvements.
1. Type of Security.
a. When any of the required Public Improvements will be constructed after approval and recordation of the
Filing Plat, the Applicant shall guarantee proper construction of such postponed improvements and payment of
all claimants supplying labor and materials for the construction of the improvements, in accordance with the
City's standards and with these Subdivision Regulations, by a bond executed by a surety company holding a
license to do business in the State of Texas, and acceptable to the City, on the form provided by the City.
b. The performance and payment bonds shall be approved as to form by the City Manager.
2. Estimated Cost and Security Approval.
a. Security shall be issued in the amount of one hundred and ten percent (110%) of the cost to construct and
complete all required Public Improvements to the City's standards as estimated by the Applicant's professional
engineer, and as approved by the City Manager.
b. Security shall be subject to the review and approval of the City Manager.
c. The Applicant shall reimburse the City for all related legal costs for review (this reimbursement shall be
paid in full prior to filing of the Filing Plat).
E. Escrow Policies and Procedures.
1. Request for Escrow.
a. The City may require or the Developer may petition the City to defer required improvements in exchange
for a deposit of escrow up to an amount not to exceed $15,000.00 for a period of two (2) years from acceptance
of the project. An example may include a timing issue due to pending street improvements by another agency
such as TxDOT.
b. The City Manager may require studies and other information to support the Developer's request to escrow.
2. Escrow Deposit with the City.
a. When the City Manager requires or agrees to accept escrow deposits, the Developer shall deposit in escrow
with the City, at a financial institution to be determined by the City, an amount equal to one hundred and ten
percent (110%) of the total “turnkey” costs including, but not limited to, the design, permitting, acceptance and
inflation costs related to the improvement(s). The full amount of escrow shall remain deposited with the City
until completion of the project.
b. The City Manager shall review and approve the amount, which shall be approved and paid prior to
recordation of the Filing Plat.
3. City Usage of Escrowed Funds. The City may also use the escrowed funds in participation with another entity
(such as TxDOT or the County, etc.) to jointly construct the Public Improvement(s).
4. Termination of Escrow.
a. Escrows, or portions of escrowed amounts, which remain unused after a period of ten (10) years following
the date of such payment shall, upon written request, be returned to the Developer.
b. Such return of escrowed funds does not remove any obligations of the Developer for construction of the
required improvement(s).
5. Refund. If all or a portion of a street or other type of Public Improvement for which escrow is deposited is
constructed by a party other than the City, the remaining unused escrowed funds, upon written request shall be
refunded to the Developer after completion and City acceptance of the street or Public Improvement. The City shall
require thirty (30) days from the request to process the refund.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 287/414
6. Interest on Escrowed Funds. When escrowed funds are returned or refunded to the escrowing Developer, the City
shall retain all of the interest accrued by the funds.
7. Escrow Fee Agreement. The City Manager, at his/her discretion, may require an escrow fee agreement be
executed.
6.06. Inspection, Maintenance, and Acceptance of Public Improvements
A. Inspection of Public Improvements.
1. Timing and Contact.
a. The City Manager shall inspect the construction of improvements while in progress, as well as upon
completion.
b. The Applicant, or Applicant's contractor, shall maintain contact with the City Manager during construction
of improvements.
2. Conformance with Construction Plans.
a. Construction shall be in accordance with the approved Construction Plans.
b. Any significant change in design required during construction shall be made by the Applicant's engineer,
and shall be subject to approval by the City Manager.
3. Corrections to Improvements. If the City Manager finds, upon inspection, that any of the required Public
Improvements have not been constructed properly and in accordance with the approved Construction Plans, the
Applicant shall be responsible for completing and/or correcting the Public Improvements to bring such into
compliance.
B. Public Works Inspection Fees.
1. Fee Standards.
a. The Developer shall be charged an inspection fee in an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the total
construction cost of the public infrastructure, storm drains, and streets in each Subdivision or development.
b. Inspections shall be conducted during normal business hours, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through
Friday.
2. Cost for Construction.
a. The Developer shall submit to the City a cost for construction of the public infrastructure to be dedicated to
the City and upon which the maintenance bond and inspection fees will be based.
b. The cost of construction shall be reviewed and approved by the City Manager.
3. Inspection During Nonbusiness Hours.
a. Public works inspections may be conducted at times other than normal working hours with prior approval.
b. A minimum forty-eight (48) hour notice must be given and the Developer shall reimburse the City a
minimum of four (4) hours at the current overtime rate per hour upon receipt of an invoice.
C. Maintenance during Construction. The Applicant shall maintain all required Public Improvements during construction of the
development.
D. Submission of Record Drawings.
1. The City shall not accept dedication of required Public Improvements until the Applicant's engineer has certified
to the City Manager, through submission of detailed Record Drawings, which have been approved by the City, of the
project and filed copies of any off-site easements that the Public Improvements have been built in accordance with the
approved Construction Plans.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 288/414
2. Each record drawing sheet shall show all changes made in the Construction Plans during construction, and on
each sheet, there shall be a “record” stamp bearing the signature of the engineer and date, which shall be maintained
by the City Manager.
3. Digital files of all the Record Drawings shall be submitted by the Applicant and received by the City.
E. Acceptance or Rejection of Improvements by the City Manager.
1. Responsible Official. The City Manager shall be responsible for inspecting all required Public Improvements
shown in the Construction Plans, and for accepting completed subdivision improvements intended for dedication to
the City.
2. Final Inspection. After completion of all improvements, franchise utilities, grading, and erosion control, the City
Manager and other designated representatives (as applicable) will perform a final inspection before recommending
acceptance of the improvements via a Letter of Final Acceptance.
3. Letter of Final Acceptance. If all improvements are completed, inspected, tested (if applicable), and determined
by the City to be in conformance with Subdivision Ordinance regulations and with the City's design standards and all
inspection fees have been paid, then the City Manager shall issue a Letter of Final Acceptance to the Applicant,
thereby notifying the Applicant of the City's approval of improvements and acceptance or future acceptance subject to
approval of a Filing Plat.
a. In cases where a Filing Plat has not been approved, the Letter of Final Acceptance will indicate that the
City's acceptance of the Public Improvements will occur concurrently with the approval of a Filing Plat.
b. In cases where a Filing Plat has already been approved with a Development Agreement, then the Letter of
Final Acceptance will indicate that the City's acceptance of the Public Improvements.
4. Meaning of Acceptance. Acceptance of the Improvements shall mean that the Applicant has transferred all rights
to all the Public Improvements to the City for title, use, and maintenance.
5. Rejection. The City Manager shall reject those Improvements that fail to comply with the City's standards and
specifications. The City shall enforce the guarantee provided by agreement(s).
F. Disclaimer.
1. Approval of a Vesting Plat or Filing Plat by the City Council, or Construction Plans by the City Manager, shall
not constitute acceptance of any of the Public Improvements required to serve the Subdivision or development.
2. No Public Improvements shall be accepted for dedication by the City except in accordance with this Section.
G. Maintenance Bond.
1. Per requirements established and maintained by the City Manager, the Developer shall furnish maintenance
bonds to the City for Public Improvements for a period of two (2) years from the date of acceptance by the City (see
subsection 6.06.E.3 Letter of Final Acceptance for acceptance dates (above)).
2. The maintenance bond shall be a good and sufficient bond executed by a corporate surety approved by the City in
an amount equal to the total cost of said improvements and guaranteeing their maintenance for two (2) years from the
date of Filing Plat approval.
Section 7. Subdivision Design Standards
7.01. Minimum Standards
A. Basis for Standards. The standards established within this Subdivision Ordinance for dedication and construction of public
facilities and infrastructure are based upon engineering studies and historical usages and demands by different categories of
development.
B. Minimum Level of Service Necessary. This Subdivision Ordinance identifies certain minimum requirements and sizes for
utilities, roadways, parks, and other facilities that have been determined by the City Council to be necessary in order to provide
the minimum level of service necessary to protect or promote the public health, safety, and welfare and to ensure the quality of
life currently enjoyed by the citizens.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 289/414
1. It is the intent of this Subdivision Ordinance that no development occur until, and unless, these minimum levels
of service are met.
2. Therefore, each Subdivision in the City shall be required to dedicate, construct or upgrade required facilities and
infrastructure to a capacity that meets these minimum levels.
C. Minimum Standards for Public Infrastructure.
1. For each category of public infrastructure, a minimum standard of infrastructure has been developed based upon
historic studies and construction projects of the City and other cities.
2. The minimum standards take into consideration the soil standards, the topographic configuration of the City, the
use and impact analyses in developing standard specifications.
3. The minimum standards reflect the minimum level of facilities that can be built to meet the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens.
7.02. Adequate Public Facilities
A. Services Required. Land proposed for development in the City and in the City's extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) must be
served adequately by essential public facilities and services, including water facilities, wastewater facilities, roadway and
pedestrian facilities, and drainage facilities.
B. Approval Timing. Land shall not be approved for platting or development unless and until adequate public facilities
necessary to serve the development exist or provision has been made for the facilities, whether the facilities are to be located
within the property being developed or off site.
7.03. Conformance to Plans and Codes
A. Public Improvements Conform to Plan and Codes.
1. Design and construction of Public Improvements must conform to the standards, criteria, and requirements of the
following, as they may from time to time be amended by those responsible for their promulgation.
a. The Transportation Plan;
b. The Drainage Design Manual;
c. The Standard Construction Details;
d. The Texas Uniform Traffic-Control Device Manual;
e. Generally accepted Standard Specifications for Construction of Public Works;
f. American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials Design Manual;
g. Texas Health Code;
h. Engineering Standards Manual (ESM);
i. Texas Water Code;
j. Master Drainage Plans;
k. Floodplain Ordinance;
l. Erosion Control Ordinance;
m. Stormwater Management Plan; and
n. All other codes and ordinances of the City[.]
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 290/414
2. If the construction of Public Improvements is not completed within two (2) years from the Vesting Plat approval
date, then the infrastructure must be redesigned using the most current criteria.
7.04. Access Management
A. Intent of Access Management. It is the intent of this section to:
1. Prohibit the indiscriminate location and spacing of driveways while maintaining reasonable vehicular access to
and from the public street system;
2. Reduce conflicting turning movements and congestion and thereby reducing vehicular accidents; and
3. Maintain and enhance a positive image for the attraction of new, high-quality developments in the City.
B. Applicability.
1. A person commits an offense if the person constructs, reconstructs, relocates or in any way alters the design or
operation of any driveway without first obtaining a building permit issued by the Building Official.
2. No driveway shall be allowed or permitted if, in the determination of the City Manager, it is detrimental to the
public health, safety and welfare.
C. Street Section Classifications. Street section classifications shall be defined in accordance with the Transportation element
of the City's Comprehensive Plan.
D. Traffic Impact Analysis.
1. A Traffic Impact Analysis (TIA) may be required at the time of Vesting Plat submittal for all site developments
on an Arterial Street or Collector Street.
a. Threshold for a Traffic Impact Analysis:
i. Residentially zoned Subdivisions that are projected to generate more than 1,000 new average daily
trips (ADT) shall require a TIA.
ii. Office zoned Subdivisions that are projected to generate more than 500 new average daily trips (ADT)
shall require a TIA.
iii. Retail/commercial zoned Subdivisions that are projected to generate more than 2,500 new average
daily trips (ADT) shall require a TIA.
iv. Industrial zoned Subdivisions that are projected to generate more than 500 new average daily trips
(ADT) shall require a TIA.
b. Calculation of the ADT for Subdivisions:
i. For calculating the ADT for residential zoned Subdivisions, a housing unit shall be considered to
generate 10 vehicle trips a day.
ii. For calculating the ADT for office zoned Subdivisions, a 50,000 square foot building shall be
considered to generate 500 ADT. In order to anticipated if a 50,000 square foot building can be built on a
lot, the lot size with all setbacks and other related area zoning standards should be applied.
iii. For calculating the ADT for retail zoned Subdivisions, a 60,000 square foot building shall be
considered to generate 2,500 ADT. In order to anticipated if a 60,000 square foot building can be built on a
lot, the lot size with all setbacks and other related area zoning standards should be applied.
iv. For calculating the ADT for industrial zoned Subdivisions, a 75,000 square foot building shall be
considered to generate 500 ADT. In order to anticipated if a 75,000 square foot building can be built on a
lot, the lot size with all setbacks and other related area zoning standards should be applied.
2. A Minor Subdivision Waiver may be granted by the City Manager if the roadway is fully built.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 291/414
E. Common Access.
1. Lots with sufficient frontage to safely meet the design requirements below may be permitted their own
driveways.
2. A Common Access Easement may be required between adjacent lots fronting on any street section in order to
minimize the total number of access points along those streets and to facilitate traffic flow between lots.
3. Common Access Easement.
a. The use of common driveways shall require the dedication of a joint-use private access easement on each
affected property.
b. Said dedication shall be provided on the Filing Plat of the subject properties, or be filed by separate
instrument approved by the City Attorney with the County with a copy forwarded to the City.
c. The Plat shall state that the easement shall be maintained by the property owner.
d. The Common Access Easement shall encompass the entire width of the planned driveway plus an additional
width of one foot on both sides of the drive.
Figure 11: Example of Common Driveway (For Illustrative Purposes Only)
F. Driveway Design for State-Maintained Roadways Criteria. The following standards shall be followed in the design and
construction of driveways. The values in the following tables represent minimum standards to be applied in designing and
locating driveways on City streets.
1. Driveway Dimensions and Spacing. The following Table 6: Dimensions for Driveways along State-Maintained
Roadways indicates the minimum dimensional values required for driveways along State-maintained roadways.
Table 6: Dimensions for Driveways along State-Maintained Roadways
Criteria Commercial and
Multifamily
Driveway
Service
Driveway
Driveway Throat Width 24–40 Feet 30–48 Feet
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 292/414
Driveway Curb Radius 20–30 Feet 25–40 Feet
Minimum Distance to Intersection
Along Roadway
300 Feet 300 Feet
Minimum Driveway Spacing Along
Roadway
300 Feet 300 Feet
Notes:
1 The requirements for Driveway Throat Width and Driveway Curb Radius are for standard
undivided two-way operation and may be varied by the City Manager if traffic volumes,
truck usage, common driveways, and other factors warrant such.
2 Distance measured from the proposed driveway face of curb to the face of the nearest
curb of the nearest driveway. Minimum spacing does not implicitly determine the number
of driveways allowed. See subsection 7.04.F.2 (below) for additional restrictions on
driveway locations along State-maintained roadways.
3 Distance measured from the intersection street nearest face of curb to the face of the curb
of the proposed driveway. See subsection 7.04.F.2 (below) for additional restrictions on
driveway locations along State-maintained roadways.
4 Service driveway spacing may be reduced to 150 feet if the ingress/egress volume is less
than 50 vehicles per day and if the service driveway is a secondary driveway ancillary to
a commercial driveway within the same development. See subsection 7.04.F.2 (below)
below for additional restrictions on driveway locations along State-maintained roadways.
5 Driveway spacing may be reduced to 250 feet if the driveway is right-in/right-out only.
Appropriate signage, pavement markings, and traffic-control devices must be provided to
limit turning movements to right-in/right-out.
2. Additional Design Requirements.
a. Plans for all work within State Right-of-Way shall be submitted to the City Manager.
b. A driveway permit from TXDOT shall be acquired prior to Vesting Plat approval. Driveways shall be in
accordance with TXDOT standards.
c. Deceleration Lane.
i. When the turning volume for a driveway exceeds 60 vehicles per hour during the peak hour, a
deceleration lane shall be provided on highways with a posted speed of 40 mph or less.
ii. When the turning volume for a driveway exceeds 50 vehicles per hour during the peak hour, a
deceleration lane shall be provided on highways with a posted speed of 45 mph or greater.
G. Driveway Design for City-Maintained Roadways. The following standards shall be followed in the design and construction
of driveways. The values in the following tables represent minimum standards to be applied in designing and locating driveways
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 293/414
on City streets.
1. Driveway Dimensions and Spacing (City-Maintained Roadways). The following Table 7: Dimensions for
Driveways along City-Maintained Roadways indicates the minimum dimensional values required for driveways along
City-maintained roadways (local streets, collectors, Arterial Streets).
Table 7: Dimensions for Driveways along City-Maintained Roadways
Criteria Street Classification
Commercial and
Multifamily
Driveway
Service
Driveway
Driveway Throat Width
Arterial Streets 24–40 Feet 30–48 Feet
Collectors 24–40 Feet 30–48 Feet
Minor/Local Streets 24–40 Feet 24–36 Feet
Driveway Curb Radius
Arterial Streets 20–30 Feet 25–30 Feet
Collectors 10–20 Feet 10–20 Feet
Minor/Local Streets 10–20 Feet 10–20 Feet
Minimum Distance to
Intersection Along
Roadway
Arterial Streets 200 Feet 200 Feet
Collectors 150 Feet 150 Feet
Minor/Local Streets 100 Feet 100 Feet
Minimum Centerline
Driveway Spacing
Along Roadway
Arterial Streets 250 Feet 250 Feet
Collectors 150 Feet 150 Feet
Minor/Local Streets 100 Feet 100 Feet
Notes:
1 The requirements for Driveway Throat Width and Driveway Curb Radius are for standard
undivided two-way operation and may be varied by the City Manager if traffic volumes, truck
usage, common driveways, and other factors warrant such.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 294/414
2 Minimum centerline spacing does not implicitly determine the number of driveways allowed.
Driveways served by deceleration lanes may be spaced at closer intervals if approved by the City
Manager.
3 Distance measured from the intersection Right-of-Way line to the centerline of the proposed
driveway.
4 Refer to subsection 7.04.G.2 (below). Commercial, multifamily and service driveways may not be
permitted on local streets.
2. Additional Design Requirements (City-Maintained Roadways).
a. Driveways Prohibited.
i. Commercial, multifamily and service driveways shall not be permitted on local streets unless the tract
or lot has no other public access.
ii. In the event there is no other access to a public street, commercial, multifamily and service driveways
shall be permitted on local streets provided that they meet the design standards in Table 6: Dimensions for
Driveways along State-Maintained Roadways.
b. Deceleration Lanes for Driveways on Arterial Streets Required.
i. When the turning volume for a driveway exceeds 60 vehicles per hour during the peak hour, a
deceleration lane shall be provided on Arterial Streets with a posted speed of 40 mph to 45 mph.
ii. When the turning volume for a driveway exceeds 50 vehicles per hour during the peak hour, a
deceleration lane shall be provided on Arterial Streets with a posted speed greater than 45 mph.
H. Required Internal Storage (Minimum throat Length/Stacking).
1. Minimum Throat Length. The driveway for any multifamily, commercial or industrial property that connects to a
highway, Arterial Street, or collector or local street shall extend onto private property a minimum distance of 15 feet,
but not less than the required front landscape edge width, from the Right-of-Way line before intersecting any internal
circulation drive.
2. Internal Storage (Stacking). Internal storage (stacking) shall be provided on multifamily, commercial or industrial
properties for corresponding driveways in accordance with Table 8: Required Internal Storage for driveways that
provide ingress/egress to parking areas of 20 or greater spaces.
Table 8: Required Internal Storage
Average Number of
Parking Spaces per
Driveway*
Total Number of Parking
Spaces** Minimum Storage
length
20–49 20–49 Landscape edge width
+20'
50–199 50'
200+ 75'
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 295/414
50–199
50–199 75'
200+ 100'
200+ 200+ 100'
Notes:
1 The average number of parking spaces per driveway is calculated by dividing the total
number of parking spaces by the number of commercial and multifamily driveways. (Service
driveways are not included in the calculation.)
2 The total number of parking spaces is the sum of all spaces accessible by a driveway or
driveways both on site and off site. The internal storage shall be separated from parking areas
by a five-foot (5') wide, raised curb island or median. Planting requirements for the island or
median shall be one (1) Small Tree and one (1) five-gallon (5 Gal.) shrub for every fifteen
(15) linear feet. Appropriate signage (e.g. stop, yield, etc.) shall be placed for any vehicular
cross movement or internal circulation that intersects the ingress/egress circulation beyond
the required internal storage.
I. Adequate Sight Distance.
1. Driveways shall be prohibited where adequate sight distance is not available for the established speed limit.
2. Sight distances shall be calculated in accordance with the latest edition of the AASHTO “A Policy on Geometric
Design of Highways and Streets.”
3. If a field inspection indicates that driveway sight distance may be insufficient, the Applicant will be required to
submit vertical and horizontal information prepared by a registered professional engineer to the City Manager that
verifies adequate sight distance is available for the proposed driveway location.
4. For sight triangle requirements, (i.e., visibility triangles), please refer to section 7.07.C. Triangular Sight
Visibility Easements (see also Figure 12: Visibility Triangles).
7.05. Alleys
A. Use of Alleys. During the Vesting Plat approval process, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the authority to
require alleys or reject the use of any proposed alley. Additionally, the Planning and Zoning Commission may approve changes to
the alignment or location of any proposed alley during the Vesting Plat approval process. The Planning and Zoning Commission
shall base its decision on providing reasonable compatibility with surrounding development, providing safe and efficient traffic
movement, and providing areas for infrastructure and city services, such as sanitation services.
B. Standards for Commercial and Industrial Alleys. Alleys in commercial and industrial districts shall be 16 feet in width and
be paved with reinforced concrete.
C. Standards for Residential Alleys. Alleys in all residential areas shall be 12 feet in width and paved with reinforced concrete.
D. Alley Right-of-Way Width and Design.
1. The minimum Right-of-Way width of an alley serving industrial and commercial areas shall be 20 feet.
2. Alleys serving single-family residential areas shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 15 feet.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 296/414
3. Alley turn-outs shall be paved to the property line and shall be at least two (2) feet wider than the alley paving.
4. A uniform transition in alley pavement widths shall be made in a distance of not less than 20 feet.
5. Alleys may be required along the rear lot lines when adjacent to Arterial Streets for rear entrance.
6. See section 7.10.K Street and Alley Requirements for additional requirements.
E. Maximum Alley Length.
1. Maximum alley length between access points to a street shall be 600 feet.
2. A length of more than 600 feet without access to a public street or approved access easement may be approved by
Minor Subdivision Waiver.
F. Alley/Street Intersection - Right Angles. Alleys shall intersect streets at right angles or radially to curved streets.
G. Alley/Street Intersection - Prohibition. Alleys shall not intersect streets that are designated in the Comprehensive Plan as
Arterial Streets.
H. Alley/Street Intersection - Separation. The minimum distance between an alley/street intersection and a street/street
intersection shall be the width of at least one (1) lot.
I. Alleys Intersections or Alley Sharp Angle. In cases where two alleys intersect or turn at a sharp angle, lot corners shall be
platted so that a triangular area of 25' x 25' or greater, is dedicated as part of the alley for the purpose of providing a minimum
radius of 30 feet to the inside edge of the alley paving. For sight visibility safety, no utilities taller than three (3) feet shall be
placed in the triangular area.
J. Radii of the Turn-Outs. The radii of the turn-outs for alleys intersecting Arterial Streets shall be 16 feet and shall be 10 feet at
intersections with all other streets.
K. Alley Fences. Where driveways connect to alleys in commercial, industrial, or residential areas, fences may be constructed
along the rear lot line of any lot to a point within five (5) feet of a point where the driveway would intersect the alley pavement at
90 degrees. Fences are optional.
L. Private Alleys. Private alleys are prohibited.
M. Dead-End Alleys. Dead-end alleys shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities.
7.06. Blocks
A. Block Length Measurement. The length of a block shall be considered to be the distance from property corner to property
corner measured along the property line of the Block Face:
1. Of greatest dimension, or
2. On which the greatest number of lots face.
B. Block Width Measurements. The width of a block shall be considered to be the distance from property corner to property
corner measured along the property line of the block face:
1. Of least dimension, or
2. On which the fewest number of lots face.
C. Block Measurement Factors. The length, width and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to:
1. Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated;
2. Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions;
3. Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic;
4. Limitations of topography; and
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 297/414
5. Compatibility with efficient development of public facilities as established by surrounding developments.
D. Block Design.
1. Intersecting streets shall be provided at such intervals as to serve traffic adequately and to meet existing streets.
2. Where no existing subdivision controls, the block lengths should not exceed 1,200 feet.
3. Where no existing subdivision controls, the blocks should not be less than 500 feet in length. However, in cases
where physical barriers, property ownership, or individual usage creates conditions where it is appropriate that these
standards be varied then, upon approval by the City Manager, the length may be increased or decreased to meet
existing conditions, having due regard for connecting streets, circulation of traffic and public safety.
E. Exceptions.
1. These limits shall be exceeded only upon approval of a Subdivision Waiver.
2. Blocks longer than 600 feet shall be avoided in commercial and industrial districts.
7.07. Easements and Dedications
Easements and fee simple dedication of all property needed for the construction of streets, Arterial Streets, alleys, private
common access easements, sidewalks, storm drainage facilities, floodways, water mains, wastewater mains and other utilities,
retaining walls and any other property necessary to serve the Plat and to implement the requirements of the Subdivision
Ordinance and Engineering Standards Manual shall be provided on Subdivision Plats and maintained by the property owner.
A. Utility Easements.
1. Where not adjacent to a public Right-of-Way, easements at least sixteen (16) feet wide shall be provided for
utility construction, service, and maintenance shall be provided where necessary.
2. Easements accommodating both water and wastewater (sewer) facilities and easements accommodating
both public utilities and franchise utilities shall be at least twenty (20) feet wide.
a. More easements or additional easement width may be required by the Planning and Zoning
Commission if deemed necessary by the City Manager.
3. Easements at least sixteen (16) feet wide for utility construction, service, and maintenance shall be provided
for lots which have frontage along state highways.
4. Easements of at least eight (8) feet in width shall be provided on each side of all rear lot lines and alongside
lot lines, where necessary, for utilities to ensure a total easement width of sixteen (16) feet.
5. Easements having greater width dimensions may also be required along or across lots where engineering
design or special conditions make it necessary for the installation of utilities and drainage facilities outside public
Right-of-Way.
6. The following full statement of restrictions shall be placed in the dedication instrument:
Easements: Any public utility, including the City, shall have the right to move and keep moved all or part
of any building, fences, trees, shrubs, other growths or improvements that in any way endanger or interfere
with the construction, maintenance, or efficiency of its respective systems on any of the easements or
Right-of-Way shown on the Plat (or filed by separate instrument that is associated with said property); and
any public utility, including the City, shall have the right at all times of ingress and egress to and from and
upon said easements for the purpose of construction, reconstruction, inspection, patrolling, maintaining and
adding to or removing all or part of its respective systems without the necessity at any time of procuring
the permission of anyone. Easements shall be maintained by property owners. The City can move trees or
any other improvements and does not have the responsibility to replace them.
B. Fire Lane Easement.
1. Emergency access and fire lane easements shall be provided in locations required by the City and be curbed.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 298/414
2. These easements shall have a minimum width of twenty-four (24) feet and a minimum height clearance of
fourteen (14) feet. Internal drives within parking lots are not required to be curbed.
3. All turns shall have a minimum inside radius of twenty-six (26) feet and a minimum outside radius of 50'.
4. Any emergency access and fire lane easement more than one hundred (100) feet in length shall either
connect at each end to a dedicated public street or private way or be provided with a cul-de-sac having one
hundred (100) feet diameter of paving with an additional distance of ten (10) feet on all sides clear of permanent
structures or other obstructions.
5. These easements shall be maintained by the owner or the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association
and a statement shall appear on the face of the Plat indicating maintenance responsibility.
C. Triangular Sight Visibility Easements.
1. Triangular sight visibility easements shall be required as follows for properties whose zoning falls within
one of the following categories:
a. Residential zoning districts (including all single-family, multifamily, mobile/modular home zoning
districts and planned development districts having a single-family, multifamily or mobile/modular home
use designation):
i. 20' x 20' sight visibility easements on corner lots at the intersection of two streets.
b. Nonresidential zoning districts (including all commercial, industrial and utility districts and planned
development districts having a commercial, industrial or utility use designation):
i. 45' x 45' sight visibility easement on corner lots at the intersection of two streets.
c. Multifamily and nonresidential zoning districts (including all multifamily, commercial, industrial and
utility districts and planned development districts having a commercial, industrial or utility use
designation):
i. 15' x 15' sight visibility easements at the main driveways.
d. All zoning districts (as noted above):
i. 15' x 15' sight visibility easements on corner lots at the intersection of an alley and a street.
Figure 12: Visibility Triangles
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 299/414
2. The following full statement of restrictions shall be placed in the dedication instrument or on the face of the
Plat:
Sight Visibility Restriction: No structure, object, or plant of any type may obstruct vision from a height of
twenty-four (24) inches to a height of ten (10) feet above the top of the curb, including, but not limited to
buildings, fences, walks, signs, trees, shrubs, cars, trucks, etc., in the sight visibility easement as shown on
the Plat. These sight visibility easements will remain in effect until vacated by ordinance adopted by the
City Council and the property replatted.
3. On commercially zoned lots, the preceding triangular sight visibility restrictions may be altered to permit
the placement within the easement area of one single pole sign, not to exceed fourteen (14) inches in diameter,
with every portion of said sign allowing minimum height clearance between it and the ground of ten (10) feet.
D. Drainage Easements.
1. Easements for storm drainage facilities shall be provided at locations containing proposed or existing
drainageways.
2. Storm drainage easements of sixteen (16) feet minimum width shall be provided for existing and proposed
enclosed drainage systems.
a. Easements shall be centered over the systems.
b. Larger easements, where necessary, shall be provided as directed by the City Manager.
3. Where lot to lot drainage occurs, a drainage easement at least ten (10) feet in width shall be provided along
the back and down one side of the downstream property. For information regarding applicable drainage standards
see section 7.14 Drainage and Stormwater, specifically section 7.14.C.1. Lot to Lot Drainage Standards.
4. Storm drainage easements shall be provided for emergency overflow drainageways of sufficient width to
contain within the easement stormwater resulting from a 100-year frequency storm less the amount of
stormwater carried in an enclosed system of a capacity required by the City.
5. Where a Subdivision is bounded by a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream, there shall be provided
a stormwater easement or drainage Right-of-Way conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse, and
of such width to provide for increased drainage from anticipated future upstream developments, plus a minimum
of ten (10) feet on each side.
6. As required by the City, drainage easements shall be dedicated up to the full width of easement necessary to
construct the ultimate drainage facility (culvert, stormwater, channel, etc.) to be constructed within the easement,
including provisions for access ingress and egress by crews and equipment for maintenance purposes.
E. Floodplain Easements.
1. Floodplain easements shall be provided along natural drainageways and lakes or reservoirs.
2. Floodplain easements shall be provided in accordance with the recommendation of the City Manager to
accommodate the 100-year storm drainage flows or the flow of the flood of record, whichever is greater.
3. Floodplain easements shall encompass all areas beneath the water surface elevation of the Base Flood, plus
such additional width as may be required to provide ingress and egress to allow maintenance of the banks and for
the protection of adjacent property, as determined by the City Manager.
4. The following full statement of structures shall be placed in the dedication instrument of the Plat:
Floodplain Easement Restriction: Construction within the floodplain may only occur with the written
approval of the City. A request for construction within the floodplain easement must be accompanied with
detailed engineering plans and studies indicating that no flooding will result, that no obstruction to the
natural flow of water will result; and subject to all owners or the property affected by such construction
becoming a party to the request. Where construction is permitted, all finished floor elevations shall be a
minimum of one (1) foot above the 100-year flood elevation as determined by analyzing the ultimate buildout
conditions of the entire drainage basin.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 300/414
a. Existing creeks, lakes, reservoirs, or drainage channels traversing along or across portions of this
addition, will remain as an open channel at all times and will be maintained by the individual owners of the
lot or lots that are traversed by the drainage courses along or across said lots. The City will not be
responsible for the maintenance and operation of said drainageways or for the control of erosion. Each
property owner shall keep the natural drainage channels traversing his/her property clean and free of debris,
silt, or any substance, which would result in unsanitary conditions. The City shall have the right of ingress
and egress for the purpose of inspection and supervision of maintenance work by the property owner to
alleviate any undesirable conditions, which may occur.
b. The natural drainage channel, as in the case of all natural drainage channels, are subject to stormwater
overflow and natural bank erosion. The City shall not be liable for damages of any nature resulting from
the occurrence of these natural phenomena, nor resulting from a failure of any structure(s) within the
natural drainage channels. The natural drainage channel crossing each lot is shown by the Floodway
easement line as shown on the plat. If a Subdivision alters the horizontal or vertical floodplain, a FEMA
Floodway map revision may be required.
F. Retaining Wall Easements.
1. If in the opinion of the City Manager, the grading plans submitted with the Application for approval of a
Filing Plat indicate a need for the construction of one or more retaining walls, a private retaining wall easement
showing the location of the retaining wall(s) and the no-build zone shall be dedicated and shown on the Vesting
Plat and the Filing Plat.
2. The width of the retaining wall easement shall be 10 feet or the width of the retaining wall, whichever is
greater, plus the width of the no-building zone, as established by the Applicant's structural engineer and
approved by the City Manager.
3. The retaining wall easement shall include a no-building zone extending from the retaining wall on both
sides, within which any additional load from future construction would exceed the design capacity of the
retaining wall.
a. No structure (other than the retaining wall), swimming pool, landscaping, or any other feature which
adds load to the retaining wall, shall be constructed within the no-building zone.
4. A retaining wall easement shall be located entirely on one lot and shall not straddle property lines unless the
wall is constructed within a retaining wall easement dedicated to the Homeowners' or Property Owners'
Association in accordance with subsection 7.07.F.5 (below).
5. The Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association for the subdivision, as applicable, shall be responsible
for maintenance of the retaining wall, and a note shall be included to this effect on the Filing Plat.
G. Needs/Benefits Determination.
1. No dedication otherwise required by this ordinance may be imposed upon a property owner unless the City
determines that the dedication is related to the impact of the proposed development; is roughly proportional to
the needs created by the proposed development; and provides a benefit to the development.
2. An Applicant may appeal a staff recommendation that a dedication be required in accordance with the
provisions of Section 8 Subdivision Relief Procedures.
H. Maintenance of Easement.
1. An area established for public purposes on private property upon which the City shall have the right to
remove and keep removed all or part of any buildings, fences, trees, shrubs, or other improvements or growths
which in any way endanger or interfere with the construction, maintenance, or efficiency of City systems.
2. The City shall at all times have the right of ingress and egress to and from and upon the said easements for
the purpose of constructing, reconstructing, inspecting, patrolling, maintaining, and adding to or removing all or
part of its respective systems without the necessity at any time or procuring the permission of anyone.
3. The property owner shall be responsible for maintaining the easement.
7.08. Homeowners' or Property Owners' Associations
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 301/414
A. Applicability. When a Subdivision contains common areas, common property, Usable Open Space or other improvements
not intended to be dedicated to the City for public use, a Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association shall be created, and the
duties and responsibilities shall be established in a declaration consistent with State laws.
B. Dedication. The common areas shall be shown on the Filing Plat or record Plat along with an adequate form for dedication
thereof. This dedication form shall:
1. Save the title to common area properties for the benefit of the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association;
and
2. Express a definite undertaking by the subdivider to convey the common properties to the Homeowners' or
Property Owners' Association.
C. Membership. A Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association shall be an incorporated nonprofit organization operating
under recorded land declarations through which:
1. Each lot owner in a described land area is automatically a member; and
2. Each lot is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share of the expenses for the Homeowners' or
Property Owners' Association's activities, such as maintenance of common areas, common open spaces or the
provision and upkeep of Usable Open Space and common recreational facilities.
D. Legal Requirements. To ensure the establishment of a permanent Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association, including
its financing and the rights and responsibilities of the homeowners in relation to the use, management and ownership of common
areas or common property, the Subdivision plat, dedication documents, covenants, and other recorded legal agreements must:
1. Legally create an automatic membership, nonprofit Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association;
2. Place title to the common property in the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association or give definite
assurance that it automatically will be so placed within a reasonable, definite time;
3. Appropriately limit the uses of the common property;
4. Give each lot owner the right to the use and enjoyment of the common property;
5. Place responsibility for operation and maintenance of the common property in with the Homeowners' or Property
Owners' Association;
6. Provide for or place an association charge or assessment on each lot in a manner which will ensure sufficient
association funds to maintain the common property or improvements;
7. Give each lot owner voting rights in the association; and
8. Identify the land area within the association's jurisdiction including, but not limited to, the following:
a. The property to be transferred to public agencies;
b. The individual residential lots;
c. The common properties to be transferred by the Developer to the Homeowners' or Property Owners'
Association; and
d. Other parcels.
E. Protective Covenants. Protective covenants shall be developed which, including, but not limited to, shall make the
Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association responsible for the maintenance and operation of all common property, and
include provisions for assessments, to be enforced by lien.
F. Procedure. Prior to filing the Plat, the Subdivider shall:
1. Draft the articles of incorporation of the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association, its bylaws, and the
restrictive covenants;
2. Submit draft articles, bylaws, and covenants to the City Manager for approval;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 302/414
3. After approval (see above), create an incorporated nonprofit corporation;
4. Record approved covenants, at the County Clerk's office, which automatically make every lot owner a member of
the association, give him/her the right to use the common property, and establish his/her voting rights and his/her
obligations to pay assessments;
5. Provide evidence of the recorded articles, bylaws, and the restrictive covenants prior to Filing Plat approval; and
6. Pay attorney fees for document review.
G. Maintenance, Repair or Capital Improvement. Any maintenance, repair or capital improvement effort made to Homeowners'
or Property Owners' Association property or facilities by the City as a result of nonperformance or negligence on the part of the
Association shall be assessed between the various Association members in proportion to the taxable value of their properties.
7.09. Lots
A. Lot Design. Lot design shall provide adequate width, depth, and shape to provide open area, to eliminate overcrowding, and
to be appropriate for the location of the Subdivision for the type of development and use contemplated, and shall meet the
requirements of the Zoning Regulations of the City.
B. Lot Frontage Requirement. Every lot shall have frontage on, and access to, a public street or other approved public access
easement.
C. Lot Frontage Prohibition for SF Lots on Arterial Streets. Lots zoned for single-family use shall not front upon an Arterial
Street as designed in the Comprehensive Plan.
D. Right Angles for Side Lot Lines. All sidelines of lots shall be at approximately right angles to straight street lines and radial
to curved street lines except where a variation to this rule will provide a better street and lot layout. The City Manager may grant
a Minor Subdivision Waiver, if unusual circumstances exist on the subject property or on adjacent property that make it difficult
to comply with this requirement.
E. Lot Width. The width of every lot at the building line shall be equal to or greater than that required by the Zoning
Regulations.
F. Scenarios where Additional Lot Depth is Required. Where a lot in a residential area backs up to a railroad Right-of-Way,
drainage easement, a high-pressure gasoline, oil or gas line, electric transmission lines (69kv or higher), water or wastewater
transmission lines, an Arterial Street, an Industrial, Commercial, or other land use that has a significant change in use from the
residential use of the property, and where no street or alley is provided at the rear of such lot, additional lot depth will be required
per the Zoning Regulations.
G. Double Frontage and Reverse Frontage Lots.
1. Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be prohibited except where essential to provide separation of
residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.
2. Where lots have double frontage, front building setbacks shall be established in accordance with the Zoning
Regulations.
H. Lots with Septic Tanks. In a Subdivision where buildings are to be served by septic tanks, the size of lots shall be
sufficiently large to accommodate adequate drainage fields and to meet the standards set forth by the State of Texas, the County
or any other governmental unit having appropriate jurisdiction.
I. Land Subject to a 100-Year Flood.
1. Any land which, in its natural state, is subject to a 100-year flood or which cannot be properly drained shall not
be subdivided, resubdivided or developed until receipt of evidence that the construction of specific improvements
proposed by the Developer can be expected to yield a usable building site, i.e. Flood Study and FEMA CLOMR
(Conditional Letter of Map Revision).
2. Thereafter, the Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend approval of the Plat; however, building
construction upon such land shall be prohibited until the specific drainage improvements have been planned,
construction completed, and a LOMR (Letter of Map Revision) [has] been received from FEMA.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 303/414
7.10. Streets
A. General.
1. The property owner shall ensure that the Subdivision is served by adequate streets and shall be responsible for the
costs of Right-of-Way and street improvements, in accordance with the following policies and standards.
2. Additional Right-of-Way may be required at some street intersections to accommodate utilities, sidewalks, trafficcontrol
devices and/or sight distances.
B. Design and Construction. Design and construction shall conform to specifications included within these Subdivision
Ordinance regulations as well as those included within the Engineering Standards Manual.
1. The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all proposed streets shall conform to the general
plan of the community, and their relationship shall be considered to that of the existing and planned streets, to
topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the
land to be served by such streets.
2. Where such is not shown in the general plan for the community, the arrangements of streets in a Subdivision
shall:
a. Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal streets in surrounding areas;
b. Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the City to meet a particular situation
where topographical or other conditions make continuation of or conformance to an existing street impracticable;
and
c. Be laid out so that they shall intersect, as nearly as possible, at right angles.
3. Residential streets shall be laid out so that their use by through traffic shall be discouraged.
4. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five feet (125') shall be avoided.
5. Street grades shall be established regarding topography, proposed land-use, and the facilities in the area
surrounding the land to be subdivided.
a. An absolute minimum grade of three tenths percent (0.30%) is required on concrete streets; however, where
it is possible, a grade of five tenths percent (0.50%) shall be provided.
6. Street name markers shall be installed in accordance with the prescribed type currently in use by the Manual on
Uniform Traffic-Control Devices.
a. Street markers and the erection thereof shall be at the expense of the Subdivider.
7. Residential lots less than one (1) acre shall not face Arterial Streets.
8. Driveways or alley pavement cuts shall not be permitted on Arterial Streets.
C. Street Right-of-Way Dedication.
1. Any Subdivider laying out and constructing new streets or whose Subdivision includes any portion of or is
adjacent to an existing street shall dedicate sufficient Right-of-Way in accordance with the following conditions:
a. General Dedication Requirements.
i. All street Right-of-Way dedications shall in the aggregate provide the Right-of-Way widths required
according to street classifications in City Ordinances and be consistent with the City's Comprehensive Plan
or Transportation Plans.
ii. The required alignment of the Right-of-Way shall be determined with respect to property boundaries,
safety, design, topography, and traffic management consideration.
(a) Concerns for safety, sound design principles and orderly development will prevail.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 304/414
(b) Principles of efficient traffic management will be applied in accordance with the City's goals
and objectives as expressed in the current Comprehensive Plan or Transportation Plans.
iii. The appropriate alignment of any street Right-of-Way can only be determined by examining the
property and topographical conditions along the entire length of the street.
(a) In order to provide adequate information to establish an appropriate Right-of-Way alignment
the Developer shall provide property and topographical information for a minimum distance of 200
feet in every direction that the street extends off of the property.
(b) Additional information may be required if, in the opinion of the City, the information provided
indicates conditions that may require additional Right-of-Way consideration.
b. New Streets. New streets shall be provided where there is not an existing street, roadway or passage.
i. Internal Streets. Internal streets shall be designed and provided in accordance with the current City
Ordinances and Engineering/Construction Criteria and be consistent with the City's Comprehensive Plan or
Transportation Plans.
ii. Perimeter Streets.
(a) When a proposed residential or nonresidential Subdivision is developed abutting an existing or
planned Arterial Street or Collector Street, the Developer shall dedicate sufficient Right-of-Way
within the Subdivision.
(b) The Developer shall construct their proportional share of the abutting street and its
appurtenances (such as curbs and gutters, sidewalks, barrier-free ramps, street trees, etc.) to the City's
design standards for that type of street.
(c) The Developer's proportional share of the street construction shall be determined by the City
Manager and shall be roughly proportional to the impact the development causes on the street system.
(d) If the Developer disagrees with the City Manager's determination of rough proportionality, then
the Developer may file a Subdivision Proportionality Appeal.
c. Existing Streets. Streets may currently exist by reasons of Plat, metes and bounds description, general
description or by prescription. If the existing geometrical configuration does not accommodate the current
Comprehensive Plan/Transportation Plan, the City may require the dedication of additional Right-of-Way to
address safety, design, topography, and traffic management considerations.
i. Adjacent to a platted Subdivision: The Right-of-Way dedication shall be based upon the distance from
the platted Subdivision boundary. Reasonable geometric adjustments will be made to accommodate safety,
design, topography, and traffic management considerations.
ii. Along a Right-of-Way described by a metes and bounds or a general written description: The Rightof-
Way dedication shall be based upon the geometric centerline of the Right-of-Way as described.
Reasonable geometric adjustments will be made to accommodate safety, design, topography, and traffic
management considerations. All existing Right-of-Way dedication within the Subdivision shall be
converted from “separate instrument” to a platted Right-of-Way by being a part of the Filing Plat.
iii. Along a prescriptive Right-of-Way: The Right-of-Way dedication shall be based upon the apparent
centerline of the existing pavement or of the travel way if unpaved. Reasonable geometric adjustments will
be made to accommodate safety, design, topography, and traffic management considerations. The
Developer shall indicate on the Vesting Plat and Filing Plat property lines and features which identify
prescriptive Right-of-Way. These features may include fences, borrow ditches, utility lines, drainage
improvements, limits of plowed or improved fields, etc. All existing prescriptive Right-of-Way dedications
within the Subdivision shall be converted from prescriptive to a platted Right-of-Way by being a part of the
Filing Plat.
D. Street Classification Descriptions.
1. Local Street.
a. Distributes traffic to and from residences.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 305/414
b. Short in length, noncontinuous to discourage through traffic.
c. Low-density residential/single family.
2. Collector Street.
a. Carries traffic from local streets to Arterial Streets.
b. Uses served would include medium and high-density residential, limited commercial facilities, some small
offices and as direct access within industrial parks.
3. Arterial Street.
a. Carries traffic from one urban area to another and serves the major activity centers of urbanized areas.
b. Used for longer urban trips and carries a high portion of the total traffic with a minimum of mileage.
E. General Requirements.
1. Streets must be designed in relation to the Comprehensive Plan/Transportation Plan, existing and proposed
streets, the terrain, streams, and other physical conditions.
a. The arrangement of streets must provide for the continuation of streets between adjacent properties when
the continuation is necessary for the safe and efficient movement of traffic and for utility efficiency.
b. The arrangement, character, extent, pavement width, Right-of-Way width, grade and location of each street
shall be considered in its relationship to the Comprehensive Plan, to existing and planned streets, topographical
conditions, public safety and convenience, and its relationship to the proposed uses of land to be served by such
street.
2. Whenever a tract to be subdivided abuts any part of any street so designated on the Comprehensive Plan, or
where a street designated on the Comprehensive Plan crosses any part of the tract to be subdivided, such part of the
proposed public street shall be platted, the Right-of-Way shall be dedicated, and the street shall be constructed by the
Developer, consistent with the location as indicated on the Comprehensive Plan, and to a width consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan and the requirements contained within these regulations.
3. All streets shall be designed to coordinate with existing streets in adjoining Subdivisions.
a. Centerline offsets, where unavoidable, shall be at least one hundred thirty-five (135) feet.
b. Greater centerline offsets as may be required by the City Manager shall be planned where necessary for
traffic safety.
4. Streets shall be named to provide continuity with existing streets.
5. Names of new streets shall not duplicate or cause confusion with the names of existing streets.
6. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets in the Subdivision shall make provision for
the proper projection of streets into such unsubdivided area.
7. Streets should be platted to allow two tiers of lots between streets when possible.
8. The reservation in private ownership of strips of land at the end of proposed or existing streets and intended
solely or primarily for the purpose of controlling access to property not included in the Subdivision shall be
prohibited.
9. Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the reasonable development of the Subdivision in
conformity with the other requirements of these regulations, and where the City finds it will be reasonable to require
the dedication of the other half when the adjoining land is subdivided. The other half of the street shall be platted
within the adjacent tract at the time it is platted.
10. Median openings shall have a minimum offset of at least 125 feet from the centerline of an intersecting street or
alley.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 306/414
11. To ensure adequate access to each Subdivision, there should be at least two (2) planned points of ingress and
egress, except that cul-de-sacs shall be permitted in conformity with subsection 7.10.F Cul-de-Sacs and Dead-End
Streets (below).
a. The City Council may require that more than two access points be constructed if the configuration, number
of lots, or other consideration creates the need for additional access points.
F. Cul-de-Sacs and Dead-End Streets.
1. Cul-de-sacs.
a. A cul-de-sac or dead-end street shall not exceed six hundred (600) feet in length.
b. A cul-de-sac street shall be platted and constructed with a concrete paved cul-de-sac at the closed end
having a turnaround with a minimum outside paving diameter of at least one hundred (100) feet and a minimum
street Right-of-Way diameter of at least one hundred-twenty (120) feet. (See section 7.07.B.4 for supplemental
information.)
2. Dead-End Streets.
a. Dead-end streets are prohibited unless the street design meets the requirements of subsection (1) above or
unless the street is intended to be extended in the future and the dead-end design is only temporary in nature.
b. If a temporary dead-end street is permitted, turnaround pavement meeting the dimensions listed for cul-desacs
in subsection 7.10.F.1 Cul-de-sacs (above) and a temporary turnaround easement meeting the dimensions
listed for the Right-of-Way in subsection 7.10.F.1 shall be provided on the Plat.
i. The portion of the temporary turnaround easement lying outside of the street Right-of-Way shall be
shown as a dotted line on the Filing Plat which shall denote a temporary easement.
In the event that the temporary dead-end street (as approved and shown on the Filing Plat) is extended in
the future, the portions of the temporary turnaround easement shall revert back to the lot(s) abutting the
temporary turnaround easement.
3. Drainage Improvements. Provisions shall be made for adequate storm drainage at the ends of dead-end streets.
4. Barricades.
a. Barricades and other traffic controls shall be installed by the Developer at dead-ends in accordance with
City specifications.
b. Barricades and other traffic controls shall be maintained by the Developer or Homeowners' or Property
Owners' Association.
G. Street Class Requirements.
1. Street layout shall provide for continuation of Collector Streets in areas between Arterial Streets.
2. Local streets shall be extended through the tract to the tract boundary to provide future connection with adjoining
unplatted lands at intervals necessary to facilitate internal vehicular circulation with adjoining unplatted lands.
3. Where single-family uses abut an existing or proposed arterial street, the Plat or dedication instrument will
provide:
a. Lots to side onto the arterial with a nonaccess restriction on the arterial side, or
b. Reverse frontage with screening and containing a nonaccess restriction along the rear property line, or
c. Lots with screened rear alleys, or
d. Other treatment as may be necessary or required for adequate protection of adjoining properties, after taking
into consideration the proposed method of off-street parking and maneuvering which will prevent the necessity
of backing into the arterial street.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 307/414
H. Street Design Criteria. All dedicated streets shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan/Transportation Plan and the following
Table 9: Minimum Street Design Criteria.
Table 9: Minimum Street Design Criteria
Street
Classification
Minimum
Right-of-
Way
Roadway
Width (Back
of Curb to
Back of Curb)
Number
of Lanes
Parking Number of
Parkways and
Width
Median
Width
Sidewalk
Width
Arterial
Street
Figure
13
120' 61' 4 Prohibited Two @ 29.5' None 4'
Collector
Street
Figure
14
55'–60' 41' 2 Limited Two @ 7.5'–10' None 4'
Local Street Figure
15
50' 33' 2 Permitted Two @ 8.5' None 5' or 6'
Notes:
1 Depending upon the nature and impact of the proposed development, additional Right-of-Way will be required at most
intersections and may be required at high-volume driveways to provide left and right turn lanes to maintain traffic
volume capacities through the intersections. Also, additional utility easements may be required beyond the Right-of-
Way.
2 If provided, the minimum width of a median adjacent to a left turn lane shall be five feet (5').
3 Collector Streets: Existing rights-of-way (R.O.W.) fifty-five feet (55') in width or greater may be used for Collector
Streets. New R.O.W dedicated for Collector Streets must be a minimum of sixty feet (60').
4 Arterial Streets: Sidewalks (see Section 7.11 Sidewalks) shall be six feet (6') wide when directly behind the curb, see
Figure 13.
Figure 13: Arterial Street
Figure 14: Collector Street
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 308/414
Figure 15: Local Street
I. Street Intersection Design. No street or intersection shall vary from a 90-degree angle of intersection by more than five (5)
degrees.
J. Construction Responsibilities.
1. Local Street and Alley Construction. The Developer shall, at the Developer's own cost and expense, pay for
constructing all local streets and alleys within the Developer's Subdivision.
2. Arterial Street and Collector Street Construction. The Developer shall, at the Developer's own cost and expense,
pay for constructing all Arterial Streets Collector Streets within the Developer's Subdivision.
K. Street and Alley Requirements.
1. General Requirements.
a. As a minimum, a street must be designated to safely provide two-way traffic for passenger, delivery,
emergency, utility, and maintenance vehicles.
i. The minimum size street which can safely accommodate a development is a local street with two 15-
foot lanes of traffic.
ii. In addition, a four-foot (4') wide sidewalk is required on the developing side of the street to provide
pedestrian safety and to meet the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
b. If the City determines that streets greater than the minimum standard are required, the City's engineer will
conduct investigations, studies, and calculations to determine the infrastructure requirements.
i. If the Developer proposes to construct no greater than the minimum standard of infrastructure, it will
be the responsibility of the Applicant to submit to the City engineering investigations, studies, and
calculations in support of constructing the minimum standard.
2. Local Streets, Collector Streets, and Alleys.
a. Local street paving shall be in conformance with Table 9: Minimum Street Design Criteria.
b. Collector Street paving shall be in conformance with Table 9: Minimum Street Design Criteria.
c. Alley paving shall be twelve feet (12') wide in residential areas and sixteen feet (16') wide in commercial
and industrial areas.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 309/414
i. Alley turnouts shall be paved to the property line and shall be at least two feet (2') wider than the alley
paving at that point.
ii. Paving radius where alleys intersect residential and Collector Streets shall be ten feet (10') and where
alleys intersect Arterial Streets the radius shall be sixteen feet (16').
d. For additional alley requirements, please see section 7.05 Alleys.
3. Street Returns.
a. The minimum radius for all street returns shall be twenty-five feet (25').
b. Returns for driveways on local streets shall be five feet (5'). Commercial and industrial driveway returns
shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') and a maximum of twenty feet (20') in special cases.
L. Street Signs.
1. Street signs shall be furnished and installed by the Developer for all intersections within or abutting the
Subdivision.
2. Such signs shall be of a type approved by the City and include the block number.
3. Street signs shall be installed in accordance with the prescribed type currently in use by the Manual on Uniform
Traffic-Control Devices.
7.11. Sidewalks
A. Sidewalks and Pedestrian ways are required as a part of Subdivision Plat approval to help the City achieve the following:
1. Promote the mobility, health, safety, and welfare of residents, property owners, and visitors to the City and to
implement objectives and strategies of the Comprehensive Plan,
2. Improve the safety of walking by providing separation from motorized transportation and improving travel
surfaces for pedestrians,
3. Improve public welfare by providing an alternate means of access to transportation and social interaction,
especially for children, other citizens without personal vehicles, or those with disabilities, and
4. Facilitate walking as a means of physical activity recognized as an important provider of health benefits.
B. Sidewalk Location and Design.
1. Sidewalks shall be constructed for both sides of all streets within the Subdivision.
2. Sidewalks shall be constructed along all lots adjoining dedicated streets, along major Arterial Streets where lots
do not adjoin the street, across power line easements and in other areas where pedestrian walkways are necessary.
3. Routing to clear poles, trees or other obstacles shall be subject to City Manager approval.
4. The Plat or Construction Plans shall show the location of all proposed sidewalks and shall state at what stage of
the project they will be constructed.
5. All sidewalks shall conform to Federal Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements and barrier-free
ramps should be provided for access to the street.
C. Sidewalk General Construction.
1. Sidewalks shall be constructed by Class “A” concrete and shall have a width of not less than four (4) feet and a
minimum thickness of four (4) inches.
2. Sidewalks along Arterial Streets shall be no less than five feet (5') in width.
3. Sidewalks adjacent to screening walls shall be 5 feet in width and shall abut the wall, eliminating the landscape
area found along the wall, thereby reducing maintenance.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 310/414
4. Sidewalks shall be constructed one foot (1') from the property line within the street or Arterial Street Right-of-
Way and shall extend along the street frontage including the side of corner lots and block ends.
5. Construction of sidewalks adjacent to curbs will be considered where driveway entrances are constructed from
the rear of lots on each side of the street for the full length of the block or where mountable curbs are installed. In
these instances, the sidewalks shall be five feet (5') wide.
6. Sidewalk construction may be delayed until development of lots, but in locations not adjacent to lots and across
bridges and culverts, the sidewalk shall be constructed with the other improvements to the Subdivision.
D. Sidewalks in Commercial and Industrial Areas. Sidewalks in commercial and industrial areas shall be a minimum width of
five feet (5') or extend from the back of the curb to the building line as required by the City.
7.12. Water Utility
A. General.
1. All Subdivisions shall provide an approved water distribution system connected to the existing City water system
in conformance with all applicable City master plans and regulations.
2. In the absence of specific standards, all water supply, distribution, pumping, and storage improvements shall be
designed in accordance with the most current standards of the American Water Works Association and the most
current criteria included in the Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 290.
3. The City shall make the final determination of the adequacy of the proposed system.
B. Basic Requirements.
1. Water Main Construction. All water mains shall be constructed within the street Right-of-Way or easements
dedicated to the City.
2. Water Lines Extended to Subdivision Borders.
a. All water lines installed within a Subdivision must extend to the borders of the Subdivision as required for
future extensions of the distribution system, regardless of whether such extensions are required for service within
the Subdivision.
b. If due to physical constraints, a new subdivision will never be constructed beyond a developing subdivision,
the City Manager may approve a Minor Subdivision Waiver for this requirement prior to action on the
Construction Plans or prior to action on any Plat.
3. Fire Hydrants (Locations and Hose-Lay).
a. Fire hydrants shall be placed on block corners or near the center of the block to place all of every lot within
a radius of five hundred feet (500') in residential areas, but under no circumstances shall a hose-lay for more than
five hundred feet (500') be made from the fire hydrant to cover all of every lot within the Subdivision or tract
under development.
b. Fire hydrants shall be located in commercial and industrial areas so that all of every lot shall be within a
radius of three hundred feet (300'), but under no circumstances shall a hose-lay of more than three hundred feet
(300') be made in order to adequately afford fire protection to the building or buildings.
c. A fire hydrant shall be placed at the entrance of all cul-de-sacs.
C. Preliminary Utility Plan.
1. General. A Preliminary Utility Plan shall detail both [this] Section 7.12 Water Utility and Section 7.13
Wastewater Utility requirements.
2. Illustrate the Location and Size of Water Utility and Wastewater Utility Mains.
a. Concurrent with the submission of a Vesting Plat or Replat, the Developer shall submit a map or plan
showing the location and size of Water Utility and Wastewater Utility mains, which will be required to provide
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 311/414
adequate service and fire protection to the lots specified in the proposed plat.
b. Plans and specifications for fire hydrant systems shall be submitted to the City Manager for review prior to
construction.
3. Plan Document. The plan shall be prepared as noted in the City's Development Application Handbook.
4. Coordination with other Utility Providers.
a. Vesting Plat. When the subdivision is located in an area served by a utility provider other than the City, the
Developer must provide a water system analysis, indicating adequate water supply and water quality.
b. Replat.
i. When a Subdivision is located in an area served by a utility provider other than the City, the Developer
must provide a letter from the utility provider stating that facilities exist in the area to provide adequate
domestic service and fire protection.
ii. If the City has reason to believe that there may be water supply or pressure concerns the City may
require, a water system analysis, indicating adequate water supply and water quality.
c. Filing Plat. The Filing Plat will not be approved until a letter has been provided from the utility provider
stating that they have accepted the plans for construction.
7.13. Wastewater Utility
A. General.
1. Approved Means of Wastewater Collection and Treatment Required. All lots, tracts or parcels on which
development is proposed shall be served by an approved means of wastewater collection and treatment.
2. Determining the Approved Means of Wastewater Collection and Treatment. The City Manager shall be
responsible for determining the approved means of wastewater collection and treatment in accordance with City
master plans and regulations.
3. Possible Phasing of Development Required.
a. The City Manager may require the phasing of development and/or improvements in order to maintain
adequate wastewater capacity.
b. Subdivisions either in the ETJ or that have recently been annexed and are not served by the City shall meet
the same requirements but be subject to approval by the City Manager.
B. Basic Requirements.
1. Wastewater Disposal System Required.
a. All Subdivisions shall provide an approved wastewater disposal system conforming to the current criteria
and all applicable City master plans and regulations and the requirements of Texas Administrative Code, Chapter
217, Design Criteria for Domestic Wastewater Systems.
b. The City shall make the final determination of the adequacy of the proposed system.
2. Wastewater Lines Extended to Subdivision Borders.
a. All laterals and sewer mains installed within a subdivision must extend to the borders of the subdivision as
required for future extensions of the collection system, regardless of whether such extensions are required for
service within the subdivision.
b. If due to physical constraints, a new subdivision will never be constructed beyond a developing subdivision,
the City Manager may approve a Minor Subdivision Waiver for this requirement prior to action on the
Construction Plans or prior to action on any Plat.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 312/414
C. Preliminary Utility Plan. When required by the Subdivision Ordinance, a Preliminary Utility Plan for Wastewater Utility
requirements shall be prepared in accordance with section 7.12.C Preliminary Utility Plan.
7.14. Drainage and Stormwater
A. General.
1. Components of the Drainage System. Drainage systems, including all conveyances, inlets, conduits, structures,
basins, or outlets used to drain stormwater, must be designed and constructed to promote the health, safety, and
welfare of the property owner and the public.
2. Management of Stormwater Runoff. Adequate provision must be made for the acceptance, collection,
conveyance, detention, and discharge of stormwater runoff drainage onto, through and originating within the
Subdivision.
3. Maintenance Responsibility.
a. Detention and retention pond maintenance is the responsibility of the property owner or the Homeowners' or
Property Owners' Association.
b. It is a violation of this Subdivision Ordinance for the pond not to be maintained according to the City's
requirements.
c. It is a violation of the City's Stormwater Management Plan's Best Management Practices for a
detention/retention pond or a structural control to be unable to operate for its intended purpose due to lack of
maintenance.
4. Discharge of Stormwater Runoff. Stormwater must be discharged in an acceptable form and at a controlled rate
so as not to endanger human life or public or private property.
5. Drainage Facilities. Drainage facilities shall be provided and constructed by the Developer in accordance with the
requirements within this section 7.14 Drainage and Stormwater and the City's Code of Ordinances.
B. Planning and Construction.
1. Plans, profiles, and specifications shall be prepared for stormwater improvements to be constructed and shall
show the locations, sizes, grades, hydraulic gradients, flow arrows, and other details for the proposed pipe, inlets,
channels, manholes, culverts, outlet structures, and other appurtenances.
a. Each sheet of the plans and profiles shall bear the seal and signature of the Licensed Professional Civil
Engineer who prepared them.
2. The Developer shall incur the cost of all drainage improvements connected with development of the Subdivision
and acceptance of current upstream flows necessary to safely and adequately drain the Subdivision, including any
necessary off-site channels or storm sewers and acquisition of any required easements.
a. The 100-year storm must be contained within the street Right-of-Way and/or the drainage easement
boundaries.
b. Any necessary off-site channel or storm sewers which are required to be within easements must have a
separate instrument easement filed in the Gonzales County Real Property Records and a filed copy shall be
submitted to the City before Construction Plans will be approved.
C. Residential Grading and Drainage.
1. Lot to Lot Drainage Standards.
a. Surface runoff from residential lots shall cross no more than one additional lot before being directed toward
the street or a dedicated drainage system.
b. When the flow reaches the second lot, side lot swales shall be in place to direct the flows to the street or to a
dedicated City drainage system within an easement in the rear yard.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 313/414
c. Furthermore, no more than one lot may drain to a second lot before the flow is directed to the street or to a
dedicated City drainage system.
d. Where lot to lot drainage occurs, the lot lines shall be aligned and a minimum of a 10' drainage easement
shall be provided.
2. Detailed Standards See the Engineering Standards Manual for requirements for detailed standards and policies.
D. Nonresidential Grading and Drainage.
1. Lot to Lot Grading and Drainage Standards.
a. Grading and drainage plans shall strive to ensure that surface runoff from nonresidential individual lots
cross no more than one (1) additional lot before being directed toward a private on-site system or a dedicated
City drainage system.
b. When the flow reaches the third lot, side lot swales may be utilized to direct the flows to private enclosed
systems or to a dedicated City drainage system within a dedicated easement or in street Right-of-Way.
c. No runoff may drain to a fourth lot.
i. The flow must be directed to the street system or to a dedicated City drainage system with a dedicated
easement.
d. Concentrations of stormwater shall not be discharged to City Streets through driveways or flumes but shall
be collected into an enclosed system, either private or public, prior to reaching the curbline of the roadway.
e. Specific deviations from these guidelines may be addressed on an individual basis.
2. Detailed Standards. See the Engineering Standards Manual for detailed standards and policies.
E. Design Criteria.
1. The design of the swales and enclosed systems located within a dedicated drainage easement shall utilize the
City's adopted drainage design criteria for channel and pipe systems.
2. Side yard swales shall have a minimum slope of one (1) percent to ensure adequacy of flow during and after a
rain event.
3. See the Engineering Standards Manual for requirements for detailed standards and policies.
F. Materials.
1. Swales on Residential Lots. Swales on residential lots shall be fully sodded.
2. Swales on Nonresidential Lots. Swales on nonresidential lots may be constructed in a natural state fully sodded in
cases where the surrounding area has been sodded and velocities and depth of flow can be contained within the
proposed swale without erosive damage.
a. Swales within the parking and private driving lanes of nonresidential properties shall be constructed of
materials similar to those of the parking and driving lanes.
3. Systems on Residential Lots. Enclosed systems may be designed utilizing reinforced concrete or approved plastic
pipe and collection inlets on residential lots.
a. Private enclosed systems on nonresidential lots may be designed utilizing approved plastic pipe and
collection inlets.
4. Systems on Nonresidential Lots. Enclosed systems on nonresidential lots which will be dedicated to the City shall
be designed utilizing reinforced concrete pipe and collection inlets.
5. All storm sewer systems shall be designed utilizing reinforced concrete pipe, shall be constructed within City
streets or Rights-of-Way, and shall be dedicated to the City.
G. Roof Drains.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 314/414
1. All roof drains of residential structures shall be directed to the street or toward a rear swale and shall not be
discharged directly onto the side lot.
2. Side downspouts may be directed to side lot swales at a 45 degree angle to the direction of flow of the side lot
swale to ensure that the flows are directed away from the house foundation yet providing a less sever entry into the
swale.
H. Maintenance.
1. All grassed swales should be designed and constructed with 3:1 side slopes that will be gentle enough to allow
easy mowing.
2. Mowing and maintenance responsibility shall be the responsibility of the property owner or Homeowners' or
Property Owners' Association.
3. Periodic cleaning of enclosed systems located within dedicated drainage easements shall be the responsibility of
the City.
I. Preliminary Drainage Plan.
1. Applicability and Purpose.
a. A Preliminary Drainage Plan shall be prepared for all developments in accordance with the requirements set
forth in the City's Development Application Handbook.
b. The Preliminary Drainage Plan shall show the watershed affecting the development and how the runoff
from the fully-developed watershed will be conveyed to, through, and from the development.
i. The Preliminary Drainage Plan must comply with the standards outlined in this Subdivision
Ordinance, Engineering Standards Manual, and the Code of Ordinances.
c. The Preliminary Drainage Plan is a guide for later detailed drainage design.
d. The review of the Preliminary Drainage Plan does not constitute final drainage plan approval or authorize a
waiver to the Subdivision Regulations.
2. Plan Required, Previous Plans, and Waivers.
a. For any property involved in the development process, a Preliminary Drainage Plan shall be provided, at the
Developer's expense, for the area proposed for development.
b. For property with a previously accepted Preliminary Drainage Plan, the accepted Preliminary Drainage Plan
may be submitted and enforced unless a revised Preliminary Drainage Plan is required by the City due to lot
reconfiguration or other conditions created by the new Plat.
c. The City Manager may waive the requirement for a Preliminary Drainage Plan if the submitted plat is not
anticipated to cause any significant change in runoff characteristics from a previously accepted drainage study or
for single residential properties where no drainage problems are anticipated.
d. If the applicant requests a waiver in writing, a copy of any previous drainage plan prepared for the property
shall be provided.
3. Submittal.
a. Three (3) paper copies of the Preliminary Drainage Plan shall be submitted with the submittal of a Vesting
Plat or Replat for review and acceptance.
b. The Preliminary Drainage Plan shall be labeled as “Preliminary.”
c. The Preliminary Drainage Plan shall be stamped by and dated by the engineer.
J. Preliminary Stormwater Management Plan.
1. Applicability and Purpose.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 315/414
a. A Preliminary Stormwater Management Plan (SWMP) shall be prepared for all developments in accordance
with the requirements set forth in the City's Development Application Handbook.
b. The purpose of the Preliminary SWMP is to identify permanent water quality feature opportunities for the
development.
2. Preparation Requirements.
a. The Preliminary SWMP shall be prepared in coordination with the Preliminary Drainage Plan on all
projects where both are required.
b. The Preliminary SWMP and the Preliminary Drainage Plan may be shown on the same sheet.
c. When a Preliminary Drainage Plan is not required, the Preliminary SWMP shall indicate the existing
drainage patterns and runoff coefficients and the proposed changes to these items.
3. Standards and Criteria.
a. The Preliminary SWMP must comply with the standards and criteria outlined in this Subdivision Ordinance,
Engineering Standards Manual, and the Municipal Code [Code of Ordinances].
b. The Preliminary SWMP may satisfy the stormwater management portion of the Stormwater Pollution
Prevention Plan (SWPPP) that is required for construction activities; however, the Preliminary SWMP is not a
substitution for the SWPPP.
c. The City's review of the Preliminary SWMP does not constitute acceptance of the final SWMP or the final
development plans.
4. Proposed Area.
a. The Developer shall provide a Preliminary SWMP for the area proposed for development.
b. For Amending Plats or Plats with a previously accepted Preliminary SWMP, the accepted Preliminary
SWMP shall be enforced unless the City Manager requires a revised Preliminary SWMP.
5. Preliminary SWMP Submittal.
a. Three (3) paper copies of the Preliminary SWMP plan shall be submitted with the submittal of a Vesting
Plat or Replat for review and acceptance.
b. The plan shall be labeled as “Preliminary.”
c. Upon acceptance of the plan, the plan shall be signed and sealed by a professional engineer.
7.15. Retaining Wall Construction
A. Location.
1. Retaining walls shall be located and constructed on private property only.
2. Retaining walls shall be located within a private retaining wall easement.
3. If a retaining wall is designed to traverse three or more lots within a Subdivision, the wall shall be located within
a private retaining wall easement dedicated to the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association of the Subdivision.
a. The easement shall be shown on the Vesting Plat and Filing Plat and shall be dedicated to the Homeowners'
or Property Owners' Association of the Subdivision to maintain the wall in a safe and orderly condition.
B. Design. Any retaining wall four (4) feet or [in] height shall be designed by a professional engineer and plans submitted to
the City for review must be signed and sealed by the design engineer.
C. Building Permit Required.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 316/414
1. Any earth terracing method that supports a structure or vehicle load, or that is over four feet (4') in height (as
measured from the bottom of footing to top of wall), shall require a building permit and shall meet the requirements of
this section.
2. A retaining wall shall not be constructed in excess of four feet in height.
a. If the wall is to be more than four feet high, the retaining wall system shall be terraced, so as to provide a
minimum of four (4) feet of flat ground between the faces of the retaining walls for each four-foot section of
retaining wall.
b. The flat terrace shall be sloped to a maximum of two (2) percent to allow drainage.
3. No building permit, other than for a retaining wall, shall be issued for any lot within a Subdivision until all
retaining walls are constructed in accordance with a grading plan for the Subdivision.
4. A retaining wall shall be constructed in accordance with the grading plan and shall comply with the requirements
of the applicable building code and this ordinance.
5. Any change from the approved grading plan or design for a retaining wall within a Subdivision shall not be
permitted unless the Applicant has submitted plans for the entire Subdivision showing the proposed changing in
grading and the City Manager has approved the proposed change(s).
7.16. Private Streets and Gated Subdivisions
A. Private Streets and Gated Subdivisions.
1. General Requirements. Subdivisions with private streets and gated communities shall meet the following
requirements:
a. The general provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance and other City Codes as they relate to development,
streets, and utilities will apply.
b. A vehicular turnaround shall be provided at entry gates to allow vehicles that have been denied entry the
ability to exit without having to backup.
c. All plans concerning private subdivisions are subject to review and approval by the local fire department.
d. The definition of a “subdivision” and “street,” as contained in the Subdivision Ordinance, will apply to all
subdivisions or streets, whether public or private.
2. Authority Maintained by City. All streets, gates, and other fire protection features, signage, and equipment are
subject to periodic inspection by the City and must be repaired immediately if found to be in a condition of disrepair
or inadequate for public access. The City shall have the right to enter the subdivision and disable, open, or remove any
gate, device, or other feature that impedes or controls vehicle access at the sole expense of the Homeowners' or
Property Owners' Association.
3. Owners Responsibility. The person or corporation in control of the property is responsible for, and liable for, any
violations of this private road requirement. This includes, but is not limited to, the developer, property owner, the
Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association and its officers, if applicable, or others who may own or exercise
control over the property.
4. Private Street Lot. Each private street and alley must be constructed within a separate lot owned by the
Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association.
a. Each lot must conform to the City's standards for design of a public street and alley right-of-way. An
easement covering the street lot shall be granted to the City providing unrestricted use of the property for utilities
and the maintenance of the same. This right shall extend to all utility providers including telephone and cable
companies, operating within the City.
b. The easement shall also provide the City with the right of access for any purpose related to the exercise of a
governmental service or function, including but not limited to fire and police protection, inspection and code
enforcement. The easement shall permit the City to remove any vehicle or obstacle within the street lot that
impairs emergency access.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 317/414
5. Payment. The City shall not pay for any portion of the cost of constructing or maintaining a private street.
6. Plans and Inspections. An applicant for a proposed subdivision with private streets must submit to the City the
same plans and engineering information required to construct public streets and utilities. Requirements pertaining to
inspection and approval of improvements prior to Filing Plat approval shall apply. Fees charged for these services
shall also apply. The City may periodically inspect private streets and require repairs necessary to ensure emergency
access.
7. Waiver of Services. The Filing Plat, property deeds and Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association
documents shall note that certain City services shall not be provided on private streets. Among the services that will
not be provided are the following:
a. Routine police patrols.
b. Enforcement of traffic and parking ordinances and preparation of accident reports.
c. Depending on the characteristics of the proposed development, other services may not be provided.
8. Signs. All private traffic regulatory signs shall conform to the Texas Manual of Uniform Traffic-Control Devices.
9. Indemnification. The Filing Plat shall contain the following language:
a. Whereby the Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association, as owner of the private streets and
appurtenances, agrees to release, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, any govern mental entity and
public utility:
i. For damages to the private street occasioned by the reasonable use of the private street by the City,
governmental entity of public utility;
ii. For damages and injury (including death) arising from the condition of said private street;
iii. For damages and injury (including death) arising out of the use by the City, governmental entity or
public utility of any restricted access gate or entrance; and
iv. For damages and injury (including death) arising out of any use of the subdivision by the City, govern
mental entity or public utility.
v. Further, such language shall provide that all lot owners shall release the City, governmental entities
and public utilities for such damages and injuries.
b. THE INDEMNIFICATIONS CONTAINED IN THIS ABOVE LANGUAGE APPLY REGARDLESS OF
WHETHER OR NOT SUCH DAMAGES AND INJURY (INCLUDING DEATH) ARE CAUSED BY THE
NEGLIGENT ACT OR OMISSION OF THE CITY, GOVERNMENTAL ENTITY OR PUBLIC UTILITY, OR
THEIR REPRESENTATIVE OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES OR AGENTS.
B. Gates.
1. Each gate installation in a gated community must conform to the following provisions:
a. Fire Department Approval Required. Each gate installation must be approved by the fire department who
will serve the proposed subdivision prior to installation. The installation must be completed and tested prior to
the City's acceptance of the subdivision.
b. Gate Openings and Clearances. Gate design may incorporate one or two gate sections to meet the required
minimum gate width of twenty-four feet. If the entrance will incorporate a median, guard shack, or similar
structure that necessitates a divided gate arrangement, the gate widths may be reduced if approved by the fire
marshal, but in no case shall any gate or street pavement have a clear opening of less than eighteen feet.
c. If a gate design incorporates any overhead obstruction, the obstruction must be a minimum of fourteen feet
(14') above the finished road surface.
2. Setback Required. Approach and departure areas on both sides of a gated entrance must provide adequate
setbacks and proper alignment to allow free and unimpeded passage of emergency vehicles through the entrance area.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 318/414
3. Gates to Be Per Fire Department Guidelines. An automatic gate installation must conform to the design and
performance guidelines established by the fire department.
4. Good Working Order Required. All components of the gate system must be maintained in an approved operating
condition, with all components serviced and maintained on a regular basis as needed to ensure proper gate operation.
A proper power supply shall be maintained to all electrical and electronic components at all times.
5. Failure to Meet Requirements. Each security gate is subject to a performance test on a regular basis as determined
by the fire department. Upon failure of a performance test, the security gate system shall be disabled and maintained in
the open position until repaired, and shall not be placed back in service until tested and authorized by the fire
department.
C. Property Owners Associations Required.
1. Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association Required. Subdivisions developed with private streets and alleys
must have a mandatory Homeowners' or Property Owners' Association which includes all property to be served by
private streets. The association shall own and be responsible for the maintenance of private streets and appurtenances.
2. The association documents must establish a reserve fund for the maintenance of streets and other improvements.
The association documents shall be reviewed and approved by the City's attorney to ensure that they conform to this
and other applicable City ordinances. The documents shall be filed of record prior to the approval of the Filing Plat.
Lot deeds must convey membership in the association and provide for the payment of dues and assessments required
by the association. The association may not be dissolved without the prior written consent of the City. No portion of
the association documents pertaining to the maintenance of the private streets and alleys and assessment therefore
[therefor] may be amended without the written consent of the City.
D. Construction and Utilities. Water, sewer, drainage facilities, streetlights and signs placed within the private street and alley
lot shall be installed to City standards prior to approval of the Filing Plat. All City regulations relating to infrastructure financing
and developer cost participation shall apply to subdivisions with private streets.
E. Converting Private Streets to Public Streets. The property association documents shall allow the association to request the
City to accept private streets and alleys and the associated property as public streets and right-of-way upon written notice to all
association members. The request will be accepted for consideration if it contains the signatures of the owners of 75% of the
affected lots on the street. However, in no event shall the City be obligated to accept said streets and alleys as public.
1. City's Acceptance of Streets and Alleys. Should the City elect to accept the streets and alleys as public, the City
may inspect the private streets and assess the lot owners for the expense of needed repairs concurrent with the City's
acceptance of the streets and alleys. The City will be the sole judge of whether repairs are needed.
2. City's Requirements. The City may also require, at the association's expense, the removal of guard houses,
access-control devices, landscaping or other aesthetic amenities located within the street lot. The association
documents shall provide for the City's right to such assessment. Those portions of the association documents
pertaining to the subject matter contained in this subsection shall not be amended without the written consent of the
City.
F. Access Restrictions.
1. General Requirements. The entrances to all private streets shall be marked with a sign stating that it is a private
street. Either a guard house or an access-control device such as a gate or cross arm shall be constructed at each
entrance. All restricted access entrances shall be manned 24 hours every day, or an alternative means shall be provided
of ensuring access to the subdivision by the City and other utility service providers with appropriate identification. If
the association fails to maintain reliable access as required to provide City services, the City shall have the right to
enter the subdivision and remove any gate or device which is a barrier to access at the sole expense of the association.
2. Restricted Access. Private streets that have access controlled by a gate, cross arm, or other access-control device
shall conform to the following requirements:
a. The street must have a minimum uninterrupted pavement width of 24 feet at the location of the accesscontrol
device.
b. If an overhead barrier is used, it shall have minimum height above the road surface as required by the local
fire department for fire lanes.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 319/414
c. The design of all gates, cross arms and access-control devices, including automatic opening systems and
manual backup systems, shall be approved by the local fire department before installation.
d. The gates, cross arms, and access-control devices shall be tested and accepted by the fire department before
being put into operation.
e. Gate designs may incorporate one or two gate sections to meet the required minimum width of 24 feet.
f. If the entrance incorporates a median, guard shack, or similar structure that necessitates a divided gate
arrangement, the gate and street pavement widths may be reduced if approved by the fire department. This
approval shall be contingent upon the subdivision with private streets having a second approved means of access,
but in no case shall any single gate or street pavement have a clear opening of less than 15 feet.
3. Visitor Entrance Design Standards. At least one entrance to a subdivision with private streets shall be equipped
for visitor access. In addition to meeting the above design standards, the visitor entrance shall be equipped with a call
or code box located at least 50 feet from the boundary of the subdivision to provide for visitors calling in an
automobile queuing. A turnaround space with a minimum outside radius of 30 feet shall be located between any call or
code box and the access-control device to allow vehicles denied access to safely exit onto public streets in a “headout”
position. A sign shall be erected next to the edge or such turnaround space to prohibit vehicle parking in such space. A
resident entrance used in combination with a visitor entrance shall comply with the requirements of this Subsection.
4. Resident Only Entrance Design Standards. In addition to meeting the above design standards, an access-control
device that requires residents to use a key, card, or code to gain access shall setback internally a minimum of 50 feet
from the boundary of the subdivision to provide for automobile queuing; except that resident entrances equipped with
an electronic opener that allows residents to remotely open the access-control device and enter the subdivision without
having to stop are exempted from this requirement. A sign shall be erected next to any resident entrance that does not
meet the 50-foot setback requirement of this subsection and does not provide a turnaround space with a minimum
outside radius of 30 feet to indicate that it is for resident use only and not for visitors.
7.17. Survey Monuments and Lot Markers
A. Temporary Survey Reference Markers.
1. Before the Vesting Plat is submitted to the City for consideration, a temporary marker and a guard stake with
flagging shall be placed by the surveyor on all of the development's perimeter boundary corners which do not have a
“found” monument.
a. Perimeter boundary corners includes points of intersection (PI), points of curvature (PC), points of
compound curvature (PCC), points of tangency (PT) and any other point along the boundary which is necessary
to establish the boundary of the development.
b. A guard stake with flagging shall be placed on all “found” monuments.
c. The temporary markers shall be within one foot (1') of the surveyed corner and the guard stake shall be
within one foot (1') of the temporary marker or the “found” monument.
2. Submission of the Vesting Plat prepared by the licensed surveyor shall be considered evidence that the temporary
markers, guard stakes, and flagging have been set, regardless of whether or not the Vesting Plat has been sealed and
signed.
B. Permanent Survey Reference Monuments.
1. Before the Filing Plat is submitted to the City for consideration, a concrete monument six inches (6") in diameter
and twenty-four inches (24") long, shall be placed by the surveyor on each of the development's perimeter boundary
corners which do not have a “found” monument.
a. An eighteen inch (18") long steel rod, 5/8 inch in diameter and embedded at least twelve inches (12") into
the monument, shall be placed at the boundary intersection point on each monument.
b. These monuments shall be set at such an elevation that they will not be disturbed during construction.
c. The tops of the monuments shall be at least twelve inches (12") below the finished grade.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 320/414
2. In addition to the requisite number of hard copies, Filing Plats shall also be prepared and submitted electronically
oriented in Texas State Plane grid coordinates (U.S. Survey Foot), Grid North, South Central Zone (4204), NAD 83, at
an elevation datum based on NAVD 88.
3. Submission of the Filing Plat prepared by the licensed surveyor shall be considered evidence that the monuments
and benchmarks have been set, regardless of whether or not the Filing Plat has been sealed and signed.
C. Public Right-Of-Way Markers.
1. Public Rights-of-Way and easements for public streets or approved access easement shall be indicated by
monuments placed along their centerlines. Monuments shall be placed at PI, PC, PCC, and PT.
2. Where concrete streets are constructed, the monuments shall be an “X” cut into the concrete pavement.
3. Each leg of the “X” shall be at least six inches (6") long and 1/4-inch deep.
4. Where asphalt streets are constructed and in unpaved areas, the monument shall be a 5/8-inch iron bar, eighteen
inches (18") long.
D. Survey Benchmarks.
1. All survey monuments and lot markers shall adhere to the adopted survey benchmark documents.
2. Each Filing Plat is required to have at least one permanent benchmark monument set within its boundary based
upon NAVD 88. All portions of the perimeter boundary of the development shall be less than 1/2 mile from the
benchmark, or additional benchmarks shall be set such that all portions of the perimeter boundary of the development
are within 1/2 mile of a benchmark.
3. Benchmark monuments may be similar to permanent boundary corner monuments set flush with the ground, or
may be set on top of visible concrete structures such as headwalls or curb inlets by chiseling a 1-1/2 inch square in the
concrete 1/4-inch deep. The location and elevation of the Benchmark(s) (based on NAVD 88) shall be noted on the
Filing Plat.
7.18. Miscellaneous
A. Underground Utilities.
1. All distribution lines, cables, etc. for utilities shall be installed below ground within the Subdivision to eliminate
the necessity for disturbing the street, curb and gutter, sidewalk and other services and structures when making
connections.
a. Transmission lines or major cables to provide utilities such as electric, telephone, and cable television to the
area as a whole may be located above ground on the perimeter of the Subdivision being served.
b. The installation of these utilities shall conform to commonly accepted construction standards and be subject
to review by the City Manager.
2. The Developer shall provide separate service lines for water and wastewater (sanitary sewerage) to each lot or
point of metering.
3. The Developer shall make arrangements with all other appropriate utility companies for the extension of their
respective utility lines and service to and within the addition and for any costs or refunds of such cost.
4. All Plats for residential and multifamily developments shall require all telephone lines, cable television lines,
electric lines, and utility lateral and services lines and wires to be placed underground except as otherwise herein
provided.
a. In special or unique circumstances or to avoid undue hardships a Major Subdivision Waiver may be
approved to permit the construction and maintenance of overhead electric utility lateral or services lines and of
overhead telephone and cable TV lines and may approve any Plat or Site Plan with such approved variances or
exceptions.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 321/414
b. All Filing Plats for residential and multifamily Subdivisions submitted for approval by the City must display
signature approval by utility companies prior to submittal.
i. All multifamily Plats or Site Plans must display signature approval by utility companies before any
building permits are issued.
ii. No Filing Plat shall be approved and no building permit will be issued without such approval.
c. Where electrical service is to be placed underground, street or site facilities shall also be placed
underground.
d. All electrical, cable TV and telephone support equipment (transformers, amplifiers, switching devices, etc.)
necessary for underground installations in Subdivisions shall be pad mounted or placed underground.
e. Nothing herein set forth shall prohibit or restrict any utility company from recovering the difference
between the cost of overhead facilities and underground facilities.
i. Each utility whose facilities are subject to the provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance shall develop
policies and cost reimbursement procedures with respect to the installation and extension of underground
service.
f. Unless specifically stated otherwise, temporary construction service may be provided by overhead utility
lines and facilities without obtaining a waiver.
g. “Electric Utility Service Lines” shall mean those electric lines which through a transformer connect a lateral
line to a customer's service entrance.
5. All installations regulated by the provisions set forth herein shall be in conformance with the intent of this
ordinance and shall conform to any regulations and/or specifications that the various public utility companies may
have in force from time to time.
6. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to require any existing facilities to be placed underground when no
development is proposed.
B. Company Notification to City. All utility companies will notify the City before digging, boring, drilling, etc.
C. Street Lighting.
1. Street lighting shall conform to the latest edition of the Illuminating Engineering Society Handbook.
2. Street lighting shall conform to City standards.
3. In no instance shall the spacing between streetlights exceed six hundred (600) feet.
4. Cost of installation of street lighting shall be borne by the Developer.
Section 8. Subdivision Relief Procedures
8.01. Petition for Subdivision Waiver
A. Purpose. The purpose of a petition for a Subdivision Waiver to a particular standard or requirement with these Subdivision
Regulations, as such are applicable to Plats or Construction Plans, is to determine whether such particular standard or requirement
should be applied to an Application.
B. Definitions. Subdivision Waivers shall be classified as a Minor Subdivision Waiver or Major Subdivision Waiver.
C. Decision Maker.
1. Minor Subdivision Waiver.
a. Decision Maker Authority.
i. The City Manager shall act upon a Minor Subdivision Waiver listed in Table 10.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 322/414
b. Appeal of a Minor Subdivision Waiver Decision.
i. Appeal Review and Recommendation. An appeal of the Minor Subdivision Waiver decision may be
considered by the Commission.
ii. Appeal Decision. If further appeal is made, the City Council shall then act on such an appeal. (See
subsection 8.01.J Minor Subdivision Waiver Appeal (below))
Table 10: Minor Subdivision Waiver
Section Standard City Manager
7.05.M Dead-End Alleys Approve
7.09.D Right Angles for Side Lot Lines Approve
7.04.D Traffic Impact Analysis Approve
7.12.B.2 Water Lines Extended to Subdivision
Borders
Approve
7.13.B.2 Wastewater Lines Extended to
Subdivision Borders
Approve
2. Major Subdivision Waiver.
a. Decision Maker Authority. After review and recommendation from the Commission, the City Council shall
decide a Major Subdivision Waiver.
D. Subdivision Waiver Applicability.
1. Waiver of Standard or Requirement.
a. An Applicant may request a Subdivision Waiver of a particular standard or requirement applicable to a
Vesting Plat, to Construction Plans, or where no Vesting Plat Application has been submitted for approval, to a
Filing Plat or a Replat.
b. A Subdivision Waiver petition shall be specific in nature, and shall only involve relief consideration for one
particular standard or requirement.
c. An Applicant may, if desired, submit more than one Subdivision Waiver petition if there are several
standards or requirements at issue.
d. For processing a Subdivision Waiver in relationship with a Plat Application, an Applicant shall submit a
Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action in accordance with section 4.04.D Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action.
2. Waiver Petition Acceptance.
a. A petition for a Subdivision Waiver shall not be accepted in lieu of:
i. A Subdivision Proportionality Appeal (section 8.02)[;] or
ii. A Subdivision Vested Rights Petition (section 8.03).
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 323/414
b. If there is a question as to whether a Subdivision Proportionality Appeal or Subdivision Vested Rights
Petition is required instead of a Subdivision Waiver petition, such determination shall be made by the City
Manager.
E. Subdivision Waiver Submission Procedures.
1. Written Waiver Request with Application.
a. A request for a Subdivision Waiver shall be submitted in writing by the Applicant with the filing of a
Vesting Plat, Construction Plans, Filing Plat or Replat, as applicable.
b. No Subdivision Waiver may be considered or granted unless the Applicant has made such written request.
2. Grounds for Waiver.
a. The Applicant's request shall state the grounds for the Subdivision Waiver request and all of the facts relied
upon by the Applicant.
b. Failure to do so, will result in denial of the Application unless the Applicant submits a Waiver of Right to
30-Day Action in accordance with section 4.04.D Waiver of Right to 30-Day Action.
F. Subdivision Waiver Criteria.
1. Undue Hardship Present. A Subdivision Waiver to regulations within this Subdivision Ordinance may be
approved only when, in the Decision Maker's opinion, undue hardship will result from strict compliance to the
regulations.
2. Consideration Factors. The Decision Maker shall take into account the following factors:
a. The nature of the proposed land use involved and existing uses of the land in the vicinity;
b. The number of persons who will reside or work in the proposed development; and
c. The effect such Subdivision Waiver might have upon traffic conditions and upon the public health, safety,
convenience and welfare in the vicinity.
3. Findings. No Subdivision Waiver shall be granted unless the Decision Maker finds:
a. That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved or other constraints such that
the strict application of the provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance would deprive the Applicant of the
reasonable use of his or her land; and
b. That the Subdivision Waiver is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right
of the Applicant, and that the granting of the Subdivision Waiver will not be detrimental to the public health,
safety or welfare or injurious to other property in the area; and
c. That the granting of the Subdivision Waiver will not have the effect of preventing the orderly subdivision of
other lands in the area in accordance with the provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance.
4. Intent of Subdivision Regulations.
a. A Subdivision Waiver may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the
Subdivision Regulations so that the public health, safety and welfare may be secured and substantial justice
done.
b. Financial hardship to the Applicant shall not be deemed to constitute undue hardship.
5. Minimum Degree of Variation. No Subdivision Waiver shall be granted unless it represents the minimum degree
of variation of requirements necessary to meet the needs of the Applicant.
6. Violations and Conflicts. The Decision Maker shall not authorize a Subdivision Waiver that would constitute a
violation of, or conflict with, any other valid ordinance, code, regulation, master plan or Comprehensive Plan of the
City.
7. Falsification of Information.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 324/414
a. Any falsification of information by the Applicant shall be cause for the Subdivision Waiver request to be
denied.
b. If the Subdivision Waiver request is approved based upon false information, whether intentional or not,
discovery of such false information shall nullify prior approval of the Subdivision Waiver, and shall be grounds
for reconsideration of the Subdivision Waiver request.
G. Burden of Proof. The Applicant bears the burden of proof to demonstrate that the requirement for which a Subdivision
Waiver is requested, if uniformly applied, imposes an undue hardship or disproportionate burden on the Applicant. The Applicant
shall submit the burden of proof with the original submittal.
H. Subdivision Waiver Decision.
1. The Decision Maker shall consider the Subdivision Waiver petition and, based upon the criteria set forth in
subsection 8.01.F Subdivision Waiver Criteria (above), shall take one of the following actions:
a. Deny the petition, and impose the standard or requirement as it is stated in these Subdivision Regulations;
or
b. Grant the petition, and waive in whole or in part the standard or requirement as it is stated in this
Subdivision Ordinance.
2. Decision Process for a Minor Subdivision Waiver. The Decision Maker shall deny of [or] grant a request for a
Minor Subdivision Waiver concurrently with the decision of a Vesting Plat, Construction Plans, Filing Plat or Replat,
as applicable.
3. Decision Process for a Major Subdivision Waiver.
a. Recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
i. The Commission shall consider the Major Subdivision Waiver request at a public meeting no later than
thirty (30) calendar days after the date on which the notice of Major Subdivision Waiver is submitted to the
City Manager.
ii. The Commission shall recommend to the City Council to approve or deny a request for a Major
Subdivision Waiver by majority vote.
b. Decision by City Council.
i. After the recommendation from the Commission has been made, the City Council shall consider the
Major Subdivision Waiver request at a public meeting no later than thirty (30) calendar days after the date
on which the Commission's recommendation was made.
ii. The City Council [shall] approve or deny a request for a Major Subdivision Waiver by a vote of all
members.
iii. The decision of the City Council is final.
I. Notification of Decision on Petition - 14 Days. The Applicant shall be notified of the decision on the Subdivision Waiver by
the applicable Decision Maker (e.g., the City Manager, Commission or City Council, as applicable), within fourteen (14) calendar
days following the decision.
J. Minor Subdivision Waiver Appeal.
1. Initiation of an Appeal.
a. The Applicant may appeal a Minor Subdivision Waiver decision of the City Manager, as allowed within the
Subdivision Regulations.
b. The written request to appeal shall be submitted to the City Manager within thirty (30) calendar days
following the denial decision.
2. Recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 325/414
a. The Commission shall consider the appeal at a public meeting no later than thirty (30) calendar days after
the date on which the notice of appeal is submitted to the City Manager.
b. At this meeting, new information may be presented and considered, if available, that might alter the
previous decision to deny the Minor Subdivision Waiver.
c. The Commission shall recommend to the City Council to affirm, modify or reverse the previous decision by
simple majority vote.
3. Appeal to City Council.
a. The Applicant may appeal the Commission's decision by submitting a written notice of appeal to the City
Manager within thirty (30) calendar days following the Commission's decision.
b. After the recommendation from the Commission has been made, the City Council shall consider the appeal
at a public meeting no later than thirty (30) calendar days after the date on which the Commission's
recommendation was made.
c. The City Council may affirm, modify or reverse the decision by simple majority vote.
d. The decision of the City Council is final.
K. Effect of Approval.
1. Submission and Processing. Following the granting of a Subdivision Waiver, the Applicant may submit or
continue the processing of a Plat or Construction Plans, as applicable.
2. Expirations. The Subdivision Waiver granted shall remain in effect for the period the Plat or Construction Plans
are in effect, and shall expire upon expiration of either or both of those Applications.
3. Extensions. Extension of those Applications shall also result in extension of the Subdivision Waiver.
8.02. Subdivision Proportionality Appeal
A. Purpose and Applicability.
1. Purpose. The purpose of a petition for relief from a dedication, construction requirement, or a requirement to pay
a fee, other than an impact fee authorized by Chapter 395 of the Texas Local Government Code is to ensure that the
imposition of uniform dedication, construction, and fee standards to a proposed development does not result in a
disproportionate burden on the property owner, taking into consideration the nature and extent of the demands created
by the proposed development on the City's roadways and public facilities systems.
2. Applicability.
a. An Applicant may file a petition for relief under this section 8.02 Subdivision Proportionality Appeal to
contest any requirement to dedicate land or to construct Public Improvements as required by this Subdivision
Ordinance, other ordinance, or attached as a condition to approval of the Application.
b. A petition under this section 8.02 Subdivision Proportionality Appeal shall not be used to waive standards
on grounds applicable to any Subdivision Waiver Application, as outlined in section 8.01 Petition for
Subdivision Waiver.
B. Petition Requirements.
1. Form of Petition. The petition for relief from a dedication, construction, or fee requirement shall allege that
Application of the standard relating to the requirement is not roughly proportional to the nature and extent of the
impacts created by the proposed development on the City's water, wastewater, storm drainage, parks or roadway
system or does not reasonably benefit the proposed development.
2. Study Required. The Applicant shall provide a study in support of the petition for relief that includes the
following information:
a. Capacity Utilized.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 326/414
i. Total capacity of the City's water, wastewater, storm drainage, parks or roadway system to be utilized
by the proposed development, employing standard measures of capacity and equivalency tables relating the
type of development proposed to the quantity of system capacity to be consumed by the development.
ii. If the proposed development is to be developed in phases, such information also shall be provided for
the entire development proposed, including any phases already developed.
b. Capacity Supplied.
i. Total capacity to be supplied to the City's water, wastewater, storm drainage, parks or roadway system
by the proposed dedication of an interest in land or construction of Public Improvements.
ii. If the Application is part of a phased development, the information shall include any capacity supplied
by prior dedications or construction of Public Improvements.
c. Capacity Comparison.
i. Comparison of the capacity of the City's public facilities system(s) to be consumed by the proposed
development with the capacity to be supplied to such system(s) by the proposed dedication of an interest in
land, construction of Public Improvements, or payment of a fee.
ii. In making this comparison, the impacts on the City's public facilities system(s) from the entire
development shall be considered.
d. Oversizing. The effect of any City participation in the costs of oversizing the Public Improvement to be
constructed in accordance with the City's requirements.
e. Other Information. Any other information that shows the alleged disproportionality between the impacts
created by the proposed development and the dedication or construction requirement imposed by the City.
3. Time for Filing Petition and Study.
a. A petition for relief from a dedication, construction, or fee requirement shall be filed with the City Manager
within fourteen (14) calendar days following the City Council's decision to conditionally approve or deny an
Application.
b. The study in support of the petition shall be filed within sixty (60) calendar days following the initial
decision, unless the Applicant (petitioner for relief) seeks an extension in writing.
c. The City Manager may extend the time for submitting the study for a period not to exceed an additional
thirty (30) calendar days for good cause shown.
4. Land in Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ). Where land or facilities to be dedicated are located in the ETJ of the
City and are to be dedicated to the County, a petition for relief or study in support of the petition shall be accepted as
complete for review by the City Manager only when such petition or study is accompanied by verification that a copy
has been delivered to and accepted by the County, as applicable.
C. Processing of Subdivision Proportionality Appeal Petitions and Decision.
1. Responsible Official. The City Manager shall be the Responsible Official for a petition for relief from a
dedication or construction requirement.
2. Review and Recommendation.
a. The City Manager shall review the petition and supporting study and shall make a recommendation to:
i. The Commission, and
ii. The City Council.
b. In response to a petition for relief from a dedication or construction requirement pursuant to [this] section
8.02 Subdivision Proportionality Appeal and to achieve proportionality between the demands created by a
proposed development on public facilities and the obligation to provide adequate public facilities, the City may
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 327/414
participate in the costs of Public Improvements, credit or offset the obligations against payment of impact fees,
or relieve the property owner any of the obligations.
3. Decision Maker. The City Council shall decide the Subdivision Proportionality Appeal petition, after receiving a
recommendation from the Planning and Zoning Commission.
4. Public Hearing Held within 60 Days after Receipt of Study. The City Council shall conduct a public hearing
within sixty (60) calendar days after the study supporting the petition (refer to subsection 8.02.B (above)) is filed with
the City Manager.
5. Burden of Proof. The Applicant bears the burden of proof to demonstrate that the Application of a dedication or
construction requirement that is uniformly applied imposes a disproportionate burden on the Applicant.
6. Decision. The City Council shall consider the petition for relief from a dedication or construction requirement
based upon the following criteria:
a. The City Council shall determine whether the Application of the standard or condition is roughly
proportional to the nature and extent of the impacts created by the proposed development on the City's water,
wastewater, storm drainage, parks or roadway system, and whether the Application of the standard or condition
reasonably benefits the development.
b. In making such determination, the City Council shall consider the evidence submitted by the Applicant, the
report and recommendation of the City Manager and, where the property is located within the City's ETJ, any
recommendations from the County, as applicable.
7. Action. Based on the criteria in subsection 8.02.C.6 (above), the City Council shall take one of the following
actions:
a. Deny the petition for relief, and impose the dedication or construction requirement as required by this
Ordinance; or
b. Grant the petition for relief, and waive any dedication or construction requirement to the extent necessary to
achieve proportionality; or
c. Grant the petition for relief, and direct that the City participate in the costs of acquiring land for or
constructing the Public Improvement under standard participation policies.
8. Notification of Decision on Petition. The City Manager shall notify the Applicant of the decision on the petition
for relief within fourteen (14) calendar days following the City Council's decision.
D. Expiration or Failure to File Application. Where an Application was denied based upon the imposition of the standard
requiring dedication of land or construction of a required Public Improvement and the City Council's decision is to grant some
level of relief, the Applicant shall resubmit the Application within sixty (60) calendar days following the date the petition for
relief is granted, in whole or in part, showing conformity with the City Council's decision on the petition.
1. If the Application is not resubmitted within the sixty (60) day period, the relief granted by the City Council on the
petition shall expire.
2. If the resubmittal of the Application is modified in any other way, a new petition for relief may be required by the
City Manager.
3. If the Application for which relief was granted is denied on other grounds, a new petition for relief may be
required by the City Manager.
E. Effect of Relief.
1. The City Manager may require the Applicant to submit a modified Application or supporting materials consistent
with the relief granted by the City Council on the petition.
2. The relief granted on the petition shall remain in effect for the period the Application is in effect, and shall expire
upon expiration of the plat or related Application.
8.03. Subdivision Vested Rights Petition
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 328/414
A. Purpose. In accordance with the Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 245 or successor statute, the purpose of a
Subdivision Vested Rights Petition is to determine whether an Application should be processed under the terms of a previous
ordinance, to provide a process for determination of possible vested status, and to determine when certain permits are subject to
expiration.
B. Applicability of a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition.
1. Any Application. A Subdivision Vested Rights Petition may be submitted for any Application authorized by this
Subdivision Ordinance.
2. Prohibit Joint Submission. A Subdivision Vested Rights Petition cannot be submitted by an Applicant along with
submission of a request for a text amendment to this Subdivision Ordinance, a Zoning Map amendment, or any other
request for a legislative decision by the City Council.
C. Petition Submission.
1. Filing. A Subdivision Vested Rights Petition shall be submitted to the City's Responsible Official and shall be in
accordance with the Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 245 or successor statute.
2. Automatic Waiver. Submission of a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition shall require a Waiver of Right to 30-Day
Action (See Section 4.04.D).
3. Stay of Further Proceedings. Submission of a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition shall stay further proceedings on
the related Application until a final decision is reached on the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition.
D. Time for Filing a Petition and Application.
1. A Subdivision Vested Rights Petition shall be filed jointly with an Application for which a vested right is
claimed.
2. A Subdivision Vested Rights Petition may be filed without a joint Application if the petition is filed pursuant to
subsection 8.03.K Dormant Projects (below).
3. Where more than one Application is authorized to be filed simultaneously by this Subdivision Ordinance, the
petition may be filed simultaneously for each Application.
E. Petition Requirements. The Subdivision Vested Rights Petition shall allege in writing that the Applicant has a vested right
for some or all of the land subject to the Application under Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 245 or successor statute, or
pursuant to Texas Local Government Code, Section 43.002 or successor statute or other applicable law, that requires the City to
review and decide the Application under standards that were in effect prior to the effective date of the currently applicable
standards. The petition shall include the following information and documents:
1. The name, mailing address, phone number and fax number of the property owner (or the property owner's duly
authorized agent).
2. Identification of the property for which the person claims a vested right.
3. Identification of the project, as that term is defined in Local Government Code Section 245.001(3), and the
permit application, permit, or plan for development giving rise to the project.
4. A narrative description of the grounds for the petition, including a statement as to whether the petition asserts a
vested right related to a specific standard or to an entire project;
5. A copy of each approved or pending Application which is the basis for the contention that the City may not apply
current standards to the Application which is the subject of the petition;
6. The Official Vesting Date of the Application;
7. The date the subdivision for which the Application was submitted was commenced;
8. Identification of all standards otherwise applicable to the Application from which relief is sought;
9. Identification of any current standards which Applicant agrees can be applied to the Application at issue;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 329/414
10. A narrative description of how the Application of current standards affect proposed landscaping, Usable Open
Space or park dedication, shown on the Application for which the petition is filed;
11. A copy of any prior vested rights determination involving the same land; and
12. Whenever the Applicant alleges that an Application subject to expiration should not be terminated, a description
of the events constituting Progress Towards Completion of the subdivision for which the application was approved.
F. Decision of a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition.
1. Reviewing a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition.
a. The Responsible Official for a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition is the same as that for reviewing the
Application with which the petition is associated.
b. Where multiple Applications are submitted, and there is more than one Responsible Official, the decision of
each Responsible Official shall be coordinated with that of any other Responsible Official on the Subdivision
Vested Rights Petition.
c. The City Attorney shall also be notified of the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition following its filing and
acceptance for processing.
d. The Applicant shall reimburse the City for all related legal costs for review of a Subdivision Vested Rights
Petition. This reimbursement shall be paid in full prior to filing of the Filing Plat.
2. Decision by the Responsible Official on a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition.
a. If the Responsible Official is the Decision Maker on the original related Application, that official shall
determine whether the relief requested in the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition should be granted in whole or in
part, and shall formulate a written report summarizing the Decision Maker's reasoning and recommendation.
b. The Applicant shall be notified of the decision within fourteen (14) calendar days following the date the
Subdivision Vested Rights Petition was filed at the City.
c. The Responsible Official may defer making a decision on the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition and
instead forward the petition to the Commission for a decision, in accordance with the process outlined in
subsection 8.03.F.3.
3. Decision by Commission on a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition.
a. If the original related Application is to be decided by the Commission, or if the Responsible Official defers
making a decision on a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition pursuant to subsection 8.03.F.2.c, the Responsible
Official for that type of Application shall submit a report in the form of a recommendation on the petition to the
Commission.
b. The Commission shall render a decision on the petition within thirty (30) calendar days following the date
the petition was filed at the City or deferred by the Responsible Official.
c. The Commission's decision on a petition shall be upon a simple majority vote of the full Commission's
voting members.
4. Decision by City Council on a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition.
a. Where the City Council is the final Decision Maker on the related Application, or for any petition submitted
pursuant to subsection K. Dormant Projects, the Responsible Official for that type of Application shall submit a
report in the form of a recommendation on the petition to the City Council.
b. The City Council shall render a decision on the petition within thirty (30) calendar days following the date
the petition was filed at the City.
c. The City Council's decision on a petition shall be upon a simple majority vote of the full City Council's
voting members, and shall be final.
5. Appeal to the Council of a Decision on Subdivision Vested Rights Petition.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 330/414
a. For an Applicant-Initiated Appeal. The Applicant may appeal the Responsible Official's or Commission's
decision on the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition to the City Council by submitting written notice of appeal to
the applicable Responsible Official within fourteen (14) calendar days following the date of such decision.
i. A letter stating the reasons for the appeal, citing the specific applicable section(s) of the Subdivision
Ordinance, shall be submitted by the Applicant.
b. For a City Council-Initiated Appeal. No less than four (4) voting members of the City Council may appeal
the Responsible Official's or Commission's decision on the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition to the entire City
Council by submitting written notice of appeal to the applicable Responsible Official within fourteen (14)
calendar days following the date of such decision.
i. The Council shall consider and act on whether it will appeal the decision at its first regular meeting
(for which there is time to include such appeal on its posted agenda, as required by State law) that occurs
after the date at which the decision was made.
ii. Written notice of the City Council's vote to appeal shall be submitted to the City Manager within
seven (7) calendar days following the City Council's vote to appeal the decision.
c. The City Council shall hear and decide the appeal within thirty (30) calendar days following receipt of the
notice of appeal by the City.
d. Approval of an appeal by the City Council shall only be upon a favorable vote of at least four (4) of the City
Council's voting members, and shall be final.
G. Criteria for Subdivision Vested Rights Petition Approval.
1. Factors. The Decision Maker shall decide the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition based upon the following
factors:
a. The nature and extent of prior Applications filed for the land subject to the petition;
b. Whether any prior vested rights determinations have been made with respect to the property subject to the
petition;
c. Whether any prior approved Applications for the property have expired or have been terminated in
accordance with State law or local ordinances;
d. Whether current standards adopted after commencement of the project affect proposed use of the land,
landscaping or tree preservation, open space or park dedication, lot size, lot dimensions, lot coverage or building
size based upon the proposed Application;
e. Whether any statutory exception applies to the standards in the current Subdivision Regulations from which
the Applicant seeks relief;
f. Whether any prior approved Applications relied upon by the Applicant have expired; and
g. Any other applicable provisions outlined in Chapter 245 or Section 43.002 of the Texas Local Government
Code, or successor statutes.
2. Conditions for a Pending Application. If the claim of vested rights is based upon a pending Application, subject
to standards that have been superseded by current standards of this Subdivision Ordinance, the Decision Maker may
condition any relief granted on the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition on the approval of the pending Application.
H. Action and Record of Action on the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition.
1. Action. The Decision Maker may take any of the following actions:
a. Deny the relief requested in the petition, and direct that the Application shall be reviewed and decided under
currently applicable standards; or
b. Grant the relief requested in the petition, and direct that the related Application be reviewed and decided in
accordance with the standards contained in identified prior regulations; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 331/414
c. Grant the relief requested in part, and direct that certain identified current standards be applied to the related
Application, while standards contained in identified prior regulations also shall be applied.
2. Record. The Responsible Official's report and the decision on the Subdivision Vested Rights Petition shall be
recorded in writing in an order identifying the following:
a. The nature of the relief granted, if any;
b. The related Application(s) upon which relief is premised under the petition;
c. Current standards that shall apply to the related Application for which relief is sought, if applicable;
d. Prior standards that shall apply to the related Application for which relief is sought, including any
procedural standards, if applicable;
e. The statutory exception or other grounds upon which relief is denied in whole or in part on the petition; and
f. To the extent feasible, subsequent related Applications that are subject to the same relief granted on the
petition.
I. Effect of the Final Petition Decision on Related Applications.
1. Petition Decision Required Before Proceeding with Application. A final decision on the Subdivision Vested
Rights Petition must be achieved prior to further processing, and prior to any consideration of, or decision on, the
related Application.
2. Revision Made (if necessary) to Related Application After Petition Decision. Following the City's final decision
on a petition, the Applicant shall, if necessary, revise the related Application such that it conforms to the City's
decision on the petition.
3. Related Applications with Revisions. After submission of a revised related Application, the Decision Maker on
the related Application shall review and consider the revised Application in accordance with the procedures for
deciding that type of Application, as outlined in this Subdivision Ordinance, and in conformity with any relief granted.
4. Related Applications without Revisions. If the relief granted on the petition is consistent with the related
Application on file, no revisions shall be necessary, and the related Application shall be deemed submitted at the time
of the final decision on the petition.
J. Expiration and Extension of a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition.
1. Expiration. Relief granted on a Subdivision Vested Rights Petition shall expire on occurrence of one of the
following events:
a. The Applicant fails to submit a revised Application that is consistent with the relief granted, if any, within
sixty (60) calendar days following the final decision on the petition;
b. The Application for which relief was granted on the petition is denied; or
c. The Application for which relief was granted on the petition expires.
2. Extension. Extension of the date of expiration for the Application for which relief was granted on a petition shall
result in extension of the relief granted on the petition for the same time period.
K. Dormant Projects.
1. Definitions. For purposes of this subsection 8.03.K only:
a. Dormant Project. A dormant project shall meet the following criteria:
i. An Initial Permit does not have an expiration date; and
ii. No Progress Towards Completion has been made within the project.
b. Initial Permit. Initial permit means any of the following types of approvals granted under these Subdivision
Regulations, or any predecessor subdivision or development-related regulation or ordinance that was in effect
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 332/414
prior to the adoption of this Subdivision Ordinance:
i. Vesting Plat,
ii. Construction Plans,
iii. Construction Release,
iv. Subdivision Waivers to any requirement in these Subdivision Regulations (per section 8.01 Petition
for Subdivision Waiver), or
v. Any other Application that was approved subject to a schematic drawing illustrating the location,
arrangement, orientation or design of development, lots or improvements on a site intended for
development.
c. Final Permit. Final permit means a Filing Plat approved under these Subdivision Regulations, or any
predecessor subdivision or development-related regulation or ordinance that was in effect prior to the adoption of
this Subdivision Ordinance.
2. Expiration Date Established for an Initial Permit. Any Application for an Initial Permit that was approved or filed
two (2) years prior to the adoption date of this Subdivision Ordinance, and was not subject to an expiration date shall
expire on the effective date of this Subdivision Ordinance.
3. Reinstatement of an Expired Initial Permit.
a. The property owner of the land subject to an Initial Permit that expires under subsection 8.03.K.2 (above)
may petition the City Council to reinstate such Initial Permit by filing a written petition within one (1) year
following the effective date of this Subdivision Ordinance.
b. The petition shall clearly state the grounds for reinstatement, and shall be accompanied by documentation
the following:
i. As of two (2) years prior to the effective date of this Subdivision Ordinance, one of the following
events had occurred:
(a) A Final Permit to continue toward completion of the project was submitted to the City for all or
part of the land subject to the approved Initial Permit and was approved by the City, or was filed and
was subsequently approved by the City;
(b) An Application for a Final Permit to continue toward completion of the project was submitted
to the City for all or part of the land subject to the expired Initial Permit, but such Application was
rejected on grounds of incompleteness (consistent with Texas Local Government Code, Chapter
245.005(c)(2));
(c) Costs for development of the land subject to the Initial Permit, including costs associated with
roadway, utility and other infrastructure facilities designed to serve the land in whole or in part, but
exclusive of land acquisition costs, were incurred in the aggregate amount of five percent (5%) of the
most recent appraised market value of the land;
(d) Fiscal security was posted with the City to guarantee performance of obligations required under
these Subdivision Regulations, including the construction of required improvements associated with
the proposed development, for all or a part of the land subject to the approved Initial Permit; or
(e) Utility connection fees for all or part of the land subject to the approved Initial Permit were paid
to the City.
4. City Council Action on Reinstatement of a Dormant Project's Expired Initial Permit. The City Council may take
one of the following actions:
a. Reinstate the expired Initial Permit without an expiration date, if it finds that the Applicant has met any one
of the criteria listed in subsection 8.03.K.3.b.i.
b. Reinstate the Initial Permit for all or part of the land subject thereto, if it finds that the Applicant has met
any one of the criteria listed in subsection 8.03.K.3.b.i, subject to expiration dates or other conditions that ensure
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 333/414
that the remaining land that is not subject to an approved or pending Final Permit Application will be developed
in a timely fashion.
i. In granting relief under this provision, the City Council may require that development of such
remaining land is subject to standards enacted after approval of the Initial Permit.
c. Deny the reinstatement petition, if it finds that the Applicant has failed to meet any of the criteria in
subsection 8.03.K.3 Reinstatement of an Expired Initial Permit); or
d. Reinstate the permit for only that part of the land subject to a pending Final Permit Application, if it finds
that the Applicant has met the criteria in subsection 8.03.K.3.b.i and the pending Application subsequently was
approved, and deny the reinstatement petition for the remaining land subject to the expired Initial Permit.
Section 9. Figures
Figure 16: Lot Type Examples
Figure 17: Lot Width Example
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 334/414
(Ordinance 2013-32 adopted 12/3/13)
CHAPTER 11
TAXATION
ARTICLE 11.100 CITY SALES AND USE TAX*
The city council hereby declares that a 1% local sales and use tax within the city has been properly and lawfully adopted at a
special election therefor held January 9, 1968, in accordance with the provisions of state law and is hereby levied within the city.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title III, Chapter 34, Section 34.15)
ARTICLE 11.200 TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICES TAX
As a result of the passage of House Bill 1777 by the 76th Session of the Texas Legislature, the City of Gonzales can no longer
collect revenue apportionments through a telecommunications tax. (Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 11.300 HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX†
Sec. 11.301 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
Consideration. The cost of the room, sleeping space, bed or dormitory space or other facilities in such hotel, and shall not include
the cost of food served or personal services rendered to the occupant not related to cleaning and readying such room or space for
occupancy, and shall not include any tax assessed for occupancy thereof by any other governmental agency.
Hotel. Any building or buildings, trailer, railroad Pullman car not being utilized for the transportation of travelers, or other facility
in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term shall include hotels, motels, tourist
homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming houses, trailer houses, trailer motels, railroad Pullman cars parked on a
siding or other area and used for sleeping accommodations not involving the transportation of travelers, dormitory space where
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 335/414
bed space is rented to individuals or groups, apartments not occupied by “permanent residents” as defined in this section, and all
other facilities where rooms or sleeping facilities or spaces are furnished for a consideration, but hotel shall not be defined so as to
include hospital, sanitariums or nursing homes.
Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to use or possession of any room, space or sleeping facility in a hotel for any
purpose.
Occupant. Anyone, who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has a right to use or possess any room or rooms, or sleeping
space or facility in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement.
Permanent Resident. Any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any room or rooms or sleeping space or
facility in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days during the current calendar year or preceding year.
Person. Any individual, company, corporation or association owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel.
Quarterly Period. The regular calendar quarters of the year, the first quarter being composed of the months of January, February
and March, the second quarter being the months of April, May and June, the third quarter being the months of July, August and
September, and the fourth quarter being the months of October, November and December.
Tax Assessor-Collector. The tax assessor-collector of the city.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title III, Chapter 34, Section 34.30)
Sec. 11.302 Levy of Tax
(a) Levy of Tax; Rate; Exception. There is hereby levied a tax upon the occupant of any room or space furnished by any hotel,
where such cost of occupancy is at the rate of two dollars ($2.00) or more per day, such tax to be equal to seven percent (7%) of
the consideration paid by the occupant of such room, space or facility to such hotel, exclusive of other occupancy taxes imposed
by other governmental agencies effective as of April 1, 1996. (Ordinance 96-2 adopted 2/27/96)
(b) No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a permanent resident.
(c) No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon an occupant of any room or space rented from a corporation or association
organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable or education purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to
the benefit of any private share holder or individual.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title III, Chapter 34, Section 34.31)
Sec. 11.303 Disposition of Revenues
All revenue derived from the occupancy tax imposed in Section 11.302(a) will only be used for the following:
(1) The acquisition of sites for, and the construction, improvement, enlarging, equipping, repairing, operation and
maintenance of, convention center facilities, including, but not limited to, civic center convention buildings,
auditoriums, coliseums and parking areas or facilities for the parking or storage of motor vehicles or other
conveyances located at or in the immediate vicinity of convention center facilities.
(2) The furnishing of facilities, personnel and materials for the registration of convention delegates or registrants.
(3) For advertising of general promotional and tourist advertising of the city and its vicinity, and conducting a
solicitation and operating program to attract conventions and visitors either by the city or through contracts with
persons or organizations selected by the city.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title III, Chapter 34, Section 34.32)
Sec. 11.304 Collection of Tax
Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax imposed in Section 11.302 for the city.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title III, Chapter 34, Section 34.33)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 336/414
Sec. 11.305 Reports
(a) On the last day of the month following each quarterly period, every person required in Section 11.302 hereof to collect the
tax imposed herein, shall file a report with the tax assessor-collector, showing the consideration paid for all room occupancies in
the preceding quarter, the amount of the tax collected on such occupancies, and any other information as the tax assessor-collector
may reasonably require. Such person shall pay the amount of tax collected from occupants during the period of the report at the
time of filing the report. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title III, Chapter 34, Section 34.34)
(b) At the end of each quarter, each hotel shall provide a copy of the quarterly report filed with the state comptroller to the city.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 11.306 Rules and Regulations
The tax assessor-collector shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are necessary to effectively collect the tax
levied herein, and shall upon reasonable notice have access to books and records necessary to enable him to determine the
correctness of any report filed as required by this article and the amount of taxes due under the provisions of this article. (1995
Code of Ordinances, Title III, Chapter 34, Section 34.35)
Sec. 11.307 Failure to Pay Tax
If any person shall fail to collect the tax imposed herein, or shall fail to file a report as required herein, or shall fail to pay to the
tax assessor-collector the tax as imposed herein when the report for payment is due, or shall file a false report, then such person
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished in accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in Section 1.109
of this code. In addition, such person who fails to remit the tax imposed by this article within the time required shall forfeit 5% of
the amount due as a penalty, and after the first 30 days shall forfeit an additional 5% of such tax. Provided, however, that the
penalty shall never be less than $1.00. Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of 9% per annum beginning 60 days from
the date due on the tax imposed by this article. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title III, Chapter 34, Section 34.36)
Sec. 11.308 Penalty
Whoever violates any provisions of this article for which another penalty is not already herein provided, shall be subject to the
penalty provisions in accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in Section 1.109 of this code. (1995 Code of
Ordinances, Title III, Chapter 34, Section 34.99)
ARTICLE 11.400 RESIDENCE HOMESTEAD TAX LIMITATION FOR ELDERLY OR DISABLED PERSONS
(a) Effective with tax year 2004, the total amount of ad valorem taxes imposed on the residence homestead of a person who is
disabled or is sixty-five (65) years of age or older shall not be increased while it remains the residence homestead of that person
or that person's spouse who is disabled or sixty-five (65) years of age or older.
(b) If the person who is disabled or is sixty-five years of age or older dies in a year in which the person received a residence
homestead exemption, the total amount of ad valorem taxes imposed on the residence homestead shall not be increased while it
remains the residence homestead of that person's surviving spouse if the spouse is fifty-five (55) years of age or older at the time
of the person's death, subject to any exceptions provided by general law.
(c) Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b), taxes on the residence homestead may be increased to the extent the value of the
homestead is increased by improvements other than repairs and other than improvements made to comply with governmental
requirements.
(d) “Disabled” means under a disability for purposes of payment of disability insurance benefits under Federal Old-Age,
Survivors, and Disability Insurance.
(e) In the event of a conflict between article VIII, Section I-b of the Texas Constitution and Section 11.261 of the Texas Tax
Code with the general explanation of the tax limitation explained herein, the provisions of the Texas Constitution and the Texas
Tax Code shall prevail.
(Ordinance 2004-13 adopted 12/6/04)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 337/414
CHAPTER 12
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
ARTICLE 12.100 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 12.101 Responsibility and Authority of City Manager
The city manager and his assigns shall have the general responsibility and authority to determine the installation and proper
timing and maintenance of traffic control devices, to conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial
measures, to conduct engineering investigations of traffic conditions, to plan the operation of traffic on the streets and highways
of this city, and to cooperate with other officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry
out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of this city. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 70, Section
70.01)
Sec. 12.102 Emergency and Experimental Regulation
(a) The city manager or his assigns is empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of this traffic
code and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such
temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than 90 days.
(b) The chief of police or his assigns may test traffic control devices under actual conditions of traffic.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 70, Section 70.02)
Sec. 12.103 City Manager; Further Authority and Presumption
(a) Whenever in this traffic code the authority is given to the city manager or his assigns to do acts as they deem or in their
opinion are advisable, or necessary, or desirable, such acts shall be based on his observations and studies, according to generally
used, accepted traffic control principles or techniques.
(b) Traffic innovations and experiments, however, are not to be inhibited hereby.
(c) As to any given traffic control device, signal, sign, marker or marking, it shall be initially presumed that such device, signal,
sign, marker, or marking independently erected by the city manager or his assigns has been installed pursuant to their
observations and studies, based on generally used, accepted traffic control principles or techniques.
(d) Any responsibility or authority imposed or conferred on the city manager by the provisions of this section may be
performed by the chief of police or by those officers, employees, or agents of the city working under their supervision and control
and designated by the city manager to perform the same.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 70, Section 70.03)
Sec. 12.104 Authority of Police and Fire Department Official
(a) It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce
all traffic laws of this city and of the state.
(b) Officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police are authorized to direct all traffic by
hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to
safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the
provisions of the traffic laws.
(c) Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic there or in the
immediate vicinity thereof.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 338/414
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 70, Section 70.04)
Sec. 12.105 Required Obedience to Traffic Provisions
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this traffic code.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 70, Section 70.05)
Sec. 12.106 Obedience to Police and Fire Department Officials
No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer or fire department official.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 70, Section 70.06)
Sec. 12.107 Use of Coasters, Roller Skates and Similar Devices Restricted
No person upon a skateboard, roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar vehicle, shall go upon
any sidewalk or roadway. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 70, Section 70.07)
Sec. 12.108 Arrest Without Warrant*
Any police officer of the city shall have the power and is authorized to arrest, without a warrant of arrest being first issued, any
person who violates any traffic law of the city of any provision of the state motor vehicle laws as are applicable within the city
limits in the presence of or within the view of such arresting officer. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 70, Section
70.08)
ARTICLE 12.200 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES*
Sec. 12.201 Authority to Install Traffic-Control Devices
The city manager or his assigns shall place and maintain official traffic control devices when and as required under this traffic
code to make effective the provisions of this code, and may place and maintain such additional official traffic control devices as
he may deem necessary to regulate, warn or guide traffic under this code and state law. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII,
Chapter 70, Section 70.20)
Sec. 12.202 Manual and Specifications for Traffic-Control Devices
(a) All traffic control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual and specifications approved by the state
commission on highways and public transportation. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far
as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city.
(b) All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law and this article shall be official
traffic control devices.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 70, Section 70.21)
Sec. 12.203 Presumption of Legality
(a) Whenever official traffic control devices are placed in position approximately conforming to the requirements of this
subchapter, such devices shall be presumed to have been so placed by the official act or direction of lawful authority, unless the
contrary shall be established by competent evidence.
(b) Any official traffic control device placed pursuant to the provisions of this traffic code and purporting to conform to the
lawful requirement pertaining to such devices shall be presumed to comply with the requirements of this traffic code, unless the
contrary shall be established by competent evidence.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 70, Section 70.22)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 339/414
Sec. 12.204 City Manager to Designate Crosswalks, Safety Zones and Traffic Lanes
The city manager or his assigns is authorized:
(1) To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks, or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks
at intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other
places as he may deem necessary.
(2) To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the
protection of pedestrians.
(3) To mark traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is
necessary.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 70, Section 70.23)
Sec. 12.205 Existing Devices Affirmed and Ratified
All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings heretofore placed or erected by the chief of police or other officers or
employees of the city and now in use for the purposes of regulating, warning or guiding traffic are hereby affirmed, ratified and
confirmed to be official traffic control devices; provided, however, such traffic control devices are not inconsistent with the
provisions of state law or this traffic code. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 70, Section 70.24)
ARTICLE 12.300 OBSTRUCTION OF VIEW AND MOVEMENT
Sec. 12.301 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:
Curbing. The boundary of that portion of any street which is improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic.
Fence. Any enclosing barrier, movable or immovable, constructed of wood, metal or any other material, regardless of its use or
purpose.
Object. Every sign, advertisement, container or display item of any type or form, whether movable or immovable, which is not
authorized by state or city law.
Plant. Any hedge, bush, shrub, vine, palm or other vegetation, except trees.
Property. The boundary line of any street, which line marks the division between the street area and the property abutting upon
the same.
Street. The entire width of every way or place of whatsoever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a
matter of right for the purpose of traffic.
Traffic. Pedestrians, riders of animals and drivers of vehicles, while using any street or sidewalk for the purpose of travel.
Vehicle. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported to drawn upon a street, except devices
moved by human power.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 70, Section 70.35)
Sec. 12.302 Plants, Objects or Vehicles
(a) Prohibited Near Street Corners. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain, or cause to be placed or maintained
any plant, object or vehicle having a height greater than three feet above the level of the center of the nearest abutting street, on or
in that portion of any corner lot in the city, which portion is included in a triangle on the street corner of the lot formed by a
diagonal line intersecting the curblines, at points 25 feet from the street corner intersection of the curblines.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 340/414
(b) Prohibited in Sidewalk Areas. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain or permit, or cause to be placed or
maintained any plant, object or vehicle having a height greater than three feet above the level of the nearest abutting street on or
in that area which lies between the property lines of any corner lot and the curblines of any street in the city.
(c) Trees Near Street Corners to be Trimmed. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain, or cause to be placed or
maintained, any tree on or in that portion of any corner lot in the city, which portion is included in a triangle on the street corner
of that lot formed by a diagonal line intersecting the curblines 25 feet from the street corner intersection of the curblines unless all
limbs, branches and foliage on the tree are kept trimmed and pruned to a minimum clearance of eight feet above the street level at
the nearest curbline or to such clearance as will provide an unobstructed view of traffic signs and controls to oncoming traffic.
(d) Placing and Maintaining in Sidewalk Area So as to Prohibit Free Passage. It shall be unlawful for any person to place,
maintain or permit, or cause to be placed or maintained, any tree, plant, object or vehicle on or in the area between the property
line of any lot and the curbline of any street abutting such property line in such a way as to obstruct the free passage on and use of
that area by the public.
(e) Placing Near Fire Hydrants. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, maintain or permit, or cause to be placed or
maintained on any property, any tree, plant or object within five feet of any fire hydrant in the city.
(f) Minimum Clearance of Trees in Sidewalk Areas. It shall be unlawful for the owner of occupant of any property in the city to
maintain or permit limbs of trees growing thereon to overhang or grow above the area between his property line and the curbline
of any abutting street, unless such limbs and all branches and foliage thereon are kept trimmed and pruned to a minimum
clearance of eight feet above the street level at the nearest curbline, or to such clearance as will provide an unobstructed view of
traffic signs and controls to oncoming traffic.
(g) Certain Fence Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or replace, or cause to be constructed or replaced,
any fence having a height greater than three feet above the level of the center of the nearest abutting street on or in that portion of
any corner lot in the city which portion is included in a triangle on the street corner of the lot formed by a diagonal line
intersecting the curblines at points 26 feet from the street corner intersection of the curblines; provided this section shall not apply
to any fence authorized by law.
(h) Correction of Violation; Notice. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to cause a written notice to be served upon the
owner or occupant of any property upon which any violation of this article exists, to correct such condition as constitutes a
violation of this article within ten days after serving such notice; and if such condition is not corrected or remedied, or caused to
be corrected or remedied by such person by the end of such ten days, the chief of police is authorized and directed to cause a
complaint to be issued against such owner or occupant, stating the offense with which he is charged.
(i) Authority of City Manager to Trim, Remove, and the Like. The city manager is authorized to remove or cause to be
removed any tree, plant or object found between the opposite curblines, in any street in the city, and to trim branches, limbs or
foliage of any tree or plant which overhangs or grows above the area which lies between the opposite curblines of any street, so as
to provide a minimum clearance of eight feet above the street level at the curbline and so as to be graduated toward the center
level at the center of the street.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 70, Section 70.36)
Sec. 12.303 Penalty
Whenever in any provisions of this traffic code, an act or condition is prohibited, or is made or declared to be unlawful, or an
offense, or a misdemeanor, or whenever in the code the doing of any act is required, or the failure to do an act is declared to be
unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefore, the violation of any such provision of this code shall be punished by a
fine in accordance with the general penalty provision set forth in Section 1.109 of this code. However, no penalty shall be greater
or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state. Each violation of this traffic code
shall constitute a separate offense. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 70, Section 70.99)
ARTICLE 12.400 OPERATION OF VEHICLES
Sec. 12.401 Weaving Prohibited
No driver of any motor vehicle or any other vehicle shall weave in and out of traffic to the extent that such weaving unreasonably
interferes with the right-of-way of other vehicles on the right or left. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 71, Section
71.01)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 341/414
Sec. 12.402 Cutting in Traffic Regulated
When traffic is traveling in parallel lanes, no driver or operator of any motor vehicle or any other vehicle shall cut from one lane
of traffic to another so as to unreasonably interfere with the right-of-way of any other vehicle, except in an emergency. (1995
Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 71, Section 71.02)
Sec. 12.403 Prima Facie Evidence of Weaving and Cutting in
In regard to Sections 12.401 and 12.402, the fact that any adjacent vehicle, into the path of which the weave or cut is made, shall
slacken its pace abruptly or shall swerve into any parallel lane or near to any obstruction in the street or object at the side thereof
shall be prima facie evidence of unreasonable interference with the right-of-way of that vehicle by the driver of the vehicle
weaving or cutting in. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 71, Section 71.03)
Sec. 12.404 Following Too Closely
The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for
the speed of such vehicles and the traffic upon and the conditions of the roadway. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter
71, Section 71.04)
Sec. 12.405 “Dig Out” or “Tire Squeal” Prohibited
(a) It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle within the city to “dig out” or produce “tire squeal.” For the
purposes of this section, dig out means tire squeal. Tire squeal means the sound produced by the friction of a motor vehicular tire
against a dry pavement under sudden acceleration of the vehicle to which said tire is mounted, the tire then turning at a rate of
revolution disproportionately greater than the length of distance then traveled on the pavement by the tire.
(b) Prima facie evidence of such disproportional revolution shall include skid marks or tire marks left by such tire upon the
pavement, or smoke produced by such revolution.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 71, Section 71.05)
ARTICLE 12.500 SPEED REGULATION*
Sec. 12.501 Application of State Speed Laws
The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within this city except where the city
manager or his assigns, upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, determines that other speed limits shall be
applicable on specified streets or in certain areas, in which event it shall be unlawful for any person to drive at a speed in excess
of any speed so determined when signs are in place giving notice thereof. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 71,
Section 71.15)
Sec. 12.502 Authority of City Council to Regulate Speed Limit
(a) Upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, the city council may decrease maximum speed limits at
intersections and outside urban districts and may increase limits within urban districts.
(b) Upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, the city council shall determine the maximum speed limits on
arterial streets.
(c) Speed limits established pursuant to this article shall be applicable at all or such times as shall be indicated by official traffic
control devices.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 71, Section 71.16)
Sec. 12.503 Specific Speed Limits
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 342/414
(a) Upon the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation heretofore made as authorized by the provisions of the Texas
Transportation Code, section 545.356, the following prima facie limits hereafter indicated for vehicles are hereby determined and
declared to be reasonable and safe, and such speed limits here hereby fixed at the rate of speed indicated for vehicles traveling
upon the named streets and highways, or parts thereof, described as follows:
(1) On U.S. Highway 183 south from a point at the south city limits to a point 3,876 feet north, a distance of
approximately 0.734 mile, 45 miles per hour;
(2) School zone on U.S. 183 (Water Street) from a point 2,573 feet south of its intersection with U.S. 90A to a point
4,261 feet south, a distance of approximately 0.320 of a mile, 35 miles per hour when so signed.
(3) On S.H. 97 (St. Lawrence Street) from a point at its intersection with U.S. 183 (St. Joseph Street) to a point
6,678 feet east, a distance of approximately 1.265 miles, 30 miles per hour;
(4) On S.H. 97 (St. Lawrence Street) from a point at the east city limit to a point 4,895 feet west, a distance of
approximately 0.927 of a mile, 45 miles per hour;
(5) School zone on S.H. 97 (St. Lawrence Street) from a point 1,634 feet east of its intersection with U.S. 183 (St.
Joseph Street) to a point 2,748 feet east, a distance of approximately 0.211 of a mile, 20 miles per hour when so
signed;
(6) School zone on S.H. 97 (St. Lawrence Street) from a point 4,382 feet east of its intersection with U.S. 183 (St.
Joseph Street) to a point 5,786 feet east, a distance of approximately 0.266 of a mile, 20 miles per hour when so
signed;
(7) On U.S. 183 (St. Joseph Street) from a point at the north city limit to a point 998 feet south, a distance of
approximately 0.189 of a mile, 55 miles per hour;
(8) On U.S. 183 (St. Joseph Street) from a point 998 feet south of the north city limit to a point 1,056 feet south, a
distance of approximately 0.200 of a mile, 45 miles per hour;
(9) On U.S. 183 (St. Joseph Street), from a point 2,054 feet south of the north city limit to a point 2,967 feet south, a
distance of approximately 0.562 of a mile, 35 miles per hour;
(10) On U.S. 183 (St. Joseph Street) from a point 5,021 feet south of the north city limit to a point 4,820 feet south,
a distance of approximately 0.913 of a mile, 30 miles per hour;
(11) On U.S. 183 (St. Joseph Street) from a point 9,841 feet south of the north city limit to a point 1,588 feet south,
a distance of approximately 0.295 of a mile, 35 miles per hour;
(12) School zone on U.S. 183 (St. Joseph Street) from a point 5,602 feet south of the north city limit to a point 688
feet south, a distance of approximately 0.130 of a mile, 20 miles per hour when so signed;
(13) On U.S. Highway No. 90A (Sarah DeWitt Street) from a point at the west city limit to a point 137 feet east, a
distance of approximately .026 of a mile, 50 miles per hour;
(14) On U.S. Highway No. 90A (Sarah DeWitt Street) from a point 137 feet east of the west city limit to a point
1,468 feet east, a distance of approximately 0.278 of a mile, 45 miles per hour;
(15) On U.S. Highway 90A (Sarah DeWitt Street) from a point 1,605 feet east of the west city limit to a point 2,064
feet south, a distance of approximately 0.391 of a mile, 35 miles per hour;
(16) On U.S. Highway No. 90A (Sarah DeWitt Street) from a point 3,670 feet east of the west city limit to a point
8,358 feet east, a distance of approximately 1.583 mile, 45 miles per hour;
(17) On U.S. Highway No. 90A (Sarah DeWitt Street) from a point 12,028 feet east of the west city limit to a point
7,050 feet east (at the east city limit), a distance of approximately 1.335 mile, 55 miles per hour;
(18) School zone on U.S. Highway No. 90A (Sarah DeWitt Street) from a point 50 feet west of its intersection with
State Highway No. 97, to a point 1,663 feet west, a distance of approximately 0.315 of a mile, 30 miles per hour when
so signed;
(19) On U.S. Highway No. 183 from a point 6,251 feet north of the intersection with U.S. Highway 90A, at the
north city limit, to a point 4,250 feet south, a distance of approximately .805 of a mile, 55 miles per hour;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 343/414
(20) On U.S. Highway No. 183 from a point 2,001 feet north of the intersection with U.S. Highway 90A to a point
6,257 feet south, a distance of approximately 1.185 of a mile, 45 miles per hour;
(21) On U.S. Highway No. 183 from a point 4,256 feet south of the intersection with U.S. Highway 90A to a point
6,125 feet south, a distance of approximately 1.160 of a mile, 50 miles per hour;
(22) On U.S. Highway No. 183 from a point 10,381 feet north of the intersection with U.S. Highway 90A to a point
7,831 feet south, at the south city limit, a distance of approximately 1.483 of a mile, 55 miles per hour;
(23) School Zone on U.S. Highway No. 183 from a point 2,538 feet south of the intersection of U.S. 90A, to a point
1,663 feet south, a distance of approximately .315 of a mile, 35 miles per hour when flashing;
(24) On U.S. Highway No. 90A (Sarah DeWitt Street) starting 1,563 feet west of the intersection of U.S. Highway
183 (Water Street), at the west city limits, to a point 137 feet east, a distance of 0.026 of a mile, 50 miles per hour;
(25) On U.S. Highway No. 90A (Sarah DeWitt Street) from a point 1,426 feet west of the intersection of U.S.
Highway 183 (Water Street), to a point 1,468 feet east, a distance of 0.278 of a mile, 45 miles per hour;
(26) On U.S. Highway No. 90A (Sarah DeWitt Street) from a point 42 feet east of the intersection of U.S. Highway
183 (Water Street), to a point 2,070 feet east, a distance of 0.392 of a mile, 35 miles per hour;
(27) On U.S. Highway No. 90A (Sarah DeWitt Street) from a point 2,112 feet east of the intersection of U.S.
Highway 183 (Water Street), to a point 2,500 feet east, a distance of 0.473 of a mile, 40 miles per hour;
(28) On U.S. Highway No. 90A (Sarah DeWitt Street) from a point 4,614 feet east of the intersection of U.S.
Highway 183 (Water Street), to a point 5,856 feet east, a distance of 1.109 of a mile, 45 miles per hour;
(29) On U.S. Highway No. 90A (Sarah DeWitt Street) from a point 10,470 feet east of the intersection of U.S.
Highway 183 (Water Street), to a point 7,049 feet east, to the east city limit, a distance of 1.335 of a mile, 55 miles per
hour;
(30) School zone on U.S. Highway No. 90A (Sarah DeWitt Street) from a point 7,366 feet east of the intersection of
U.S. Highway 183 (Water Street), to a point 1,663 feet east, a distance of 0.315 of a mile, 25 miles per hour when so
signed and 45 miles per hour all other times;
(31) On Spur 131 at the intersection of U.S. Highway 90A, to a point 1668' North, to the intersection of S.H. 97, a
distance of approximately 0.316 of a mile, 40 miles per hour;
(32) School zone on Business U.S. 183 (St. Joseph Street) from a point 1,706 feet North of its intersection with U.S.
183 (Water Street) to a point 611 feet north, a distance of approximately 0.116 of a mile, 20 miles per hour when
signed;
(33) School zone on St. Paul Street 30 ft. south of the intersection of St. Michael Street and St. Paul Street and
approximately 60 yards north of St. Matthew Street on St. Paul Street. The total distance of the school zone being
approximately 615 ft. from one sign to the other sign on St. Paul Street.
(Ordinance 2016-3 adopted 3/8/16)
(b) Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof shall be fined in any sum not more than two hundred ($200.00) dollars. (Ordinance 2012-25 adopted 6/5/12)
ARTICLE 12.600 TURNING MOVEMENT
The city manager or his assigns are authorized:
(1) To place official traffic control devices within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by
vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than
as prescribed by law.
(2) To determine and designate streets, parts of streets, or specific lanes thereon upon which vehicular traffic shall
proceed in one direction during one period and the opposite direction during another period of the day and shall place
and maintain appropriate marking, signs, barriers, or other devices to give notice thereof. The city manager or his
assigns may erect signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless
of the centerline of the roadway.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 344/414
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 71, Section 71.25)
ARTICLE 12.700 REGULATING TRAFFIC ON STREETS
Sec. 12.701 Gross Weight Limits
The city council is authorized on the basis of engineering and traffic investigation, to erect and maintain traffic control devices on
any streets or parts of streets to impose gross weight limits. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 71, Section 71.35)
Sec. 12.702 Exclusion of Certain Traffic
The city council is hereby authorized on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation to determine and designate those
heavily traveled streets upon which shall be prohibited any class or kind of traffic which is found to be incompatible with the
normal safe movement of traffic and shall erect appropriate official traffic control devices. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII,
Chapter 71, Section 71.36)
ARTICLE 12.800 TRUCK ROUTES
Sec. 12.801 Truck Routes Designated
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle with a carrying capacity of more than 26,000 pounds upon
any street within the limits of the city except upon the streets designated as truck routes under subsection (b) below.
(b) The following streets, roads and highways or parts thereof are designated as truck routes:
(1) F.M. 794.
(2) U.S. Highway 183.
(3) U.S. Highway 90-A Bypass.
(c) This article shall not apply to operation of a motor vehicle of more than 26,000 pound carrying capacity to secure fuel,
repairs or to deliver, load or unload cargo. The operator of such motor vehicle shall continue on a route along the streets
designated as truck routes to a point closest to the delivery or destination point and shall then proceed over streets that are not
designated to the point of delivery or destination and after reaching the destination, the operator shall return to the designated
streets over the same route. At no time shall trucks be allowed to park along designated truck routes, streets, avenues, alleys or
highways in the city which are dedicated to the public or use or a way upon which the public has a prescriptive use except to
deliver or unload cargo.
(Ordinance 2012-11 adopted 4/3/12)
Sec. 12.802 Exceptions
(a) Section 12.801 shall not apply to emergency vehicles operating in response to emergency calls or school, church or tourist
busses.
(b) Section 12.801 shall not apply to the operation of a motor vehicle of more than 26,000 pounds carrying capacity to secure
fuel, repairs or to deliver, load or unload cargo. The operator of such motor vehicle shall continue on a route along the streets
designated as truck routes in Section 12.801(b) to a point closest to the delivery or destination point and shall then proceed over
streets that are not designated to this point of delivery or destination. After reaching the destination, the operator shall return to
the designated streets over the same route. At no time shall trucks be allowed to park along designated truck routes except to
deliver or unload cargo.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 71, Section 71.51)
ARTICLE 12.900 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING*
Division 1. Generally
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 345/414
Sec. 12.901 Authority of City Council
(a) The city council is authorized on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, to prohibit or limit stopping, standing
or parking of vehicles at all times or during specified hours.
(b) No prohibition, regulation or limitation relating to stopping, standing or parking imposed under this section or any other
applicable law or ordinance of the city shall be effective unless official traffic control devices are erected and in place at the time
of an alleged offense and it shall be the duty of the city manager or his assigns to erect and maintain such devices.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 72, Section 72.01)
Sec. 12.902 Authority to Erect and Maintain Signs and Traffic-Control Devices
The city manager or his assigns are authorized to erect and maintain stop signs, yield signs or other official traffic control devices
to designate through streets or to designate intersections or other roadway junction. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter
72, Section 72.02)
Sec. 12.903 Stop When Traffic Obstructed
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or
crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians,
notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 72, Section 72.03)
Sec. 12.904 Parking Spaces for Persons With Disabilities
(a) The chief of police is authorized to designate certain parking spaces in the city as spaces to be used only by persons who are
disabled or handicapped.
(b) Each space so designated will be plainly marked “HANDICAPPED PARKING ONLY.”
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 72, Section 72.04)
Sec. 12.905 Parking for More Than 48 Consecutive Hours Prohibited
(a) It shall be a violation of this article to park a vehicle on the streets or squares of the city for 48 or more consecutive hours.
By the term “vehicle,” is meant any car, truck, motorcycle, trailer, cart, wagon, travel trailer, bus, buckboard or other conveyances
whether similar or dissimilar to the previously named items.
(b) Presumptions.
(1) The police department of the city shall mark vehicles in such a manner as to assure that such vehicles have in
fact been in violation of this article for 48 consecutive hours and such marking shall be presumed correct.
(2) The license plate or motor vehicle identification number listed with the state shall be presumptively correct as to
the ownership of the vehicle.
(3) Before the police department is authorized to act upon a violation of this section, a written complaint must be
filed with the city secretary stating the place of violation, the type of vehicle alleged in violation, and the name of the
complaining party.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 72, Section 72.05)
Secs. 12.906-12.910 Reserved
Division 2. Parking Schedules
Sec. 12.911 Schedule I. Parking Prohibited
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 346/414
Parking shall be prohibited on the following streets:
Street Location Ord. No. Date Passed
St. Joseph Street 100 and 200 blocks 258 3-11-86
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 74, Schedule I)
Sec. 12.912 Schedule II. Truck Parking Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a truck or trucks at the following locations:
Street Location Side Ord. No. Date
Passed
St. Joseph Street 1400, 1500, 1600, 1700 and 1800
blocks
East 258 3-11-86
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 74, Schedule II)
ARTICLE 12.1000 BICYCLES
Sec. 12.1001 Application of Provisions
The regulations contained in this article applicable to bicycles shall apply wherever a bicycle is operated upon any public street or
upon any public sidewalk within the city limits. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 73, Section 73.01)
Sec. 12.1002 Obedience to Traffic Rules and Traffic-Control Signals
(a) Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties
applicable to the driver of a vehicle by the laws of this state declaring rules of the road applicable to vehicles, or by the traffic
laws of this city applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to special regulations in this article and except as to those
provisions of laws which by their nature can have no applications.
(b) Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic control signals, signs, and other control devices
applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 73, Section 73.02)
Sec. 12.1003 Rules for Operation of Bicycles
(a) A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
(b) No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed or equipped.
(c) Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to the right-hand side of the roadway as practicable,
exercising due care when passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 347/414
(d) Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside
for the exclusive use of bicycles.
(e) Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such path and shall
not use the roadway.
(f) No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing.
(g) The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway or building, shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk
area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk or sidewalk area, and
upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such roadway.
(h) No person riding upon any bicycle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
(i) No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one
hand upon the handlebars.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 73, Section 73.03)
Sec. 12.1004 Parking on Roadway or Sidewalk
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to
support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.(1995
Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 73, Section 73.04)
Sec. 12.1005 Riding on Sidewalks
No person shall ride their bicycle or skateboard upon any public sidewalk within the city limits, with the exception of sidewalks
located along East Avenue and North Avenue. (Ordinance 2016-6 adopted 5/3/16)
Sec. 12.1006 Equipment on Bicycles
(a) Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light that is
visible for a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type which shall be visible from all
distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A
lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.
(b) Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level,
clean pavement.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 73, Section 73.06)
Sec. 12.1007 Violation
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this article
and it shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for the parent of any child under the age of 16 years and the guardian of any ward
under the age of 16 years to authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this article.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title VII, Chapter 73, Section 73.98)
CHAPTER 13
UTILITIES
ARTICLE 13.100 INDUSTRIAL WASTE DISCHARGE REGULATIONS
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 348/414
Sec. 13.101 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:
Approving Authority. The city manager or his duly authorized representative.
BOD (Biochemical Oxygen Demand). The quantity of oxygen by weight, expressed in mg/l, utilized in the biochemical oxidation
of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five days at a temperature of 20° C.
Building Sewer. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal (also called “house lateral”
and “house connection”).
City. The city or any authorized person acting in its behalf.
COD (Chemical Oxygen Demand). Measure of the oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in the
water or wastewater expressed in mg/l as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test, but not
differentiating between stable and unstable organic matter and thus not necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand.
Control Manhole. A manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point before the building sewer discharges in the public
sewer.
Control Point. A point of access to a course of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer.
Discharge. To deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep, or otherwise release or dispose of, or to allow, permit, or
suffer any of these acts or omissions.
Garbage. Animal and vegetable wastes and residue from preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food and from the handling,
processing, storage and sale of food products and produce.
Industrial Waste. Waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade, or business from the development of any
natural resource, or any mixture of the waste with water or normal wastewater, or distinct from normal wastewater.
Industrial Waste Charge. The charge made on those persons who discharge industrial wastes into the city's sewerage system.
Milligrams Per Liter (mg/l). The same as parts per million and is a weight-to-volume ratio; the milligram per liter value
multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.
Natural Outlet. Any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake, or other body of surfacewater or groundwater.
Normal Domestic Wastewater. Wastewater excluding industrial wastewater discharged by a person into sanitary sewers and in
which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than 200 mg/l and BOD is not more than 200 mg/l.
Overload. The imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered design capacity.
Person. Includes corporation, organization, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership association, and any other legal entity.
pH. The logarithm (Base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration.
Public Sewer. Pipe or conduit carrying wastewater or unpolluted drainage in which owners of abutting properties shall have the
use, subject to control by the city.
Sanitary Sewer. A public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which
stormwater, surfacewater, groundwater, and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed.
Slug. Any discharge of water, wastewater, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of
flow, exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows
during normal operation.
Standard Methods. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater as prepared, approved, and published jointly by the American Public
Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 349/414
Storm Sewer. A public sewer which carries storm and surfacewaters and drainage and into which domestic wastewater or
industrial wastes are not intentionally passed.
Stormwater. Rainfall or any other forms of precipitation.
Superintendent. The water and wastewater superintendent of the city or his duly authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
Suspended Solids [SS]. Solids measured in mg/l that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, wastewater, or
other liquids, and which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration device.
Trap. A device designed to skim, settle, or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes or other harmful substances.
Unpolluted Wastewater. Water containing:
(1) No free or emulsified grease or oil;
(2) No acids or alkalis;
(3) No phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in receiving water;
(4) No toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state, or solution;
(5) No noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases;
(6) Not more than an insignificant amount in mg/l each of suspended solids and BOD, as determined by the State
Water Quality Board; and
(7) Color not exceeding 50 units as measured by the Platinum-Cobalt method of determination as specified in
Standard Methods.
Waste. Rejected, unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous, or solid form resulting from domestic, agricultural, or
industrial activities.
Wastewater. A combination of the water-carried waste from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial
establishments, together with any ground, surface, and stormwater that may be present.
Wastewater Facilities. All facilities for collection, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater and industrial wastes.
Wastewater Treatment Plant. Any city owned facilities, devices, and structures used for receiving, processing and treating
wastewater, industrial waste, and sludges from the sanitary sewers.
Wastewater Service Charge. The charge on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the
concentration values established as representative of normal wastewater.
Watercourse. A natural or manmade channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 51, Section 51.01)
Sec. 13.102 Prohibited Discharges
(a) No person may discharge to public sewers any waste which by itself or by interaction with other wastes may:
(1) Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes or facilities;
(2) Constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or
(3) Create a hazard in receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant effluent.
(b) All discharges shall conform to requirements of this article.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 51, Section 51.02)
Sec. 13.103 Chemical Discharges
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 350/414
(a) No discharge to public sewers may contain:
(1) Cyanide greater than 1.0 mg/l;
(2) Fluoride other than that contained in the public water supply;
(3) Chlorides in concentrations greater than 250 mg/l;
(4) Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas;
(5) Substances causing an excessive COD.
(b) No waste or wastewater discharged to public waters may contain:
(1) Strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not;
(2) Fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32° and 150° F. (0° and 65° C.);
(3) Objectionable or toxic substances, exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such
material received in the composite wastewater, at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the
approving authority for such materials; or
(4) Obnoxious, toxic, or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in quantities sufficient to violate the provisions of
Section 13.102(a).
(c) No waste, wastewater, or other substance may be discharged into public sewers which has a pH lower than 5.5 or higher
than 9.5, or any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel at the
wastewater facilities.
(d) All waste, wastewater, or other substance containing phenols, hydrogen sulfide, or other taste-and-odor producing
substances, shall conform to concentration limits established by the approving authority. After treatment of the composite
wastewater, concentration limits may not exceed the requirements established by state, federal, or other agencies with jurisdiction
over discharges to receiving waters.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 51, Section 51.03)
Sec. 13.104 Heavy Metals and Toxic Materials
(a) No discharges may contain concentrations of heavy metals greater than amounts specified in subsection (b) below.
(b) The maximum allowable concentrations of heavy metals stated in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l), determined on the
basis of individual sampling in accordance with Standard Methods are:
(1) Arsenic, 0.05 mg/l.
(2) Barium, 5.0 mg/l.
(3) Boron, 1.0 mg/l.
(4) Cadmium, 0.02 mg/l.
(5) Chromium (total), 5.0 mg/l.
(6) Copper, 1.0 mg/l.
(7) Lead, 0.1 mg/l.
(8) Manganese, 1.0 mg/l.
(9) Mercury, 0.005 mg/l.
(10) Nickel, 1.0 mg/l.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 351/414
(11) Selenium, 0.02 mg/l.
(12) Silver, 0.10 mg/l.
(13) Zinc, 5.0 mg/l.
(c) No other heavy metals or toxic materials may be discharged into public sewers without a permit from the approving
authority specifying conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, volumes, and other applicable provisions.
(d) Prohibited heavy metals and toxic materials include but are not limited to:
(1) Antimony;
(2) Beryllium;
(3) Bismuth;
(4) Cobalt;
(5) Molybdenum;
(6) Uranyl ion;
(7) Rhenium;
(8) Strontium;
(9) Tellurium;
(10) Herbicides;
(11) Fungicides; and
(12) Pesticides.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 51, Section 51.04)
Sec. 13.105 Discharge of Garbage
(a) No person may discharge garbage into public sewers unless it is shredded to a degree that all particles can be carried freely
under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers. Particles greater than one-half inch in any dimensions are
prohibited.
(b) The approving authority is entitled to review and approve the installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped
with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.16 hp metric) or greater.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 51, Section 51.05)
Sec. 13.106 Stormwater and Other Unpolluted Drainage
(a) No person may discharge to public sanitary sewers:
(1) Unpolluted stormwater, surfacewater, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage;
(2) Unpolluted cooling water;
(3) Unpolluted industrial process waters; or
(4) Other unpolluted drainage.
(b) In compliance with state law, the approving authority may designate storm sewers and other watercourses into which
unpolluted drainage described in subsection (a) above may be discharged.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 352/414
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 51, Section 51.06)
Sec. 13.107 Temperature
No person may discharge liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F. (65° C.), or any substance which causes the
temperature of the total wastewater treatment plant effluent to increase at a rate of 10° F. or more per hour, or a combined total
increase of plant influent temperature to 110° F. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 51, Section 51.07)
Sec. 13.108 Radioactive Wastes
(a) No person may discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into public sewers without the permission of the approving
authority.
(b) The approving authority may establish, in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations, regulations for
discharge of radioactive wastes into public sewers.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 51, Section 51.08)
Sec. 13.109 Impairment of Facilities
(a) No person may discharge into public sewers any substance capable of causing:
(1) Obstruction to the flow in sewers;
(2) Interference with the operation of treatment processes of facilities; or
(3) Excessive loading of treatment facilities.
(b) Discharges prohibited by subsection (a) above include but are not limited to materials which exert or cause concentrations
of:
(1) Inert suspended solids greater than 300 mg/l including but not limited to:
(A) Fuller's earth;
(B) Lime slurries;
(C) Lime residues;
(2) Dissolved solids greater than 1,000 mg/l including but not limited to:
(A) Sodium chloride;
(B) Sodium sulfate;
(3) Excessive discoloration including but not limited to;
(A) Dye wastes;
(B) Vegetable tanning solutions.
(4) BOD, COD, or chlorine demand in excess of normal plant capacity.
(c) No person may discharge into public sewers any substance that may:
(1) Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog the sewers;
(2) Overload skimming and grease handling equipment;
(3) Pass to the receiving waters without being effectively treated by normal wastewater treatment processes due to
the nonamenability of the substance to bacterial action; or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 353/414
(4) Deleteriously affect the treatment process due to excessive quantities.
(d) No person may discharge any substance into public sewers which:
(1) Is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the processes and facilities employed; or
(2) Is amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of
other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
(e) The approving authority shall regulate the flow and concentration of slugs when they may:
(1) Impair the treatment process;
(2) Cause damage to collection facilities;
(3) Incur treatment costs exceeding those for normal wastewater; or
(4) Render the waste unfit for stream disposal or Industrial use.
(f) No person may discharge into public sewers solid or viscous substances which may violate subsection (a) above if present
in sufficient quantity or size including but not limited to:
(1) Ashes;
(2) Cinders;
(3) Sand;
(4) Mud;
(5) Straw;
(6) Shavings;
(7) Metal;
(8) Glass;
(9) Rags;
(10) Feathers;
(11) Tar;
(12) Plastics;
(13) Wood;
(14) Unground garbage;
(15) Whole blood;
(16) Paunch manure;
(17) Hair and fleshings;
(18) Entrails;
(19) Paper products, either whole or ground by garbage grinders;
(20) Eggshells;
(21) Slops;
(22) Chemical residues;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 354/414
(23) Paint residues; or
(24) Bulk solids.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 51, Section 51.09)
Sec. 13.110 Compliance With Existing Authority
(a) Unless exception is granted by the approving authority, the public sanitary sewer system shall be used by all persons
discharging:
(1) Wastewater;
(2) Industrial waste;
(3) Polluted liquids.
(b) Unless authorized by the State Water Quality Board, no person may deposit or discharge any waste included in subsection
(a) above on public or private property into or adjacent to any:
(1) Natural outlet;
(2) Watercourse;
(3) Storm sewer;
(4) Other area within the jurisdiction of the city.
(c) The approving authority shall verify prior to discharge that wastes authorized to be discharged will receive suitable
treatment within the provisions of laws, regulations, ordinances, rules and orders of federal, state and local governments.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 51, Section 51.10)
Sec. 13.111 Approving Authority Requirements
(a) If discharges or proposed discharges to public sewers may deleteriously affect wastewater facilities, processes, equipment
or receiving waters, create a hazard to life or health, or create a public nuisance, the approving authority shall require pretreatment
to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers, control over the quantities and rates of discharge, and payment to
cover the cost of handling and treating the wastes.
(b) The approving authority is entitled to determine whether a discharge or proposed discharge is included under subsection (a)
above.
(c) The approving authority shall reject wastes when it determines that a discharge or proposed discharge is included under
subsection (a) above, and the discharger does not meet the requirements of subsection (a) above.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 51, Section 51.11)
Sec. 13.112 Approving Authority Review and Approval
(a) If pretreatment or control is required, the approving authority shall review and approve design and installation of equipment
and processes.
(b) The design and installation of equipment and processes must conform to all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances and other
laws.
(c) Any person responsible for discharges requiring pretreatment, flow-equalizing, or other facilities shall provide and maintain
the facilities in effective operating condition at his own expense.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 51, Section 51.12)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 355/414
Sec. 13.113 Requirements for Traps
(a) Discharges requiring a trap include:
(1) Grease or waste containing grease in excessive amounts;
(2) Oil;
(3) Sand;
(4) Flammable wastes; and
(5) Other harmful ingredients.
(b) Any person responsible for discharges requiring a trap shall at his own expense and as required by the approving authority:
(1) Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by the approving authority;
(2) Locate the trap in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection; and
(3) Maintain the trap in effective operating condition.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 51, Section 51.13)
Sec. 13.114 Requirements for Building Sewers
Any person responsible for discharges through a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall, at his own expense and as
required by the approving authority, install an accessible and safely located control manhole, install meters and other
appurtenances to facilitate observation sampling and measurements of the waste, and maintain the equipment and facilities. (1995
Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 51, Section 51.14)
Sec. 13.115 Sampling and Testing
(a) Sampling shall be conducted according to customarily accepted methods, reflecting the effect of constituents upon the
sewage works and determining the existence of hazards to health, life, limb, and property. (Note: The particular analyses involved
will determine whether a 24-hour composite sample from all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or
samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids [SS] analyses are obtained from 24-hour
composites of all outfalls. Where applicable, 16-hour, 8-hour or some other period may be required. Periodic grab samples are
used to determine pH.)
(b) Examination and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes required by this article shall be conducted in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods, and determined from suitable samples taken at the control manhole
provided or other control point authorized by the approving authority.
(c) COD and suspended solids shall be determined from composite sampling, except to detect unauthorized discharges.
(d) The city may select an independent firm or laboratory to determine flow, BOD, and suspended solids.
(e) The city is entitled to select the time of sampling at its sole discretion so long as at least annual samples are taken.
(f) Flow measurements of the industrial waste will be made by one of the following methods:
(1) By a flow meter installed and maintained by the user and approved by the approving authority as per Section
13.114.
(2) By flow measurements taken by the city to determine typical flow characteristics. The flow measurements will
be intermittent and will determine an estimate of the flow and shall be revised on a periodic basis.
(3) If substantially all of the user's water use results in process wastewater, then the water service meter will be used
as measurement of the total volume of wastewater.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 51, Section 51.15)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 356/414
Sec. 13.116 Payment and Agreement Required
(a) Persons making discharges of industrial waste shall pay a charge to cover the cost of collection and treatment.
(b) When discharges of industrial waste are approved by the approving authority, the city or its authorized representative shall
enter into an agreement or arrangement providing terms of acceptance by the city, and payment by the person making the
discharge.
(c) The agreement entered into pursuant to subsection (a) above shall include but not be limited to:
(1) Amortization of all capital outlay for collecting and creating the waste, including new capital outlay and the
proportionate part of the value of the existing system used in handling and treating the waste;
(2) Operation and maintenance costs including salaries and wastes, power costs, cost of chemicals and supplies,
proper allowances for maintenance, depreciation, overhead, and office expense; and shall be completed over the debt
period, or the life of the facilities, whichever is shortest. Payment shall include all debt service costs.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 51, Section 51.16)
Sec. 13.117 Schedule of Charges
(a) Industrial waste charges shall be calculated by the following general formula:
Cu = Vc Vu+ Bc Bu+ Sc Su
where:
Cu = Charge to industrial users, $/unit of time.
Vc = Unit cost of transport and treatment chargeable to volume $/1,000 gallons.
Vu = Volume of wastewater from industrial users $/unit of time.
Bc = Unit cost of treatment chargeable to BOD $/lb.
Bu = Amount of BOD from industrial user, lbs./unit of time.
Sc = Unit costs of treatment chargeable to SS $/lb.
Su = Amount of SS from industrial user lbs./unit of time.
(b) The unit costs applicable to volume, BOD and SS shall be the total of the unit costs from capital investment and from
operation and maintenance. The total capital investment costs will be allocated as a percentage to BOD, volume and SS so that
the total equals 100% and similar the operation and maintenance costs will be allocated on a percentage basis to volume, COD
and SS. The allocations for capital costs may be different than operation and maintenance costs allocations and shall be applied so
as to represent the total costs associated with each parameter.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 51, Section 51.17)
Sec. 13.118 Adjustment of Charges
(a) The city shall adjust charges at least annually to reflect changes in the characteristics of wastewater based on the results of
sampling and testing.
(b) Increases in charges shall continue for six billing periods unless subsequent tests determine that the charge should be further
increased.
(c) The city shall review at least semiannually the basis for determining charges and shall adjust the unit treatment cost in the
formula to reflect increases or decreases in wastewater treatment costs based on the previous year's experience.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 357/414
(d) The city shall bill the discharger by the month and shall show industrial waste charges as a separate item on the regular bill
for water and sewer charges. The discharger shall pay monthly in accordance with practices existing for payment of sewer
charges.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 51, Section 51.18)
Sec. 13.119 Industrial Cost Recovery
Volume increases or changes in the characteristics of the waste flow or increased standards set by regulatory authorities may
require that wastewater collection, treatment or other disposal facilities of the city be improved, expanded or enlarged in order to
treat the waste. The capital investments made by the city will be calculated into the industrial user charges so that the industrial
will pay its fair and equitable share of the total costs of the treatment system. If a federal government grant is obtained for waste
system improvements, then significant industrial users (as defined by government grant regulations) shall pay a cost recovery
charge (in addition to the city's industrial user charge) on that portion of the federal grant applicable to the treatment of the
industrial user's waste. The cost recovery charge shall be calculated and applied in accordance with the requirements of the
federal government grant. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 51, Section 51.19)
Sec. 13.120 Savings Clause
A person discharging industrial wastes into public sewers prior to the effective date of this article may continue without penalty
so long as he:
(1) Does not increase the quantity or quality of discharge, without permission of the approving authority;
(2) Has discharged the industrial waste at least three months prior to the effective date of this article; and
(3) Applies for and is granted a permit no later than 90 days after the effective date of this article.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 51, Section 51.20)
Sec. 13.121 Conditions of Permits
(a) The city may grant a permit to discharge to persons meeting all requirements of the savings clause provided that the person:
(1) Submit an application within sixty (60) days after the effective date of this article on forms supplied by the
approving authority;
(2) Secure approval by the approving authority of plans and specifications for pretreatment facilities when required;
(3) Has complied with all requirements for agreements or arrangements including, but not limited to provisions for
payment of charges, installation and operation of pretreatment facilities, and sampling and analysis to determine
quantity and strength; and
(4) Provides a sampling point subject to the provisions of this article and approval of the approving authority.
(b) A person applying for a new discharge shall meet all conditions of subsection (a) above and secure a permit prior to
discharging any waste.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 51, Section 51.21)
Sec. 13.122 Power to Enter Property
(a) The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled
to enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this article.
(b) Anyone acting under this authority shall observe the establishment's rules and regulations concerning safety, internal
security, and fire protection.
(c) Except when caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions, the city shall indemnify the
company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 358/414
property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the sampling operation.
(d) The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled
to enter all private properties through which the city holds a negotiated easement for the purposes of:
(1) Inspection, observation, measurement, sampling or repair;
(2) Maintenance of any portion of the sewerage system lying within the easements; and
(3) Conducting any other authorized activity. All activities shall be conducted in full accordance with the terms of
the negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
(e) No person acting under authority of this provision may inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical oil
refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the
public sewers.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 51, Section 51.22)
Sec. 13.123 Authority to Disconnect Service
(a) The city may terminate water and wastewater disposal service and disconnect an industrial customer from the system when:
(1) Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment process are released to the sewer, causing rapid
deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater;
(2) A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a
quality permitted for discharge to a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is delivering wastewater to the city's
system that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic
treatment; or
(3) The industrial customer:
(A) Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the approving
authority;
(B) Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the
wastewater treatment system;
(C) Fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary sewer services when due; or
(D) Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes to public sewers.
(b) If service is discontinued pursuant to subsection (a)(2) above, the city shall:
(1) Disconnect the customer;
(2) Supply the customer with the governmental agency's report and provide the customer with all pertinent
information; and
(3) Continue disconnection until such time as the industrial customer provides additional pretreatment or other
facilities designed to remove the objectionable characteristics from his industrial wastes.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 51, Section 51.23)
Sec. 13.124 Notice
The city shall serve persons discharging in violation of this article with written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory compliance. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 51, Section 51.24)
Sec. 13.125 Continuation of Prohibited Discharges
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 359/414
No person may continue discharging in violation of this article beyond the time limit provided in the notice. (1995 Code of
Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 51, Section 51.25)
Sec. 13.126 Failure to Pay for Service
In addition to sanctions provided for by this article, the city is entitled to exercise sanctions provided for by the other ordinances
of the city for failure to pay the bill for water and sanitary sewer service when due. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter
51, Section 51.26)
Sec. 13.127 Dumping of Wastes
(a) 1 to 500 gallons:
(1) During business hours, Monday to Friday 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.: $41.00 per dump.
(2) After business hours: $100.00 per dump.
(b) 501 to 1,000 gallons:
(1) During business hours, Monday to Friday 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.: $82.00 per dump.
(2) After business hours: $125.00 per dump.
(c) Waste can only be dumped at the city's wastewater treatment plant in designated manholes with city personnel present and
approving waste as acceptable. Only grey water will be accepted unless the business is located within the city limits. No grease
trap waste will be accepted at any time.
(Ordinance 2011-32 adopted 12/6/11)
Sec. 13.128 Penalty
(a) Whoever violates any provisions of this article for which another penalty is not already herein provided, shall be subject to
the penalty provisions of Section 1.109 of this code.
(b) In addition to proceeding under authority of subsection (a) above, the city is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil
remedies to which it is entitled under authority of statutes or other ordinances against a person continuing prohibited discharges.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 51, Section 51.99)
ARTICLE 13.200 UTILITY REGULATIONS*
Division 1. General Provisions
Sec. 13.201 Utility Department
There is created within the city a utility department which shall operate the electrical utility system, waterworks system, sewerage
system and the other public utility systems owned and operated by the city. The utility department shall be composed of such
personnel and shall have and perform such powers and, duties as may be provided by the city's charter and granted by the city
council from time to time. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 52, Section 52.01)
Sec. 13.202 Privies, Cesspools, Septic Tanks
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to build, construct, dig, maintain of use any dry toilet, surface privy, cesspool or septic
tank within 100 feet of any line or main of the city's sanitary sewerage system; provided, however, when connection to the city's
sewer system is impossible or impractical at any time, the construction, maintenance and use of a septic tank constructed in
conformity to state law and approved by the plumbing inspector may be permitted until such time as connection to the city's
sewer system may be made.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 360/414
(b) If any person shall fail or refuse to remove and abate any privy, privy pit, closet, cesspool or other structure, apparatus or
appliance used for the disposal of sewage matter located within 100 feet of any city sewer system line and not connected
therewith within 48 hours after receiving written notice from the city code enforcement officer to so remove or abate same, he
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 52, Section 52.02)
Sec. 13.203 Water and Sewer Taps and Repairs
Plumbers licensed by the state are hereby allowed to make sewer, water taps and repairs. The city engineer or a representative of
the street department shall be present during the back fill and repairs to the streets. (Ordinance 2014-25 adopted 9/2/14)
Sec. 13.204 Electrical Generation
(a) Distribution Generation.
(1) This section is intended to provide for the orderly, safe and effective interconnection and parallel operation of
distributed generation facilities with the city's electric system by customers of the city's electric utility.
(2) The city is authorized to enact this section by the Public Utility Regulatory Act, Tex. Util. Code Ann. section
31.005 (Vernon 1998, and supp. 2005) (PURA) and successors, which authorizes and encourages electric utilities to
establish customer option programs that encourage the reduction of air contaminant emissions including distributed
energy generation technology. Also, the Public Utility Regulatory Act, Tex. Util. Code Ann. section 39.101(b)(3)
(Vernon 1998 and supp. 2005) (PURA) entitles all state electric customers to access to onsite distributed generation.
Finally, the Texas Public Utility Regulatory Act, Tex. Util. Code Ann. section 39.916 (Vernon 1998, and supp. 2005)
(PURA) and it successors authorizes electric utilities to establish requirements for and allow the interconnection and
parallel operation of distributed renewable generation, and requires the Public Utility Commission of Texas to
promulgate rules and regulations for the implementation of interconnection and parallel operation of distributed
renewable generation.
(b) Connection Policy and Procedure Manual Adopted. All distributed generation systems operating in the city shall comply
with the city's connection policy and procedure manual and its successors.
(c) Offense and Penalties. Any person violating this section by interconnecting distributed generation to the city's electric
system without a complete application and executed agreement, or operating a distributed generation system that does not meet
the specification set forth in this section commits a misdemeanor and upon conviction may be subject to the penalties provided in
this code.
(Ordinance 2015-9 adopted 12/1/15)
Sec. 13.205 Reserved
Division 2. Rates and Charges
Sec. 13.206 Application for Service
Written application shall be made for electricity, water, sewer, garbage collection or any other utility service that may be
furnished by the city to the city upon forms furnished therefor. Such application shall state the name and address of the applicant,
the type of utility service desired, the purposes for which the application is made and such other information as the city may
request. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 52, Section 52.15)
Sec. 13.207 Meters
(a) Required. Meters shall be required to measure the consumption of each utility service furnished by the city, except garbage
collection and sewerage service.
(b) Installation, Maintenance. All meters required by this article and used to measure the consumption of utility services
furnished by the city shall be installed and maintained by the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 361/414
(c) Ownership. All meters used for the measurement of the consumption of any utility service furnished by the city shall be the
property of the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to install or maintain any meter for such purposes anywhere within the
city which is not owned by the city.
(d) Tampering With. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a duly authorized employee of the city, to tamper with any
meter, or to in any manner injure any meter, or to manipulate or attempt to manipulate any meter in any manner so as to affect its
registration or measurement of the metered utility service.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 52, Section 52.16)
Sec. 13.208 Utility Deposit Policy
(a) Initial Account Deposit.
(1) Deposit for residential customers will be $200.00 due upon application for utility service. Deposit is to be paid
at city hall and a receipt issued to account holder. If customer is low-income qualified, deposit may be made in two
monthly payments, with $100.00 due at time of application of utility service and the remaining amount to be billed on
the first utility bill. Verification of income will be required to qualify for low-income status. Nonpayment of billed
deposit will result in suspension of service to residence until payment is made. A reconnection fee will be imposed and
paid prior to resumption of services. Customers who have had a previous account with the city and left a balance will
be required to pay that balance prior to a new account being opened.
(2) Deposits for commercial/industrial accounts will be estimated on an individual basis. Commercial/industrial
account deposits will be based on six months of average utility bills for a similar type of business. Minimum deposit
will be $200.00.
(b) Refund of Deposit.
(1) When a utility customer has maintained a payment history void of any delinquent notices, shut-offs or
nonsufficient fund payments for a period of one year, the deposit on file for that account will be applied as a credit to
the customer's account on the thirteenth month. If customer does not meet criteria listed, their account will be reevaluated
every six months for refund of deposit.
(2) Deposits paid by an assistance agency will not be refunded to customer. Deposit will be applied to customer
final billing with any remaining being sent back to originating service agency. Any remainder of bill, thereafter, will
be the responsibility of the customer to pay.
(c) Termination of Service. Upon termination of service, the city shall record final read as of termination date and send final
bill during normal billing cycle. Deposits will be applied to customer's final bill if bill is not paid by due date. Any deposit will be
refunded to the customer, if said deposit was not paid by an assistance agency. Any deposit or credit balance on a utility account
that remains unclaimed by the customer for one year from termination of service will be presumed abandoned and shall be
forwarded to unclaimed funds with the state.
(d) Customer Change of Service Address Within Service Area.
(1) If a customer relocates to a new service address, deposits for pre-existing service will be applied to final bill.
Any remaining balance will be due by due date. If the customer has a payment history void of any delinquent notices,
shut-offs or nonsufficient fund payments for a period of one year, no additional deposit will be required. If the
customer does not have said payment history, they will be required to place additional deposit in the amount of the
average of the past two months' bills at their previous address or $200.00 whichever is less.
(2) The city reserves the right to deny services at a new address if customer carries a past due balance on their
current account until account arrearage has been paid.
(e) Noncompliance.
(1) Failure to comply with city's deposit policy will result in refusal of utility services or disconnection of utility
services.
(2) The city reserves the right to grant extensions on past due accounts; and, reserves the right to issue credits to
accounts that can provide proof of nonstandard utility usage.
(Ordinance 2012-22 adopted 5/22/12)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 362/414
Sec. 13.209 Rates and Charges
The rates and charges for any utility service furnished by the city shall be as determined by the city from time to time. (1995 Code
of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 52, Section 52.18)
Sec. 13.210 Payment of Rates and Charges
The rates and charges fixed and prescribed for utility services furnished by the city by this article shall be due and payable in the
office of the utility department of the city on or before the tenth day of the month following the date bills therefor shall be mailed.
In the event that such rates and charges are not paid in full by such due date, a penalty of 10% of the amount due and payable
shall be added to such rates and charges. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 52, Section 52.19)
Sec. 13.211 Disconnection of Service for Nonpayment
(a) It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a
meaningful opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city hereby adopts the following guidelines:
(1) All bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth on the bill;
(2) If any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second bill will be mailed on the day following the initial due date,
containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid within ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be
discontinued for nonpayment; and
(3) Any customer disputing the correctness of his bill shall have a right to a hearing at which time he may be
represented in person and by counsel or any other person of his choosing and may present orally or in writing his
complaint and contentions to the city official in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to order that
the customer's service not be discontinued and shall have the authority to make a final determination of the customer's
complaint.
(b) Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained; only questions of proper and correct billing will be
considered. In the absence of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided herein, service will be
discontinued at the time specified.
(c) When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be
reinstated only after all bills for service then due have been paid and any deposit required has been made.
(d) (1) The city council hereby waives utility late fees for customers over the age of 60. Customers will have to
provide proof of their age to have late fees waived. Accounts that are paid after thirty (30) days will be considered
negligent and the late fees will be reinstated.
(2) This subsection will only apply to the utility account in which the “over 60” customer is the primary account
holder. This subsection will not apply to any rental properties owned by the “over 60” customer, only the primary
residence will apply.
Sec. 13.212 Resumption of Service
Any consumer of the utility services furnished by the city whose utility services have been disconnected or terminated for the
nonpayment of the rates and charges therefor may have such utility services resumed by paying all rates, charges, deposits and
penalties due by the customer to the city plus a reconnection fee set by the city from time to time. The amount due shall not
include any amounts for which a bill has not yet been received by the customer.
(Ordinance 2018-2 adopted 1/9/18)
Sec. 13.213 Rates and Charges of Franchise Public Utilities to be Fixed by City Council
The city council shall fix and approve the rates charged by any private public utility company franchised by the city and doing
business within the city. It shall be unlawful for any such public utility company or any officer or employee thereof to assess or
charge for services rendered any rate other than the rate so fixed or approved. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title V, Chapter 52,
Section 52.22)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 363/414
ARTICLE 13.300 WATER RATES*
Sec. 13.301 Definition
Industrial. Is defined as any account with a meter 2" or greater.
Sec. 13.302 Specific Charges
(a) Base Rates.
(1) City residential/commercial/industry base rates:
Meter City Base Rate Rural Base Rate
3/4 $13.26 $14.85
1 $21.06 $23.59
1.5 $27.30 $30.58
2 $40.56 $45.43
3 $62.40 $69.89
4 $93.60 $104.83
6 $195.00 $218.40
(2) Tier rates nonindustrial:
Usage Tier City Rate Rural Rate
1 to 5,000 $2.69 $3.01
5,001 to 10,000 $3.00 $3.36
10,001 to 25,000 $3.31 $3.71
25,001 to 50,000 $3.63 $4.07
Over 50,000 $3.88 $4.35
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 364/414
(3) Tier rate industrial:
Usage Tier City Rate Rural Rate
1 to 5,000 $2.69 $3.01
5,001 to 10,000 $3.00 $3.36
10,001 to 100,000 $3.31 $3.71
100,001 to 1,000,000 $2.69 $3.01
Over 1,000,000 $2.50 $2.80
(b) Bulk Water Rates. The rate for bulk water shall be $12.00 per thousand gallons.
(Ordinance 2011-24 adopted 10/4/11)
Sec. 13.303 Water Meter Fee Schedule
LUE's per meter size meter installation fee:
Meter Size LUE Fee/LUE Fee
5/8" 1 $500.00 $500.00
3/4" 1.5 $500.00 $750.00
1" 2.5 $500.00 $1,250.00
1-1/2" 5 $500.00 $2,500.00
2" 8 $500.00 $4,000.00
3" 16 $500.00 $8,000.00
4" 25 $500.00 $12,500.00
6" 50 $500.00 $25,000.00
8" 80 $500.00 $40,000.00
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 365/414
10" 115 $500.00 $57,500.00
(Ordinance 2012-20 adopted 5/1/12)
Sec. 13.304 Delayed Payment/Reconnect Fees
(a) Delayed Payment or Late Payment. Will be ten percent (10%) of the bill if not paid on or before the 10th of the month in
which bill is rendered.
(b) Reconnect Fee. If service is discontinued because of nonpayment, a $50.00 per meter charge will be made for reconnection
during regular working hours. For reconnection after regular working hours, the charge will be $75.00.
(Ordinance 2011-24 adopted 10/4/11)
ARTICLE 13.400 SEWER RATES*
Sec. 13.401 Monthly Sewer Rates
There shall be charged for sewer services in the City of Gonzales, Texas, for each month, rates as provided for in the office of the
city secretary. (Ordinance 2004-03 adopted 3/1/04)
Sec. 13.402 Sewer Tap Fee Schedule
(a) Four inch (4") connection: $1,500.00.
(b) Six inch (6") connection: $2,500.00.
(c) Eight inch (8") connection: $3,500.00.
(d) Taps larger than eight inches (8") or under circumstances that increase the cost of any tap the customer shall pay the actual
construction cost.
(Ordinance 2012-20 adopted 5/1/12)
ARTICLE 13.500 BACKFLOW AND CROSS-CONNECTIONS
Sec. 13.501 Cross-Connection Control; General Policy
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this article is:
(1) To protect the public potable water supply of the City of Gonzales from the possibility of contamination or
pollution by isolating within the consumer's internal distribution system(s) or the consumer's private water system(s),
such contaminants or pollutants which could backflow into the public water system; and
(2) To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential between the consumer's
in-plant potable water system(s) and non-potable water system(s), plumbing fixtures and industrial piping systems;
and
(3) To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control which will systematically
and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems.
(b) Responsibility. The City of Gonzales water purveyor/code enforcement officer shall be responsible for the protection of the
public potable water distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow of contaminants or pollutants
through the water service connection. If, in the judgment of said water purveyor/code enforcement officer, an approved backflow
prevention assembly is required (at the consumer's water service connection; or, within the consumer's private water system) for
the safety of the water system, the water purveyor/code enforcement officer or his designated agent shall give notice in writing to
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 366/414
said consumer to install such an approved backflow prevention assembly(ies) at a specific location(s) on his premises. The
consumer shall immediately install such an approved backflow prevention assembly(ies) at the consumer's own expense; and
failure, refusal or inability on the part of the consumer to install, have tested and maintained said assembly(s), shall constitute
grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such requirements have been satisfactorily met.
Sec. 13.502 Definitions
Water Purveyor/Code Enforcement Officer. The water purveyor/code enforcement officer in charge of the water department or
health department of the City of Gonzales is invested with the authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective
cross-connection control program and for the enforcement of the provisions of this article.
Approved.
(1) The term “approved” as herein used in reference to a water supply shall mean a water supply that has been
approved by the health agency having jurisdiction.
(2) The term “approved” as herein used in reference to an air gap, a double check valve assembly, a reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly or other backflow prevention assemblies or methods shall mean an
approval by the administrative authority having jurisdiction.
Auxiliary Water Supply. Any water supply on or available to the premises other than the purveyor's approved public water supply
will be considered as an auxiliary water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's public potable
water supply or any natural source(s) such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or used waters or industrial fluids. These
waters may be contaminated or polluted or they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the
water purveyor does not have sanitary control.
Backflow. The undesirable reversal of flow of water or mixtures of water and other liquids, gases or other substances into the
distribution pipes of the potable supply of water from any source or sources. (See terms Backsiphonage and Backpressure)
Backpressure. Any elevation of pressure in the downstream piping system (by pump, elevation of piping, or steam and/or air
pressure) above the supply pressure at the point of consideration which would cause, or tend to cause, a reversal of the normal
direction of flow.
Backsiphonage. A form of backflow due to a reduction in system pressure which causes a subatmospheric pressure to exist at a
site in the water system.
Backflow Preventer. An assembly or means designed to prevent backflow.
(1) Air Gap. A physical separation between the free flowing discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline and an
open or non-pressure receiving vessel. An “approved air gap” shall be at least double the diameter of the supply pipe
measured vertically above the overflow rim of the vessel, in no case less than 1 inch (2.54 cm).
(2) Reduced Pressure Principal Backflow Prevention Assembly. An assembly containing two independently acting
approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically independent pressure differential relief
valve located between the check valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The unit shall include
properly located resilient seated test cocks and tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves at each end of the
assembly. This assembly is designed to protect against a non-health (i.e., pollutant) or a health hazard (i.e.
contaminant). This assembly shall not be used for backflow protection of sewage or reclaimed water.
(3) Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention Assembly. An assembly composed of two independently acting,
approved check valves including tightly closing resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly
and fitted with properly located resilient seated test cocks. This assembly shall only be used to protect against a nonhealth
hazard (i.e., pollutant).
Contamination. An impairment of the quality of the water which creates an actual hazard to the public health through
poisoning or through the spread of disease by sewage, industrial fluids, waste, etc.
Cross-Connection. Any unprotected actual or potential connection or structural arrangement between public or a consumer's
potable water system and any other source or system through which it is possible to introduce into any part of the potable system
any used water, industrial fluid, gas or substance other than the intended potable water with which the system is supplied. Bypass
arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices and other temporary or permanent devices
through which or because of which backflow can or may occur are considered to be cross-connections.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 367/414
(1) The term “direct cross-connection” shall mean a cross-connection which is subject to both backsiphonage and
backpressure.
(2) The term “indirect cross-connection” shall mean a cross-connection which is subject to backsiphonage only.
Cross-Connections – Controlled. A connection between a potable water system and a non potable water system with an approved
backflow prevention assembly properly installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford the protection commensurate
with the degree of hazard.
Cross-Connection Control by Containment. The term “service protection” shall mean the appropriate type or method of backflow
protection at the service connection, commensurate with the degree of hazard of the consumer's potable water system.
Hazard, Degree of. The term “degree of hazard” shall mean either a pollutional (non-health) or contamination (health) hazard and
is derived from the evaluation of conditions within a system.
(1) Hazard; Health. An actual or potential threat of contamination of a physical or toxic nature to the public potable
water system or the consumer's potable water system that would be a danger to health.
(2) Hazard; Plumbing. An internal or plumbing type cross-connection in a consumer's potable water system that
may be either a pollutional or a contamination type hazard. This includes but is not limited to cross-connections to
toilets, sinks, lavatories, wash trays and lawn sprinkling systems. Plumbing type cross-connections can be located in
many types of structures including homes, apartment houses, hotels and commercial or industrial establishments. Such
a connection, if permitted to exist, must be properly protected by an appropriate type of backflow prevention
assembly.
(3) Hazard; Pollutional. An actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or the potability
of the public or the consumer's potable water system but which would not constitute a health or system hazard, as
defined. The maximum degree or intensity of pollution to which the potable water system could be degraded under
this definition would cause a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause minor damage to the system or
its appurtenances.
(4) Hazard; System. An actual or potential threat of severe danger to the physical properties of the public or the
consumer's potable water system, or of a pollution or contamination which would have a protracted effect on the
quality of the potable water in the system.
Industrial Fluids. Any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or
concentration which would constitute a health, system, pollutional or plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water
supply. This may include, but not be limited to: polluted or contaminated used waters; all types of process waters and “used
waters” originating from the public potable water system which may deteriorate in sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid form;
plating acids and alkalies; circulated cooling waters connected to an open cooling tower and/or cooling waters that are chemically
or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances contaminated natural waters such as from wells, springs, streams, rivers,
bays, harbors, seas, irrigation canals or systems, etc.; oils, gases glycerine, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions and other liquids
and gaseous fluids used industrially, for other processes, or for firefighting purposes.
Pollution. An impairment of the quality of the water to a degree which does not create a hazard to the public health but which
does adversely and unreasonably affect the aesthetic qualities of such waters for domestic use.
Water, Potable. The term “potable water” shall mean any public potable water supply which has been investigated and approved
by the health agency. The system must be operating under a valid health permit. In determining what constitutes an approved
water supply, the health agency has final judgment as to its safety and potability.
Water, Non-Potable. The term “non-potable water” shall mean a water supply which has not been approved for human
consumption by the health agency having jurisdiction.
Water, Service Connection. The term “service connection” shall mean the terminal end of a service connection from the public
potable water system, (i.e. where the water purveyor may lose jurisdiction and sanitary control of the water at its point of delivery
to the consumer's water system). If a water meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the service connections
shall mean the downstream end of the water meter.
Water, Used. The terms “used water” shall mean any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public potable water system to a
consumer's water system after it has passed through the service connection and is no longer under the control of the waster
purveyor.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 368/414
Sec. 13.503 Requirements
(a) Water System.
(1) The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: the water purveyor's system and the consumer's
system.
(2) Water purveyor's system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system, and shall include all
those facilities of the water system under the complete control of the purveyor, up to the point where the consumer's
system begins.
(3) The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage, and
delivery of water to the distribution system.
(4) The distribution system shall include the network of conduits used for the delivery of water from the source to
the consumer's system.
(5) The consumer's system shall include those parts of the facilities beyond the termination of the water purveyor's
distribution system which are utilized in conveying potable water to points of use.
(b) Policy.
(1) No water service connection to any premise shall be installed or maintained by the water purveyor unless the
water supply is protected as required by the City of Gonzales laws and regulations and this article. Service of water to
any premise shall be discontinued by the water purveyor/code enforcement officer if a backflow prevention assembly
required by this article is not installed, tested and maintained, or if it is found that a backflow prevention assembly has
been removed, bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises. Service will not be restored
until such conditions or defects are corrected.
(2) The consumer's system should be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the
City of Gonzales to determine whether unprotected cross-connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including
violations of these regulations, exist. When such a condition becomes known, the City of Gonzales shall deny or
immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing for a physical break in the service line until the
consumer has corrected the condition(s) in conformance with the City of Gonzales statutes relating to plumbing and
water supplies and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
(3) An approved backflow prevention assembly shall also be installed on each service line to a consumer's water
system at or near the property line or immediately inside the building being served; but, in all cases, before the first
branch line leading off the service line wherever the following conditions exist:
(A) In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply which is not or may not be of safe bacteriological
or chemical quality and which is not acceptable as an additional source by the City of Gonzales, the public water
system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention
assembly in the service line commensurate with the degree of hazard.
(B) In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any other objectionable substances is handled in
such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public system shall be
protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the
service line commensurate with the degree of hazard. This shall include the handling of process waters and
waters originating from the water purveyor's system which have been subject to deterioration in quality.
(C) In the case of premises having (i) internal cross-connections that cannot be permanently corrected or
protected against; or (ii) intricate plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the
premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain
whether or not dangerous cross-connections exist, the public water system shall be protected against backflow
from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line.
(4) The type of protective assembly required under subsections (b)(1)-(3) above shall depend upon the degree of
hazard which exists as follows:
(A) In the case of any premise where there is an auxiliary water supply as stated in subsection (b)(3)(A) above,
and is not subject to any of the following rules, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air gap
or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 369/414
(B) In the case of any premise where there is water or substance that would be objectionable but not hazardous
to health, if introduced into the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved
double check valve backflow prevention assembly.
(C) In the case of any premise where there is any material dangerous to health which is handled in such a
fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall be
protected by an approved air gap or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly.
Examples of premises where these conditions will exist include sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping
stations, chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries and plating plants.
(D) In the case of any premise where there are unprotected cross-connections, either actual or potential, the
public water system shall be protected by an approved air gap or an approved reduced pressure principle
backflow prevention assembly at the service connection.
(E) In the case of any premise where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it
is impossible or impractical to make a complete in-plant cross-connection survey, the public water system shall
be protected against backflow from the premises by either an approved air gap or an approved reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention assembly on each service to the premise.
(5) Any backflow prevention assembly required herein shall be a make, model and size approved by the City of
Gonzales. The term “approved backflow prevention assembly” shall mean as assembly that has been manufactured in
full conformance with the standards established by the American Water Works Association entitled:
AWAA/ANSI C510-921 Standard for Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention Assemblies;
AWAA/ANSI C511-921 Standard for Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Assemblies;
and, have met completely the laboratory and field performance specifications of the Foundation for Cross-
Connections Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern California (USCFCCCHR) established in:
Specifications of Backflow Prevention Assemblies—Section 10 of the most current edition of the Manual of
Cross-Connection Control.
Said AWWA and USCFCCCHR standards and specifications have been adopted by the City of Gonzales. Final
approval shall be evidenced by a “Certificate of Compliance” for the said AWWA standards; or “Certificate of
Approval” for the said USCFCCCHR Specifications; issued by an approved testing laboratory.
The following testing laboratory has been qualified by the City of Gonzales to test and approve backflow
prevention assemblies:
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research
University of Southern California
KAP-200 University Park MC-2531
Los Angeles, California 90089-2531
Testing laboratories other than the laboratory listed above will be added to an approved list as they are qualified by
the City of Gonzales.
Backflow preventers which may be subjected to backpressure or backsiphonage that have been fully tested and
have been granted a certificate of approval by said qualified laboratory and are listed on the laboratory's current list of
approved backflow prevention assemblies may be used without further test or qualification.
(6) It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premise where backflow prevention assemblies are installed, to have a
field test performed by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester upon installation and at least once per year. In
those instances where the water purveyor/code enforcement officer or health officer deems the hazard to be great
enough, he may require field tests at more frequent intervals. These tests shall be at the expense of the water user and
shall be performed by City of Gonzales personnel or by a certified tester approved by the City of Gonzales. It shall be
the duty of the water purveyor/code enforcement officer to see that these tests are made in a timely manner. The
consumer shall notify the City of Gonzales in advance when the tests are to be undertaken so that an official
representative may witness the field tests if so desired. These assemblies shall be repaired, overhauled or replaced at
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 370/414
the expense of the consumer whenever said assemblies are found to be defective. Records of such tests, repairs and
overhaul shall be kept and made available to the City of Gonzales.
(7) All presently installed backflow prevention assemblies which do not meet the requirements of this section but
were approved devices for the purposes described herein at the time of installation and which have been properly
maintained, shall, except for the testing and maintenance requirements under subsection (6) above, be excluded from
the requirements of these rules so long as the City of Gonzales is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the water
purveyor's system. Whenever the existing device is moved from the present location or requires more than minimum
maintenance or when the City of Gonzales finds that the maintenance constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be
replaced by an approved backflow prevention assembly meeting the requirements of this section.
(8) The City of Gonzales is authorized to make all necessary and reasonable rules and policies with respect to the
enforcement of this article. All such rules and policies shall be consistent with the provisions of this article and shall
be effective 14 days after its passage and approval. The city secretary shall give notice of the passage of this article by
causing the caption hereof to be published in the official newspaper in the City of Gonzales at least twice within ten
(10) days after the passage of this article.
(Ordinance 98-1 adopted 1/27/98)
ARTICLE 13.600 WATER CONSERVATION AND DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLANS
The drought contingency plan attached to Ordinance 2014-23 as exhibit A and water conservation plan attached to Ordinance
2014-23 as exhibit B and made part hereof for all purposes be, and the same is hereby, adopted as the official policy of the city, is
kept on file in the office of the city secretary. (Ordinance 2014-23 adopted 9/2/14)
CHAPTER 14
ZONING
ARTICLE 14.100 AIRPORT ZONING REGULATIONS*
Sec. 14.101 Findings
(a) It is found that an obstruction:
(1) Has the potential for endangering the lives and property of users of Gonzales Municipal Airport and the property
or occupants of land in its vicinity;
(2) May affect existing and future instrument approach minimum of Gonzales Municipal Airport; and
(3) May reduce the size of areas available for the landing, takeoff, and maneuvering of aircraft;
thus tending to destroy or impair the utility of Gonzales Municipal Airport, and the public investment therein.
(b) Accordingly, it is declared:
(1) Gonzales Municipal Airport fulfills an essential community purpose;
(2) The creation or establishment of an obstruction has the potential of being a public nuisance and may injure the
region served by Gonzales Municipal Airport;
(3) It is necessary in the interest of the public health, public safety, and general welfare that the creation or
establishment of obstructions that are a hazard to air navigation be prevented; and
(4) The prevention of these obstructions should be accomplished, to the extent legally possible, by the exercise of
the police power without compensation.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 371/414
(c) It is further declared that the prevention of the creation or establishment of hazards to air navigation, the elimination,
removal, alteration or mitigation of hazards to air navigation, or the marking and lighting of obstructions are public purposes for
which a political subdivision may raise and expend public funds and acquire land or interests in land.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 91, Section 91.15)
Sec. 14.102 Short Title
This article shall be known and may be cited as “Gonzales Municipal Airport Zoning Regulations.” (1995 Code of Ordinances,
Title IX, Chapter 91, Section 91.16)
Sec. 14.103 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
Airport. The Gonzales Municipal Airport.
Airport Elevation. The established elevation of the highest point on the usable landing area measured in feet from mean sea level.
Airport Hazard. Any structure or tree on land which obstructs the air space required for the flights of aircraft or which obstructs
or interferes with the control or tracking and/or data acquisition in the landing, taking off or flight at an airport, or at any
installation or facility relating to flight, and tracking and/or data acquisition of the flight craft; hazardous, interfering with or
obstructing such landing, taking off or flight of aircraft or which is hazardous or interferes with tracking and/or data acquisition
pertaining to flight and flight vehicles.
Airport Hazard Area. Any area of land or water upon which an airport hazard might be established if not prevented as provided in
this article.
Airport Reference Point. The point established as the approximate geographic center of the airport landing area and so designated.
Approach Surface. A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and upward from the
end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in Section 14.105. In the
plan, the perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone.
Approach, Transitional, Horizontal, and Conical Zones. The zones set forth in Section 14.104.
Board of Adjustment. A Board consisting of five members appointed by the city council, as provided by Tex. Loc. Gov't Code, §
241.032.
Conical Surface. A surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to 1 for a
horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
Hazard to Air Navigation. An obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of
the navigable airspace.
Height. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this article and shown on the zoning map, the
datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
Horizontal Surface. A horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides
with the perimeter of the horizontal zone.
Joint Airport Zoning Board. A board consisting of five members, two members appointed by the city council, and two members
appointed by the Commissioners' Court of Gonzales County, Texas. The four members so appointed shall elect a fifth member,
who shall serve as chairperson.
Landing Area. The surface area of the airport used for the landing, take-off or taxiing of aircraft.
Nonconforming Use. Any preexisting structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions
of this article or an amendment thereto.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 372/414
Obstruction. Any structure, growth or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in Section
14.105.
Person. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association, or body politic, and includes
a trustee, receiver, assignee, administrator, executor, guardian or other representative.
Primary Surface. A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the
primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of the runway; but when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface, or
planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of the at runway. The width of the primary surface of a runway will be
that width prescribed in Part 77 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) for the most precise approach existing or planned for
either end of that runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on
the runway centerline. The width of a primary surface is 250 feet for utility runways having only visual approaches.
Runway. A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and take-off of aircraft along its length.
Structure. An object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including, but not limited to buildings, towers,
cranes, smokestacks, earth formation, and overhead transmission.
Transitional Surfaces. These surfaces extend outward at 90° angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended
at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically frown the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they
intersect the horizontal surfaces.
Tree. Any object of natural growth.
Visual Runway. A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures.
Utility Runway. A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft 12,500 pounds maximum
gross weight and less.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 91, Section 91.17)
Sec. 14.104 Zones
In order to carry out the provisions of this article, there are created and established certain zones which include all of the land
lying beneath the approach surfaces, transition surfaces, horizontal surface and conical surfaces as they apply to Gonzales
Municipal Airport. Such zones are shown on zoning map consisting of one sheet, prepared by the Texas Aeronautics
Commission, and dated March 26, 1982, which is attached to Ordinance 88-8 and made a part hereof. An area located in more
than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones
are hereby established and defined as follows:
(1) Approach Zones - Runway 15/33. An approach zone is established beneath the approach surface at the ends of
Runway 15/33 on Gonzales Municipal Airport for the visual landings and take-offs. The inner edge of the approach
zone shall have a width of 250 feet which coincides with the width of the primary surface at a distance of 200 feet
beyond each end of the runway, widening thereafter uniformly to a width of 1,250 feet at a horizontal distance of
5,000 feet beyond each end of the primary surface, its centerline of the runway.
(2) Transitional Zones. Transition zones are hereby established beneath the transition surface adjacent to each
runway and approach surface as indicated on the zoning map. Transition surfaces, symmetrically located on either side
of runways, have variable widths as shown on the zoning map. Transitional surfaces extend outward and upward at
right angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of 7:1 from the sides of the primary
surface and from sides of approach surfaces.
(3) Horizontal Zone. The area beneath a horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the
perimeter of which is construction by swinging arcs of 5,000 feet radii from the center of each end of the primary
surface of Runway 15/33 and connecting the adjacent arcs by lines tangent to those arcs.
(4) Conical Zones. The area beneath the conical surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the
horizontal surface at a slope of 20:1 for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 91, Section 91.18)
Sec. 14.105 Height Limitations
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 373/414
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to
grow in any zone created by this article to a height in excess of the applicable height limit herein established for such zone. Such
applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows:
(1) Approach Zones - Runway 15/33. One foot in height for each 20 feet in horizontal distance beginning at the end
of and at the elevation of the primary surface and extending to a point 5,000 feet from the end of the primary surface.
(2) Transitional Zones. Slope seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of each at the same
elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a height of 150 feet above mean sea level.
(3) Horizontal Zone. Establishing at 150 feet above the airport elevation, or a height of 504 feet above mean sea
level.
(4) Conical Zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and
at 150 feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation.
(5) Excepted Height Limitations. Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the growth, construction or
maintenance of any tree or structure to a height up to 40 feet above the surface of the land.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 91, Section 91.19)
Sec. 14.106 Use Restrictions
Notwithstanding any other provisions of the article, no use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this
article in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport
and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using
the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere
with the landing, taking off, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter
91, Section 91.20)
Sec. 14.107 Nonconforming Users
(a) Regulations Not Retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this article shall not be construed to require the removal,
lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of this
article, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use. Nothing herein contained shall require any change
in the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this article, and is diligently prosecuted.
(b) Marking and Lighting. Not withstanding the preceding subsection of this section, the owner of any nonconforming structure
or tree is required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed
necessary by the city manager, to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport, the presence of such airport
hazards. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated and maintained at the expense of the city.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 91, Section 91.21)
Sec. 14.108 Permits
(a) Future Users.
(1) Except as specifically provided in subsections (A) and (B) below, no material change shall be made in the use of
land, no structure shall be erected or otherwise established, and no tree shall be planted in any zone created unless a
permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for
which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use,
structure, or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the
permit shall be granted. No permit for a use inconsistent with the provisions of this article shall be granted unless a
variance has been approved in accordance with subsection (d) below.
(A) In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and conical zone, no permit shall be required for
any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when, because of terrain, land
contour, or topographic features, such tree or structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for such
zones.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 374/414
(B) On areas lying within the limits of the approach zones, but at a horizontal distance of not less than 4,200
feet from each end of the runway, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of vertical
height above the ground, except when such tree or structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for
such approach zones.
(2) Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any
construction, or alteration of any structure, or growth of any tree in excess of any of the height limits established by
this article except as set forth in Section 14.105(5).
(b) Existing Uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of any airport hazard or permit a
nonconforming use, structure, or tree to be made or become higher, or become a greater hazard to air navigation, than it was on
the effective date of this article or any amendments thereto, or than it is when the application for a permit is made. Except as
indicated, all applications for such a permit shall be granted.
(c) Nonconforming Uses Abandoned or Destroyed. Whenever the city manager determines that a nonconforming structure or
tree has been abandoned or more than 80% has been torn down, physically deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall be granted
that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviated from the zoning regulations.
(d) Variances.
(1) Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use his
property in violation of the regulations prescribed in this article, may apply to the board of adjustment for a variance
from such regulations in question. The application of variance shall be accompanied by a determination from the
Federal Aviation Administration as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities, and the
safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal
application or enforcement of the regulations will result in unnecessary hardship and the relief granted would not be
contrary to the public interest, but do substantial justice, and be in accordance with the spirit of this article.
(2) Additionally, no application for variance to the requirements of this article may be considered by the board of
adjustment unless a copy of the application has been furnished to the Gonzales, Gonzales County Joint Airport Zoning
Board for advice as to the aeronautical effects of the variance. If the Gonzales County Joint Airport Zoning Board
does not respond to the application within 15 days after receipt, the board of adjustment may act on its own to grant or
deny the application.
(e) Obstruction Marking and Lighting. Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable by the city
manager or the board of adjustment to effectuate the purpose of this article and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so
conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to allow the city manager to install, operate, and maintain,
at the expense of the city such markings and lights as may be necessary.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 91, Section 91.22)
Sec. 14.109 City Manager to Enforce Provisions
It shall be the duty of the city manager to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits shall
be made to the city manager upon a form published for that purpose. Applications required by this article to be submitted to the
city manager shall be promptly considered and granted or denied. Applications for variances shall be made to the board of
adjustment by first filing the application for variance with city manager who shall forthwith transmit the application to the board
of adjustment for determination. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 91, Section 91.23)
Sec. 14.110 Board of Adjustment
(a) There is created a board of adjustment to have and exercise the following powers:
(1) To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the city manager in
the enforcement of this article;
(2) To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this article upon which such board of adjustment under
such regulations may be required to pass;
(3) To hear and decide specific variances.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 375/414
(b) The board of adjustment shall consist of five members appointed by the city council and each shall serve for a term of two
years and be removable for cause by the appointment authority upon written charges, after a public hearing.
(c) The board of adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance and procedure in harmony with the provisions of this article.
Meetings of the board of adjustment shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such times as the board of adjustment may
determine. The chairperson, or in his absence the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses. All hearings of the board of adjustment shall be public. The board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings
or failing to vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records
of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office of the city secretary, and shall
be a public record.
(d) The board of adjustment shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law stating the facts upon which it relied
when making its legal conclusions in reversing, affirming, or modifying any order, requirement, decision or determination which
comes before it under the provisions of this article.
(e) The concurring vote of four members of the board of adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement,
decision, or determination of the city manager or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pay
under this article, or to affect any variation in this article.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 91, Section 91.24)
Sec. 14.111 Appeals
(a) Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the city manager made in his administration of this
article, if of the opinion that a decision of the city manager is an improper application of these regulations, may appeal to the
board of adjustment.
(b) All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the board of adjustment, by filing
with the city manager a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The city manager shall forthwith transmit to the board of
adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
(c) An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the city manager certifies to the
board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate, a stay
would, in the opinion of the city manager, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed
except by order of the board of adjustment on notice to the city manager and on due cause shown.
(d) The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in
interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by
attorney.
(e) The board of adjustment may in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or
modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or
determination, as may be appropriate under the circumstances.
(1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 91, Section 91.25)
Sec. 14.112 Judicial Review
Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the board of adjustment, may appeal to a court of competent
jurisdiction, as provided by the Airport Zoning Act, as amended, Tex. Loc. Gov't Code, §§ 241.041 through 241.043. (1995 Code
of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 91, Section 91.26)
Sec. 14.113 Additional Remedies
The city council may institute in any court of competent jurisdiction, an action to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate any violation
of this article/order or of any order or ruling made in connection with its administration or enforcement including, but not limited
to, an action for injunctive relief as provided by the Airport Zoning Act, as amended, Tex. Loc. Gov't Code, § 241.044. (1995
Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 91, Section 91.27)
Sec. 14.114 Conflicting Regulations
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 376/414
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this article and any other regulations
applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or trees, the use of land, or any other
matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. (1995 Code of Ordinances, Title IX, Chapter 91,
Section 91.28)
ARTICLE 14.200 ZONING REGULATIONS*
Sec. 14.201 Purpose
(a) This article is enacted in accordance with the comprehensive master plan to promote the safety, health, and general welfare
of the community by regulating development within the city.
(b) The city has been divided into various zoning districts to provide for an orderly growth pattern, to foster homogeneous land
use development, and to ensure availability of adequate public facilities. Zoning districts have been selected to enhance the usage
trends indicated by the comprehensive master plan.
(c) The zoning districts are designed to provide flexibility of use while retaining the limitation necessary to protect existing
areas and uses and to avoid undue population concentration and lessen street congestion. Limits have been placed on development
which is not conducive to desirable and attractive growth while providing areas for most uses and allowing for utilization of the
many smaller tracts that presently exist within the city.
(d) To provide for new and changing uses, the definitions of allowable and permitted uses within each zoning district are
written in a general and generic form. When there is a question concerning the definition or meaning of any such use, the
planning and zoning commission is authorized to define such use.
(e) It is also the intent of this article to provide for the integrity of residential neighborhoods and to provide for appropriate
commercial, industrial, and public facilities while allowing sufficient flexibility to promote orderly growth and development.
(f) The zoning regulations are also designed to secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers, to promote health and the
general welfare, to provide adequate light and air, to prevent overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of population,
and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewers, schools, parks, and other public requirements.
(Ordinance 99-9 adopted 10/26/99)
Sec. 14.202 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein.
When consistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the
singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word “shall” is always mandatory, while the
word “may” implies an option. Definitions not expressly prescribed herein are to be determined in accordance with the law.
Definitions expressly prescribed herein are to be constructed in accordance with the city's subdivision regulations, or other
applicable ordinances of the city, or in the absence of such ordinances, then in accordance with the customary usage in municipal
planning, surveying, and engineering practices.
Access. A means of egress and ingress from a tract of land to a dedicated right-of-way or from a city-approved private street.
Accessory Building. A structure, the use of which is incidental, appropriate, and subordinate to that of the principal structure on
the same lot. See Figure 1 below.
Accessory Use. A land use, activity, or structure that is customarily incidental, appropriate, and subordinate to the principal use of
land or of the principal structure on the same lot.
Agriculture. The use of land including, but not limited to farming, dairying, ranching, or animal or poultry husbandry, and the
necessary accessory operations for packing, creating, or storing the products; provided that the operations of any such accessory
operations must be secondary to that of the normal agricultural activities.
Apartment. A residential development type which provides for five (5) or more dwelling units within a single principal structure
for nontransient tenants. This term includes and is synonymous with multifamily.
Basement. That part of a building with more than half its first floor height below the average ground level. A basement shall not:
be counted as a story. This term includes cellar.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 377/414
Bed and Breakfast. See hotel.
Board. The board of adjustment of the City of Gonzales.
Boardinghouse. A dwelling, other than a hotel, motel or crew rental housing, where not more than four (4) separate sleeping
rooms for unrelated persons are provided for compensation. This term includes roominghouse.
Buildable Area. That portion of a lot remaining after the required setbacks have been provided. See Figure 1 below.
Building Height. The vertical distance from the average ground level to the highest point of the roof.
Building Line. A line within a lot defined by the minimum permitted horizontal distance from an adjacent property line. See
Figure 1 below.
Cellar. See basement.
Child Care Center. Any place, home, or institution which provides temporary custodial care and is regulated by the state.
Combined Family. A residential development type which provides for not more than four (4) dwelling units within a single
principal structure.
Commission. The planning and zoning commission of the City of Gonzales.
Comprehensive Master Plan. A statement of public policy containing the goals and objectives of the community which may
include:
(1) Capital improvements programs;
(2) Land use plan;
(3) Thoroughfare plan;
(4) Community facilities plan;
(5) Subdivision and zoning regulations and other development codes, ordinances, policies and plans promulgated by
the council for the quality and orderly growth of the community.
Condominium. A type of multifamily dwelling in which each dwelling unit is owned by the occupant but in which the halls,
entranceways, and underlying land are wholly or in part jointly owned.
Council. The city council of the City of Gonzales.
Crew Rental Housing. A temporary dwelling commonly rented on a daily, weekly, monthly or semi-annually basis for transient
oil and gas drilling employees and other transient employees.
Development Type. The form and use of a residential structure allowed or permitted within the various residential districts within
the city limits.
Duplex. A residential development type which provides for not more than two (2) dwelling units within a single principle
structure designed as a residence for nontransient tenants.
Dwelling Unit. A single unit providing complete independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation.
Home Occupation. Any occupation or profession carried on by the inhabitants of a dwelling which is clearly incidental and
secondary to the use of the structure for dwelling purposes, which does not change the character thereof, and which is conducted
entirely within the main or accessory buildings; provided that no trading in merchandise is carried on. No mechanical equipment
shall be used nor activities conducted which creates any noise, dust, odor, or electrical disturbances beyond the confines of the lot
on which the occupation is conducted. No home occupation shall employ more than one assistant in such a business. The
operation of a restaurant, convalescent facility, or cabinet, carpentry, metal, or auto repair shop is not a home occupation.
Hotel/Motel. A building designed and occupied as a temporary abiding place of individuals. To be classified as a hotel or motel an
establishment shall provide individual guest rooms or units and shall furnish customary services such as linen, maid service,
telephone, use and upkeep of furniture.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 378/414
Land Use Plan. A document adopted by the council which attempts to identify and guide growth within the city, and is a part of
the comprehensive master plan.
Lot Depth. The average of the length of the side lot lines. See Figure 1 below.
Lot Width. The average of the length of the front lot line and of the rear lot line. See Figure 1 below.
Manufactured Home. A residential structure constructed wholly or in modules at a location other than the building site, then
transported in one or more sections to the site, and installed on a permanent foundation. This term includes only those structures
which bear a decal of the Manufactured Housing Division, Texas Department of Labor and Standards, and which fully comply
with the Southern Standard Building Code in construction, installed systems and placement. This includes modular homes.
Mobile Home. Any vehicle or similar portable structure mounted or designed for mounting on wheels, used or intended for use
for dwelling purposes, including structural additions, except parked and unoccupied camping type trailers. Any such vehicle or
structure shall be deemed to be a mobile home whether or not the wheels have been removed therefrom and whether or not
resting upon a temporary or permanent foundation.
Modular Home. See manufactured home.
Multifamily. A residential development type which provides for five (5) or more dwelling units within a single principal structure.
Separate ownership of one or more units shall constitute a condominium. This term includes and is synonymous with apartment.
Nonconforming Building. Any building, or part thereof, lawfully existing or occupied at the effective date of this article (October
26, 1999) that does not comply, after the passage of this article, with the height, yard, parking, loading, coverage area, or
screening regulations of the district in which it is located.
Nonconforming Lot. Any lot lawfully existing at the effective date of this article (October 26, 1999,) that does not comply, after
the passage of this article, to the width, depth, and area regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
Nonconforming Use. Any use lawfully existing at the effective date of this article that does not comply, after the passage of this
article, with the use regulations of the district in which it is located.
Principal Structure. The primary building on a lot which by its design defines the use and character of the tract. See Figure 1
below.
Roominghouse. See boardinghouse.
Row House. See townhouse.
Single-Family Home. A residential development type which provides for a single dwelling unit within a single principal structure.
Structure. Anything constructed or erected on the ground including, but not limited to, buildings, factories, sheds, cabins, mobile
homes, and other similar forms.
Thoroughfare Plan. A document adopted by the council which attempts to identify and guide the locations of arterial and
collector streets within the city and is a part of the comprehensive master plan.
Townhouse. A residential development type which provides for five (5) or more dwelling units generally separated by common
walls within a single structure. Usually each dwelling unit is placed on an individually owned lot and each story of the structure
on each lot is under the same ownership. Some areas and yards may be commonly owned. A townhouse where the lot under and
immediately adjacent to the structure is individually owned does not constitute a condominium. This term includes row house.
Transient Person. A person that is a temporary guest, boarder, or the like.
Use. Any activity, function, or purpose to which a parcel of land or building is put and shall include the words used, arranged, or
occupied, for any purpose, including all residential, commercial business, industrial, public, or other use.
Accessory Use. A use which is wholly incidental to and supportive of the principal use of the same lot.
Principal Use. The primary purpose for which land or a building is used as permitted by the applicable zoning district.
Yard. An open space of ground between a structure and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a
structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided. In measuring a yard, the least horizontal distance between the lot
line and the structure shall be used. See Figure 1 following this section.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 379/414
Front Yard. A yard across the full width of the lot from the front wall of a structure to the front line of the lot.
Rear Yard. A yard across the full width of the lot from the rear wall of a structure to the rear line of the lot.
Required Yard. The area between a lot line and the adjacent setback line. All area within a lot which does not
constitute buildable area.
Side Yard. A yard between the wall of a structure and the adjacent side line of the lot, and extending from the front
wall of a structure to the rear wall of a structure.
(Ordinance 2013-04 adopted 2/19/13)
Sec. 14.203 Authenticity
(a) The city, having previously been divided and zoned into use districts, with subsequent rezoning in the several districts,
adopts and declares to be a part of this article that map prepared December 5, 2005. (Ordinance 2005-13 adopted 12/5/05)
(b) The map shall be signed by the zoning administrator to attest to its accuracy.
(c) The map shall be signed by the mayor to attest to its adoption by the city council.
(d) The map shall be signed by the city secretary to attest to its authenticity and to its receipt on the date of adoption.
Sec. 14.204 Maintenance
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 380/414
(a) The map shall be displayed in a secured transparent-faced case at a public location selected by the zoning administrator.
(b) Changes to the official zoning map shall be made only under the direct supervision of the zoning administrator.
(c) Changes made to the corporate limits of the city or additions or subdivisions approved by the council and subsequently
recorded, shall be added to the map and a marginal notation made giving the annexation ordinance number and adoption date,
along with the volume and page where recorded, or the subdivision/addition name and the plat book and page where recorded.
The notation shall be dated and initialed by the zoning administrator.
(d) Rezoned tracts shall be individually outlined on the map. Each rezoned tract shall be marked with a sequential key number
and a marginal notation made giving the key number, new zoning designation, agency approving such action, and a reference to
the ordinance or court order authorizing such action. The notation shall be dated and initialed by the zoning administrator.
(e) Copies of all or part of the official zoning map may be made for use, sale, or reference; but only the original of the official
zoning map, as amended, shall be deemed as the official current zoning status within the city.
(f) If the official zoning map becomes difficult to interpret due to damage or due to the number and/or nature of changes or
additions thereto, the council may adopt by ordinance a new official zoning map which shall supersede the prior map.
(1) The new official zoning map may also correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior map, but no such
correction shall have the effect of amending the prior map.
(2) The new official zoning map shall reference the effective date of the prior map and shall be attested and
authenticated as provided in Sections 14.701 - 14.703.
(g) Should the official zoning map become lost or destroyed, a new official zoning map shall be reconstructed by the zoning
administrator from any reliable source of copies and from such other documentation available. After a public hearing concerning
the accuracy thereof, the council may adopt by ordinance such map to be the new official zoning map.
(1) The new official zoning map shall be attested and authenticated as provided by Sections 14.701 - 14.703.
(2) Should the lost map be discovered prior to amendment of the reconstructed map, the reconstructed map shall be
void.
(3) If one or more amendments have been made to the reconstructed map, such corrections to the reconstructed map
as are needed to bring it into conformity with the previously lost map, shall be made by the zoning administrator as
provided in subsection (d) above, and those property owners affected by the corrections notified by ordinary mail. The
reconstructed map shall then continue in effect as the official zoning map.
(h) Any superseded official zoning map, or remaining portions thereof, along with documentation of actions modifying such
maps shall be maintained in the files of the city.
Sec. 14.205 Interpretation
(a) Where uncertainties exist with respect to the intended boundaries of the various districts as shown on the official zoning
map, the following rules shall apply:
(1) Unless otherwise clearly shown on the map, where district boundaries follow the centerline of a street, alley,
waterway, railroads, or other right-of-way the centerline of such or where appropriate, the extension or continuation of
the centerline shall be construed to be the district boundary.
(2) Unless otherwise clearly shown on the map, where district boundaries follow approximately along lot or tract
lines, the actual lot or tract line or, where appropriate, the extension thereof, shall constitute the boundary.
(3) When property is hereafter subdivided into lots and blocks and the district lines on the official zoning map differ
from the platted lines, the nearest platted line shall become the district boundary unless indicated otherwise on the plat
of such subdivision.
(4) Where a district boundary crosses an existing platted or described lot or tract, the nearest existing property line,
as of October 26, 1999, shall be construed to be such district boundary.
(5) Where a district boundary crosses an unsubdivided tract larger than two (2) acres, the location of such boundary
shall be determined from the nearest identifiable line shown on the map by use of the scale appearing on the map.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 381/414
(b) When none of the above apply or there is a dispute as to actual location of the district boundary, the board shall make such
determination.
Sec. 14.206 Zoning Upon Annexation
(a) Any territory hereafter annexed to the city shall be classified as A-O (Agriculture-Open Space) only, unless otherwise
determined by the planning and zoning commission and city council at the time of annexation.
(b) The procedure for establishing initial zoning other than A-O and subsequent zoning or annexed territory shall conform to
the procedure established by law for the adoption of normal zoning classifications and regulations.
(c) Subsequent rezoning must be in accordance with the procedures provided in Section 14.801.
(d) Subsequent to annexation, the new territory may be rezoned by the city council for a land use consistent with the
comprehensive plan and on the recommendation of the planning commission.
(e) In an area classified A-O, no person shall erect, excavate, construct, or proceed or continue with the erection or construction
of any building or structure or add to, enlarge, move, improve, alter, repair, convert, or extend or demolish any building or
structure or cause the same to be done in any newly annexed territory to the city without first applying for and obtaining a
building permit therefor from the building official as may be required in applicable city ordinances.
ARTICLE 14.300 DISTRICT REGULATIONS*
Sec. 14.301 Agriculture-Open Space District (A-O)
(a) Purpose. This district includes lands within the corporate limits of the city which are not subdivided and relatively
undeveloped. It may also include those areas mentioned in Section 14.206. This district is designed to promote orderly, timely,
economical growth and to recognize current conditions. It is a reserved area in which the future growth of the city can occur.
(b) Permitted Uses. Refer to Section 14.309
(c) Specific Uses Permitted. Refer to Section 14.309
(d) Area Requirements. Refer to Section 14.310
Sec. 14.302 Residential 1 District (R-1)
(a) Purpose. This district includes lands within the city limits subdivided for single-family residential purposes and associated
uses. The district is designed to provide sufficient, suitable, residential neighborhoods, protected from incompatible uses,
provided with necessary facilities and services.
(b) Permitted Uses. Refer to Section 14.309
(c) Specific Uses Permitted. Refer to Section 14.309
(d) Area Requirements. Refer to Section 14.310
(e) Parking Requirements. Refer to Section 14.405 through 14.407
Sec. 14.303 Residential 2 District (R-2)
(a) Purpose. This district contains lands within the city which have been subdivided for single-family residential purposes and
associated uses as well as larger parcels of property which lend themselves to duplex. This district is for moderate densities. It
may be utilized as a transitional zone between low density residential and commercial uses.
(b) Permitted Uses. Refer to Section 14.309
(c) Specific Uses Permitted. Refer to Section 14.309
(d) Area Requirements. Refer to Section 14.310
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 382/414
(e) Parking Requirements. Refer to Section 14.405 through 14.407
Sec. 14.304 Light Commercial District (C-1)
(a) Purpose. This district includes uses of limited retail category intended for use near residential neighborhood areas for
purposes of supplying day-to-day retail needs of the residents as well as visitors, such as food, drugs, and personal services.
(b) Permitted Uses. Refer to Section 14.309
(c) Specific Uses Permitted. Refer to Section 14.309
(d) Area Requirements. Refer to Section 14.310
(e) Parking Requirements. Refer to Section 14.405 through 14.407
Sec. 14.305 Heavy Commercial District (C-2)
(a) Purpose. This district is composed of uses constituting retail goods and consumer services to residents of the urban and
trade areas of the city, as well as visitors. The district also provides space for financial, administrative, and business services
compatible with the function of the focal point of community activity and its intensive development.
(b) Permitted Uses. Refer to Section 14.309
(c) Specific Uses Permitted. Refer to Section 14.309
(d) Area Requirements. Refer to Section 14.309
(e) Parking Requirements. Refer to Section 14.405 through 14.407
Sec. 14.306 Industrial District (M-1)
(a) Purpose. This district includes industrial activities and provides an environment exclusively for, and conducive to, the
development and protection of such activities.
(b) Permitted Uses. Refer to Section 14.309
(c) Specific Uses. Refer to Section 14.309
(d) Area Requirements. Refer to Section 14.310
(e) Parking Requirements. Refer to Section 14.405 through 14.407
Sec. 14.307 Historical District (H-D)
(a) Purpose. This district provides opportunities for the use of substantial land areas and buildings within the City of Gonzales
which have unique qualities associated with the history and culture of the area and its people. An historical district is defined as
an area which has outstanding historical, cultural, and architectural significance in the national, international, state, region, or
community within which the buildings, structures, or appurtenances are of basic and vital importance for the preservation and
development of culture and tourism because of their association with history.
(b) Permitted Uses. A building(s) or premise(s) shall be used for the following purposes:
(1) Any use for which it was originally constructed.
(2) For public, commercial, residential, and tourist use, providing that the exterior architectural appearance of the
building is not altered from its original design and use; that the commercial and tourist uses are conducted wholly
within the enclosed building; and that the yards should not be used for display or storage of merchandise or for the
parking and storage of vehicles, containers, or waste materials.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 383/414
(c) Specific Uses. Building and structures in connection with the above uses will be permitted by special written use permit
following a favorable recommendation by the planning commission.
(d) Area Requirements. No yard regulations in this district. No building shall exceed two and one-half (2½) stories or thirtyfive
feet (35') without the approval of the city council. No minimum lot area requirements in this district.
(e) Parking Requirements. As determined by the planning commission as being compatible with the purpose of intent of this
district.
Sec. 14.308 Mobile Home District (M-H)
(a) Purpose. This district includes mobile home parks.
(b) General Requirements.
(1) Any mobile home/modular home located within the corporate limits of the City of Gonzales, shall be located in
an approved mobile home park. Any mobile home park constructed after the adoption of this section, and for any
extension or addition to an existing mobile home park in the city shall be in compliance with this section and Chapter
3, Article 3.700.
(2) Any mobile home/modular home located within a floodplain must meet the Federal Emergency Management
Association (FEMA) regulations.
(c) Area Requirements. Mobile home parks shall be a minimum of three (3) acres in size. Refer to Section 14.309 for additional
space requirements.
(d) Parking Requirements. One (1) parking space for each mobile home unit plus one (1) for each two (2) employees shall be
provided.
(Ordinance 99-9 adopted 10/26/99)
Sec. 14.308.2 Planned Development (PD) District
(a) Purpose. The purpose of an overlay planned development zoning district (“PD District”) is to provide for the development
of land as an integral unit for single or mixed use in accordance with a PD concept plan that may include uses, regulations and
other requirements that vary from the provisions of other zoning districts.
(1) PD districts are intended to implement generally the goals and objectives of the city's comprehensive plan.
(2) PD districts are also intended to encourage flexible and creative planning, to ensure the compatibility of land
uses, incorporate new planning concepts into a development, to allow for the adjustment of changing demands to meet
the current needs of the community, and to result in a higher quality development for the community than would result
from the use of conventional zoning districts.
(b) Applicability. A PD district may only be established in one or more of the following circumstances:
(1) The land is located in close proximity to established residential neighborhoods where conventional zoning
classifications may not adequately address neighborhood concerns regarding the quality or compatibility of the
adjacent development, and where it may be desirable to the neighborhood, the developer or the city to develop and
implement mutually agreed, enforceable development standards;
(2) The land, or adjacent property that would be impacted by the development of the land, has sensitive or unique
environmental features requiring a more flexible approach to zoning and clustering of uses, or special design
standards, in order to afford the best possible protection of the unique qualities of the site or the adjacent property;
(3) The land is proposed for development as a mixed-use development or a traditional neighborhood development
requiring more flexible and innovative design standards;
(4) The land consists of older sections of the city that are proposed for redevelopment or infill development, and
special design considerations are deemed desirable;
(5) The land serves as transition between different and seemingly incompatible land uses;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 384/414
(6) The land is proposed for development as a major office, retail, commercial or industrial employment center, and
special design standards may be warranted;
(7) The land is of such a character that it is in the community's best interest to encourage high quality development
through flexible development standards to further the goals and objectives of the city's comprehensive plan;
(8) The land consists of unusually configured parcels that cannot be developed efficiently under the base district
standards.
(c) Approval Procedures. Approval procedures for a PD district are within Article 14.800.
(d) Nature of the District. Each PD district shall be established as an overlay zoning district that combines with one or more
base zoning districts. Development in a PD district must be consistent with a concept plan that is incorporated as part of the
district by the adopting ordinance for the PD.
(e) Base Zoning District Uses. Any use permitted by right or conditionally in the base district shall be permitted in the PD
district, unless the use is prohibited or otherwise conditioned in the regulations adopted for the PD district. Uses requiring a
specific use permit for the base district may be authorized in the PD district only if designated on the concept plan adopted as part
of the PD district, in which case the use does not require a separate specific use permit under Article 14.700.
(f) Overlay Zoning District Uses.
(1) The PD district may provide for uses not allowed in the base zoning district, provided that the uses are
compatible with the stated purposes of the district and do not conflict with policies in the comprehensive plan,
considering the arrangement, combination and design features of the uses within the PD district, as depicted on the
concept plan.
(2) Uses that are not allowed in the base zoning district but are permitted within any specific PD shall be reflected in
the PD application, approved as part of the concept plan, and enumerated in the ordinance establishing the district.
(g) Location and Arrangement of Uses. The location and arrangement of all authorized uses in the PD district shall be
consistent with the concept plan approved with the district.
(h) Deviations from the Concept Plan. Refer to Section 14.804(d) for regulations related to deviations from the concept plan.
(i) Base District and Supplemental Standards. In a PD district, uses shall conform to the standards in the base zoning district
governing area, building and height requirements in this code, and any applicable supplemental standards, unless specifically
excepted in the ordinance establishing the PD district.
(j) Overlay Zoning District Standards.
(1) In a PD district, standards otherwise applicable to authorized uses in the base zoning district or pursuant to this
code may be varied, and thereafter shall be applied to the uses established in the PD district, only if approved in the
ordinance establishing the PD district.
(2) Standards that may be varied include but not limited to the following:
(A) Residential density;
(B) Lot area;
(C) Lot width;
(D) Lot depth;
(E) Yard depths and widths;
(F) Building height and size;
(G) Building exterior construction;
(H) Lot coverage;
(I) Floor area ratio;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 385/414
(J) Parking;
(K) Access;
(L) Screening;
(M) Landscaping;
(N) Accessory buildings;
(O) Signage;
(P) Sidewalks;
(Q) Hours of operation;
(R) Lighting; and
(S) Outdoor storage and display.
(3) Varied standards may increase or decrease the requirements otherwise applicable to particular uses.
(4) Any graphic depictions used to illustrate such standards, unless otherwise provided in the PD district regulations,
shall be considered standards that apply to subsequent development applications.
(k) Public Facilities.
(1) All facilities or improvements within public rights-of-way shall be provided in accordance with design standards
set forth within city subdivision regulations.
(2) All facilities or improvements within private rights-of-way or easements must meet city material standards and
construction specifications.
(3) Rights-of-way or easements for private streets shall comply with classification standards as set forth within the
city subdivision regulations. Paving and curb and gutter shall be provided according to the standards as set forth
within the subdivision regulations.
(4) In order to justify variations from public facilities standards pertaining to provision of roadway and drainage
facilities and to demonstrate compliance with the adequate public facilities policies in this LDC, a traffic impact study,
drainage study, or other type of applicable engineering study may be required as a prerequisite for approving a petition
for a PD district.
(Ordinance 2018-25 adopted 8/15/18)
Sec. 14.309 Specific Uses (All Districts)
The following uses may be permitted in any district when they meet special regulations and conditions prescribed by the board of
adjustment through the issuance of a permit. Detailed examination of proposed location and use characteristics is necessary to
maximize compatibility.
(1) Community buildings, meeting, recreational;
(2) Telephone exchange;
(3) Temporary signs;
(4) Public library;
(5) Municipal service facilities and buildings;
(6) Parks, playfields, and playgrounds;
(7) Public swimming pool;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 386/414
(8) School, public or denominational;
(9) Temporary structures not to exceed six (6) months (construction, real estate, etc.);
(10) Livestock.
(Ordinance 99-9 adopted 10/26/99; Ordinance 2010-04, sec. A, adopted 7/6/10; Ordinance 2016-8 adopted 5/3/16)
Sec. 14.310 Permitted and Specific Uses by District
(a) A-O Agricultural/Open Space District.
(1) Permitted Uses.
Country club (public or private)
Crop production
Farm
Garden (including greenhouse for commercial purposes)
Golf course
Pasture
Rodeo grounds and pens
Riding academy (private)
(2) Specific Uses.
Aircraft sales, service rental repair
Airports, landing strips terminal facilities
Broadcast towers for TV, or microwave
Sand and gravel extraction
Barn, stable for keeping public or private animal stock
Poultry production (no processing or sales on premises)
Single-family dwelling
(b) R-1 Residential District.
(1) Permitted Uses.
Single-family dwelling (one dwelling per lot)
Swimming pool (private)
Duplex dwelling units (two family)
Home occupation
(2) Specific Uses.
Athletic field
Daycare center (10 or less)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 387/414
Kindergarten (10 or less)
Bed and breakfast
Geriatric (10 or less day only)
(c) R-2 Residential District.
(1) Permitted Uses.
Uses permitted in R-1 plus
Apartments (less than ten)
Home occupations
Single-family dwellings units
Triplex dwellings
Townhouse
(2) Specific Uses.
Specific uses in R-1 plus
Apartments (more than ten)
Boardinghouse/Rooming house
Fraternity or sorority house
(Ordinance 99-9 adopted 10/26/99)
(d) C-1 Business District.
(1) Permitted Uses.
Uses permitted in R-1 and R-2 plus:
Administrative and professional offices
Art studio
Barber shop, beauty parlor
Tattoo parlor
Book store (retail, wholesale sales)
Cafe, restaurant, cafeteria
Cleaner, pick up station
Clinic, (public or private)
Daycare center
Domestic household equipment rental
Jewelry/watch repair shop
Domestic household storage
Drive-in eating establishment
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 388/414
Drug store and/or pharmacy
Florist
Government officers (federal, state, county or local)
Indoor theaters and motion-picture houses
Men, women, children's wearing apparel shop
Music and/or dance schools or studios
Photographic studio and/or photo processing
Laboratory (with no more than five employees)
Real estate office
Retail drug and specialty shop
Retail food with gas pumps (drive-in)
Retail food (supermarket)
Retail furniture and appliances
Shoe shop
Storage
Variety store
Pet shop
Antique shop
Cleaner, dry and pressing plant laundry and/or linen supply
Domestic household equipment rental, storage
Gas and electric public utility regulator
Printing and reproduction processing shop
Radio, TV repair
Radio, TV station or studio (no towers)
Retail service station
Geriatric (11 or more)
Boardinghouse/roominghouse
Bank or other financial institute
Uses similar to above when approved by board of adjustment
(2) Specific Uses.
Specific uses permitted in R-1 and R-2, plus:
Automobile carwash
Auto sales (new and used)
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 389/414
Tire sales and service
Automobile rental
Farm implements sales (new and used and storage)
Printing and reproduction processing shop
Mortuaries
Commercial recreation
(Ordinance 2018-26 adopted 8/15/18)
(e) C-2 Business District.
(1) Permitted Uses.
Uses permitted in R-1, R-2 and C-1 plus:
Automobile car wash
Automobile repair garage
Automobile rental
Automobile sales, new or used, building, lot and garage
Boarding kennel (public)
Bowling alley
Cold storage plant
Farm implement sales (new or used, storage, repair)
Garden (including greenhouse for commercial)
Hospital, general (public and private)
Household appliance repair
Lumber and building materials (sales and/or storage)
Mobile home sales and storage
Monument sales
Mortuaries
Private lodges (fraternal orders)
Sign shop
Tire shop (no vulcanizing or retreading)
Trailer and/or accessory equipment sales, rental or storage
Hotel/motels/bed and breakfast
Nursing homes
Apartments (more than 10)
Uses similar to above when approved by board of adjustment
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 390/414
(2) Specific Uses.
Specific uses in R-1, R-2 and C-1 plus:
Arena-coliseum
Carting, crating, express hauling or storage
Food products processing plant (less than five employees)
Heavy equipment repair or rental
Instrumentation and testing laboratory
Kindergarten
Nursery (commercial greenhouse)
Storage yards for contractor's materials (corp. yard)
Wholesale sales (general) enclosed within building
(Ordinance 99-9 adopted 10/26/99)
(f) M-1 Industrial District.
(1) Permitted Uses.
All uses permitted in R-1, R-2, C-1 and C-2 (with the exception of dwelling units but to include crew housing)
plus:
General merchandise warehouse
Heavy equipment sales and storage
Instrumentation and testing laboratories
Precision machine shop
Sheet metal fabrication shop
Welding shop
(Ordinance 2013-04 adopted 2/19/13)
(2) Specific Uses.
All specific uses permitted in R-1, R-2. C-1 and C-2 (with the exception of dwelling units, day care, and
kindergarten) and including:
Automobile wrecking (sales and storage)
Batching plant (concrete)
Broadcast towers (radio and TV, microwave)
Food products processing plant
Grain processing and storage
Motor freight terminal and/or warehouse
Salvage yard
Sand and gravel pit
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 391/414
Storage tanks (for petroleum and explosive products)
Tire shop (vulcanizing and retreading)
Slaughterhouse
(Ordinance 2012-34 adopted 11/5/12)
(g) M-1 Industrial District Located North of Industrial Park Road.
[(1) Permitted Uses.]
All uses permitted above plus:
Crew Housing
(Ordinance 2013-04 adopted 2/19/13)
Zone standards
District
Min. Lot
Area
(Gross)
Area/DU 
Lot
Width
Lot
Depth Front Yard Side Yard Exterior
Side Yard
Rear
Yard
Max. Lot
Coverage
Max.
Height Other
A-O (conditional) 5 acres 5 acres 200' 200'
variable; ave.
50' or 40'
min.
A. 25'
B. 60'
30' 30' 30% No limit
R-1 6,000 6,000 SF 50' 125' 30' 10' 15' 25' 33%
2.5 stories or 35'
SF
R-1 7,500 SF 7,500 SF 60' 125' 30' 15' 15' 25' 33%
2.5 stories or 35'
R-2 6,000 SF 2,000 SF 50' 125' Same as R-1 Same as R-1 (1) 12' (1) 25' (1) 40% 2.5 stories
R-2 8,000 SF 1,500 SF 60' 125' 15' see footnote 10' 15' 50% No limits except G.
M-H 3,500 SF 3,500 SF 40' 80' 10' 10' 25' 15' 30% One story H
C-1 6,000 SF 1,500 SF 60' 100' 10'
None except
F
5' plus E
20' plus
D
75%
Two
stories or
30'
C-2
(1) 3,000
SF
1,500 SF
(1) 25' (1) 115' -
None except
F
None
except E
20' plus
D
75%
Five
stories or
60'
(2) 6,000
SF
(2) 50' (2) 100' 10' 75%
H-D
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 392/414
See Section 14.307
M-1 5,000 SF - - - - 40' - - - No limit
(1) Interior lot
(2) Corner lot
A. One yard must have this dimension.
B. Combined yards.
D. Feet plus one for every 2 feet over 40 feet in height.
E. Opaque fence wall, or screen of not less than six feet in height when adjacent to any other R District.
F. Minimum 20 feet only when abutting any R-District.
G. When multi-family structure is to be adjacent to R-1 District or single-family dwelling unit, maximum height shall be 2.5 stories or 35 feet;
whichever is less.
H. Minimum distance between mobile homes = 15 feet at any point; requirements for open space, streets, circulation, access and the like, found in
Chapter 3, Article 3.700.
ARTICLE 14.400 REGULATIONS COMMON TO ALL OR SEVERAL DISTRICTS
Sec. 14.401 General District Regulations
(a) Every principal structure shall be on a lot having one or more sides abutting a public street or with a private street approved
by the city. All structures, other than accessory buildings not connected to any public utility, shall be so located on any lot such
that safe and convenient street access is provided.
(b) No building may be constructed or placed within any required yard.
Sec. 14.402 Height Limitations
The height limitations contained in the schedule of district regulations shall not include spires, belfries, cupolas, antennae, water
tanks, ventilators, chimneys, mechanical systems, or other appurtenances usually required to be placed at or above roof level not
intended for human occupancy.
(Ordinance 99-9 adopted 10/26/99)
Sec. 14.403 Multiple Structures on One Lot
(a) In any residential district permitting more than one structure housing an allowed or permitted use to be erected on a single
lot, the requirements of the zoning district and the other requirements of this article must be met for each structure as though each
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 393/414
structure were on an individual lot with the exception of accessory buildings.
(b) Should any structure be severed by sale from the other structures on the lot, the individual lot requirements of this article
shall be met for the structure within each severance.
(c) Accessory Buildings General Requirements.
(1) No accessory building shall be allowed on any lot that does not have a principal structure located on the lot.
(2) Except as provided below, only one accessory building will be allowed on any lot, provided that the accessory
building does not exceed the greater of 200 square feet or 2.0% of the calculated lot size, up to a maximum accessory
building size of 2,500 square feet.
(3) On lots equal to or greater that two (2) acres, the total allowable accessory building square footage may be split
into two accessory buildings.
(4) One additional accessory building used exclusively as a pool storage building (i.e., to house equipment and
supplies necessary to operate and maintain an onsite swimming pool and for a toilet and/or shower) is permitted,
provided the pool storage building has a maximum height of sixteen (16) feet, and a maximum area of one hundred
(100) square feet for lots equal to one (1) acre or less in size and two hundred (200) square feet for lots exceeding one
(1) acre in size.
(5) One additional accessory building used exclusively as a pump house (i.e., to house a pump and related
equipment for sprinkling purposes) is permitted, provided the pump house has a maximum height of four (4) feet, and
a maximum area of sixteen (16) square feet for lots equal to one (1) acre or less in size and thirty-six (36) square feet
for lots exceeding one (1) acre in size.
(6) One additional accessory building used exclusively as a decorative gazebo is permitted, provided the gazebo has
a maximum area of one hundred forty-four (144) square feet and a maximum height of twelve (12) feet. For purposes
of this subsection, an accessory building will be deemed a gazebo only if a minimum of fifty percent (50%) of each
sidewall is left open, and/or is covered only with either a screen or transparent glass.
(7) One additional accessory building up to 484 square feet is permitted on a lot when there is not an attached
garage on the principal building.
(8) No accessory building or structure shall include residential or living quarters for human beings.
(d) Location and Height Limitations.
(1) Accessory buildings shall not exceed one (1) story in height.
(2) The roof pitch of an accessory building shall not be greater than 10/12 or less than 3/12.
(3) An accessory building must be at least ten feet (10') away from any other building.
(4) An accessory building shall have setback requirements listed below.
(5) Side yard: seven feet (7').
(6) Rear yard: ten feet (10').
(7) Corner lot side yard next to street: ten feet (10').
(Ordinance 2008-07 adopted 12/2/08)
Sec. 14.404 Screening
(a) Buildings having more than four (4) dwelling units per structure within the residential district shall provide for an opaque
wall, screen, or fence at least six (6) feet high along each line adjoining any other development type structure or any other
residential district, except along any line which is also a street line.
(b) Any commercial or any industrial district adjoining any residential district shall provide for an opaque wall, screen, or fence
at least six (6) feet high along each adjoining lot line, except along any line which is also a street line.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 394/414
(c) Salvage or junk yards shall be completely enclosed by an opaque wall, screen, or fence at least eight (8) feet high around
those portions of such tract in which the salvage and storage operations are conducted. Such establishments shall also be in
conformance with the standards and requirements of applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
Sec. 14.405 Minimum Parking and Loading Requirements
(a) Off-street parking space consistent with the proposed land use is required in order to reduce inappropriate on-street parking.
(b) In all zoning districts, at the time any building or structure is erected, enlarged, or increased incapacity, or at the time any
other use is established, off-street parking spaces for vehicles shall be provided in accordance with the requirements as provided
in Section 14.407.
(c) Parking spaces within off-street parking areas shall have average dimensions of eight (8) by twenty (20) feet, exclusive of
any area required for access drives or aisles, and shall be of usable shape and location. Each parking space and the maneuvering
area thereto shall be located entirely upon private property. Except for single-family, duplex, and triplex dwellings, there shall be
adequate provision for ingress and egress to all parking spaces, without backing into public right-of-way. Entrances to and exits
from parking areas to a street shall be appropriate to the individual circumstance.
(d) For any new use, building, or structure, where required off-street parking cannot be provided adjacent thereto, such parking
may then be provided on other property within the allowable distance from the building site. Where individual land parcels are
not large enough to permit on-site parking, the owners of various parcels may undertake the joint development of the required
parking spaces upon a nearby tract. Proof shall be provided to the zoning administrator that such parking arrangements are
provisions of any applicable deeds or leasing agreements.
(e) The number of off-street parking spaces required shall be appropriate to the use of the property and shall be determined as
provided in Section 14.407 and from the applicable portions of this section. If for any reason the number of off-street parking
spaces is not readily determinable, the requirement shall be determined by the commission.
(f) All off-street parking areas, including commercial parking lots, automobile, farm equipment, mobile home, and other openair
sales lots shall meet the following requirements:
(1) All off-street parking in districts zoned other than residential shall be separated from the street right-of-way by
barrier curbs or by tire stops approved by the city.
(2) Unless otherwise authorized, all driveways and off-street parking areas shall be paved with an all weather
surface, such as portland cement concrete or with asphaltic concrete pavement and concrete curb and gutter.
(3) Parking spaces and driving lanes shall be so arranged and marked to provide for safe and orderly movement and
parking of vehicles.
(4) Design of parking areas shall provide for appropriate disposal of surface water, except for those portions which
may be used as a part of required detention system.
(5) Lighting fixtures used to illuminate or to mark any off-street parking area shall be arranged to shield direct light
from any residence and from street traffic.
(g) Plans for off-street parking areas for more than five (5) vehicles including ingress and egress, shall be reviewed by the
zoning administrator for compliance with this article prior to the issuance of a building permit.
Sec. 14.406 Additional Parking Requirements
(a) Garages shall not be considered off-street parking space within any residential district.
(b) Driveways may be considered off-street parking in all residential districts, except for those development types having more
than four (4) dwelling units per structure.
(c) Off-street parking shall be upon the same tract as the dwelling unit in residential districts.
(d) Off-street parking in residential districts may be upon the same tract as the main structure or upon a parking lot within two
hundred (200) feet of the main structure.
(e) Any dwelling unit housing a home occupation shall provide two (2) additional off-street parking spaces.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 395/414
(f) Any residence used to house non-family residents shall provide one (1) additional off-street parking space per residence
room.
(g) All off-street parking within all other districts shall meet the requirements of the applicable positions of this section and
Section 14.407. Off-street parking areas need not be on the same lot as the principal structure or use, but must be within three
hundred (300) feet of said structure or use.
(h) Any business or industrial building, hospital, institution, or hotel hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered, in
any district, shall provide adequate off-street facilities for loading and unloading of merchandise and goods within or adjacent to
the building, in such a manner as not to obstruct freedom of traffic movement of the public streets, alleys, or sidewalks.
Sec. 14.407 Specific Parking Requirements for All Districts
(a) The following table set forth the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required (excluding garages) for each zoning
district:
Development Type Off-Street Parking Spaces Per Dwelling
(Minimum Excluding Garage)
A-O (Agricultural Open) Two, plus one for each additional bedroom
over three per dwelling unit.
R-1 (Residential 1 District) Two, plus one for each additional bedroom
over three per dwelling unit.
R-2 (Residential 2 District) Two, plus one for each additional bedroom
over three per dwelling unit.
M-H (Mobile Home) N/A
C-1 (Light Commercial District) One per shift person and per each 300
square feet of floor area.
C-2 (Heavy Commercial District) On-Street except any structure over three
stories shall be same as C-1 District.
H-D (Historical District) N/A
M-1 (Industrial District) One per shift person and per each 500
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 396/414
square feet of floor area.
(b) Off-street parking for more than five (5) vehicles, including ingress and egress, shall be approved by the zoning
administrator prior to issuance of a building permit.
Sec. 14.408 Performance Standards; Commercial and Industrial Districts
(a) Flammable, Toxic, and Hazardous Materials.
(1) The storage, manufacture, utilization, or dispensing of substances which may constitute or may cause danger to
public health, safety, or welfare shall be conducted only within the limits and conditions specified in the latest addition
of both the Standard Fire Prevention Code and the National Fire Code.
(2) The emission of toxic or explosive vapors, dusts, or aerosols into the atmosphere shall not exceed, at the facility
property line, more than fifty (50) percent of the limit of such as is given in “Threshold Limit Values” as adopted at the
most recent meeting of the American Conference of Industrial Hygienists.
(3) No form of flammable, toxic, or other hazardous material shall be released into or upon any utility line, pit,
dump, open ground, stream, or drainage way.
(4) The container size, location, design, and construction of any storage tank, building, or facility for any
flammable, toxic, or other hazardous material shall be approved by the fire marshal and the building official as a part
of the building permit application and shall be based upon the requirements of the Standard Fire Prevention Code, the
National Fire Code, and the Southern Standard Building Code.
(b) Pollution.
(1) No operation or activity shall discharge or cause to be released into public waters any liquid or solid waste
unless in conformance with the latest provisions of the (TNRCC) Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission,
the Texas Department of Health, and/or the Texas Railroad Commission.
(2) No operation or activity shall discharge or cause to be released into the atmosphere any smoke or particulate
matter which exceeds the limits permitted by the latest requirements of the (TNRCC) Texas Natural Resource
Conservation Commission.
ARTICLE 14.500 NONCONFORMING USES AND SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
Sec. 14.501 Nonconforming Structures and Uses
(a) In those areas annexed in which nonconforming uses exist at the time of annexation, such uses may be continued, subject to
the provisions of this section.
(b) Any building, structure, or use which is listed as a specific use within the district for which it is zoned shall be considered to
be a nonconforming building, structure, or use until a specific use permit has been granted.
Sec. 14.502 Modification or Alteration
(a) Nonconforming structures within a district shall not be modified or altered except to bring the structure into compliance
with the rules of the district within which it is situated, unless required by law, or to provide for continued safe use of the
structure.
(b) Strengthening or repairing of a nonconforming structure to permit its continued use, or if required, to correct any portion
thereof that has been deemed unsafe by the building official, shall not be considered modification or alteration. All further use of
a structure for any nonconforming use shall cease if the total cost of repairs, modifications, and alteration made to a structure
would exceed sixty (60) percent of its assessed value for tax purposes.
(c) Any nonconforming structure shall not be repaired, restored, or reconstructed for use as before if it is destroyed or damaged
above its foundation to such an extent that the cost to restore the structure to its existing condition prior to the damage exceeds
sixty (60) percent of its assessed value for tax purposes. If the structure may be repaired, restored, or reconstructed at a cost of
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 397/414
less than sixty (60) percent of its assessed value, it may then be repaired, restored, or reconstructed and used as before. Such
repair, restoration, or reconstruction must be completed within twelve (12) months of the damaging event. The structure may not
thereafter be used for some other nonconforming use.
Sec. 14.503 Cessation of Nonconforming Use
When nonconforming buildings, structures, or areas have ceased to be used for any nonconforming use for more than six (6) full
calendar months, with the exception of mobile homes, whether with intent to abandon such use or not, nonconforming use shall
not thereafter be made of such structures, buildings, or areas. Such time limit with respect to mobile homes shall be thirty (30)
days after removal or cessation of occupancy by utility disconnection of the existing mobile home thereon.
Sec. 14.504 Annexed Area; Nonconforming Construction
When an area is annexed and a nonconforming structure or building is in the process of construction (the foundation forms being
in place), or in the process of alteration or repair (materials having been delivered) the construction, alteration, or repair may be
continued upon issuance of a building permit. Such construction, alteration, or repair shall be completed within twelve (12)
months of annexation.
Sec. 14.505 Special Exceptions; Scope
(a) A special exception is permission given in special cases for an applicant to use their property in a manner contrary to the
provisions of this article, provided that such use shall serve the general welfare and preserve the community interest.
(b) Special exceptions shall not be granted if such exception:
(1) Is contrary to the public interest.
(2) Will adversely affect public health and safety.
(3) Will substantially or permanently injure the appropriate use of adjacent conforming property in the same district.
(4) Will alter the essential character of the zoning district within which the property is located.
(c) Special exceptions may be granted only in the following instances:
(1) To permit the temporary enlargement of a nonconforming use, but only when the enlargement will not prolong
the life of the nonconforming use. A specific time limit for return to original nonconformity may be required.
(2) To grant temporary specific use permits for a period of not more than one-year periods for any use of land and/or
structure.
(3) To permit the use of a tract or tracts in any dwelling district adjacent to any other district, even if separated
therefrom by an alley or a street, for the parking of passenger vehicles under such safeguards and conditions of the
more restricted property, provided that no other use is made of such tract or tracts.
(4) To permit such modifications of yard, lot area, or lot width requirements as may be necessary to secure
appropriate improvements upon a tract of land where such tract was separately owned on the effective date of October
26, 1999, and is not adjoining another tract of the same ownership, and where the tract is of such size, shape, or area
that it cannot be improved without such modification.
(5) To preclude an essentially inadvertent taking of property when the circumstances are such that they have not
been caused by any action on the part of the property owner.
(d) Procedures. All procedures for requesting a special exception shall follow exactly the procedures provided in Sections
14.901 and 14.902 for variances and shall be acted upon by the board.
ARTICLE 14.600 BUILDING PERMITS
Sec. 14.601 Application
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 398/414
(a) An application for a building permit shall be obtained from the staff.
(b) The application for a building permit shall contain the following minimum information:
(1) Name, mailing address, and contact telephone number of the applicant and of the property owner, if not the
same.
(2) Street address and legal description of the property for which the permit is to be obtained. The legal description,
with the recorded data, shall be determined from a copy of a deed presented by the applicant if there is any question on
the part of the city as to the legal description or ownership.
(3) Zoning district of the property for which the permit is to be obtained.
(4) Statement of the type and scope of work to be done.
(5) The application shall be accompanied by maps and plans as specified in Section 14.1002. Such maps and plans
shall become a part of the application.
(6) The applicant shall attest to the accuracy of all information given on or accompanying the application.
(7) There shall be a separate application for each building or structure to be constructed, erected, installed, or
altered, except for accessory buildings and appurtenances which may be included in the permit for the major structure
when construction is concurrent.
Sec. 14.602 Processing
(a) The application and accompanying information shall be presented in three (3) complete copies to the appropriate clerk
during normal business hours. The clerk shall note on all copies of the application, one of which is to be returned to the applicant,
the date on which the completed application is received.
(b) Within five (5) full business days of the date the application is received, the request shall be reviewed by the building
official and a building permit issued, or the application denied. If the application is not acted upon by the building official within
five (5) full business days, the applicant shall be considered as approved on the sixth (6th) full business day after submission. The
action of denial of a request for modification shall stay the requirement for approval within five (5) full days.
(1) If the application is in full compliance with this article and all provisions of the building codes, the applicant
shall be notified in writing or by telephone that the building permit(s) will be issued.
(2) If modification of the application and/or accompanying information is required to bring the request into full
compliance, as above, the application shall be denied, and the applicant notified in writing or by telephone. The
applicant shall be given a list of all corrections required to bring the request into full compliance.
(3) The applicant may modify the request to provide full compliance or may appeal to the board in writing that the
denial is contested, specifying reasons therefor, and requesting relief.
(c) If completion of some other zoning action is required to effect the issuance of a building permit, such action must be
completed prior to the application for a building permit.
(d) If the request is approved or upon receipt by the building official of a written order for issuance by the board, and upon
payment of the required fee, the building permit(s) shall be issued.
Sec. 14.603 Duration
A building permit is valid for six (6) full months. If work described or permitted by any building permit has not begun within six
(6) full months from the date of issue thereof, such permit shall be automatically revoked, and no work shall begin until a new
building permit has been issued.
Sec. 14.604 Renewal
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 399/414
A building permit may be renewed for two (2) additional full six-month periods upon verbal request, presentation of the original
dated approved application, and payment of the appropriate fee. Any construction not completed within eighteen (18) full months
of the issue date of the original building permit shall require issuance of a new building permit.
Sec. 14.605 Revocation; Stop-Work Orders
(a) A building permit may be revoked and/or a stop-work order issued by the building official at any time prior to the
completion of the building or structure for which the same was issued, when it shall appear that there is departure from the plans,
specifications, or conditions as required under terms of the permit, that the same was procured by false representation, was issued
in error, or that any of the provisions of the building codes or of the zoning regulations are being violated.
(b) The building official shall issue a stop order upon the failure, refusal, or neglect of any owner, their agent, contractor, or
duly authorized representative to secure such permit and pay the prescribed fee as herein provided.
(c) Any revocation or order to stop may be served upon the owner, their agent or contractor, or upon any person employed upon
the building or structure for which the permit was or should have been issued. Thereafter no construction shall proceed until the
revoked building permit is reinstated or until a building permit has been issued.
Sec. 14.606 Display of Permits
Building permits shall be displayed such that they are protected from weather and vandalism and will be visible when facing the
structure from the street and until such time as the final inspection and approval of the improvements has been accomplished by
the building official.
(Ordinance 99-9 adopted 10/26/99)
Sec. 14.607 Fees
All fees for building permits shall be set by the city council from time to time and maintained on file in the office of the city
secretary. (Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 14.700 SPECIFIC USE PERMITS
Sec. 14.701 When Required
To utilize a tract for those purposes which are permitted as specific uses within each zoning district, a specific use permit is
required from the board of adjustment.
Sec. 14.702 Application
(a) The application for a specific use permit must be made by the title holder or their attorney-in-fact.
(b) An application for a specific use permit shall be obtained from the city, and shall contain the following minimum
information:
(1) Name, mailing address, and contact telephone number of the applicant.
(2) Street address and legal description of the property for which the permit is to be obtained. The legal description,
with recorded data, shall be determined from a copy of a deed presented by the applicant if there is any question on the
part of the city as to the legal description or ownership.
(3) Zoning district of the property for which the permit is to be obtained.
(4) Statement of the use which will be made of the property and of proposed modification to the property or
structures located thereon.
(5) The application shall be accompanied by maps and plans as specified in this article. Such maps and plans shall
become a part of the application.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 400/414
(6) The applicant shall attest to the accuracy of all information given on or accompanying the application.
(Ordinance 99-9 adopted 10/26/99)
Sec. 14.703 Processing; Fee
(a) The application, accompanying information, and a filing fee ($300.00) shall be submitted after consultation with the zoning
administrator. (Ordinance 2017-21 adopted 11/14/17)
(b) The zoning administrator shall review the application for completeness and for compliance with this article. Should
additional information or modification to the application be necessary to provide compliance, the zoning administrator shall assist
the applicant to make such changes.
(c) Should the application be in obvious violation of this article or should the applicant refuse to make necessary modifications
to bring the application into compliance, the zoning administrator shall deny such application and provide the applicant with a
written statement as to the reason or reasons for such denial. Upon such denial, the applicant may appeal to the board in writing
that the denial of the application for processing is contested, specifying reasons therefor, and requesting relief.
(d) Upon completion of review of the application and finding the application to be correct, or upon receipt of a written order
from the board setting aside such denial by the zoning administrator, the following actions shall be initiated:
(1) The building official shall prepare a list, using the current tax appraisal map and the current city tax roll, of all
owners of any portion of a tract that is within two hundred (200) feet of any portion of the property for which the
permit is requested.
(2) The zoning administrator shall determine the date of the next meeting of the board, not less than three (3) full
weeks and not more than seven (7) full weeks from the date of the application, place such request on the agenda of the
board, and schedule a public hearing thereon.
(3) The city secretary shall send a letter to each of the property owners, as above and including the applicant, stating
the purpose of the permit, street address of the property for which a permit is requested, date, time, and place of the
public meeting before the board, and that comments about the request must be made in writing or verbally before the
board. The notification letters deposited at the post office as ordinary mail not less than two (2) weeks prior to the
meeting of the board shall constitute constructive notice.
(4) The agenda of the board of adjustment shall be posted in a public location at city hall in accordance with the
Texas Open Meetings Act.
(e) The city staff shall prepare a statement for presentation at the public meeting before the board of adjustment. The statement
shall contain as a minimum:
(1) Any pertinent information bearing on the application that may not be evident from the application.
(2) Impact of approval of the request upon utility service, streets and parking, and upon the local area.
(3) Any recommendations for modifications or any stipulations should the request be approved.
Sec. 14.704 Board of Adjustment Action*
(a) The board of adjustment shall hold a public meeting pertaining to the application and shall receive comments both in
writing or verbally.
(b) The board of adjustment shall consider the recommendations of the staff.
(c) The board of adjustment shall determine such modifications or stipulations which shall apply to the request if approved.
(d) The board of adjustment shall by vote approve, approve with modification and/or stipulation, or deny the application.
(e) Should the application be denied or should the applicant object to any modification or stipulation applying to the
application, the application and the record of the board of adjustment meeting and decision shall be presented to the council for
further consideration.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 401/414
(f) Should any property owner as provided in Section 14.703(d)(1)object to approval of the request or of any modification or
stipulation applied by the commission, such objection and an appeal to the council shall be made verbally or in writing prior to
conclusion of such agenda item.
(g) Any appeal to the council shall be taken before the council at a public meeting as an agenda item at the next regular council
meeting. No mailing or newspaper notice of this appeal shall be necessary. After such hearing the council shall uphold, modify, or
deny the actions of the commission.
(h) Should the applicant or any property owner as provided in Section 14.703(d)(1) still be aggrieved, they may make written
appeal to the board, specifying the reasons for such appeal, and requesting relief.
(Ordinance 99-9 adopted 10/26/99)
(i) Review criteria for the keeping of livestock. The following shall be used as a guideline by the board when reviewing a
request for a specific use permit to keep livestock. These criteria should be used on a case by case basis to review each
application. These are general guidelines and individual cases may call for greater dimensions.
(1) Horses.
(A) Each animal shall have access to a covered, shelter area. The shelter area will be a minimum of fifteen feet
by fifteen feet (15' x 15') for each animal and shall be constructed in a sturdy, workman-like manner. A minimum
of one wall will be attached to the shelter to provide a windbreak for the animal. The adequacy of the shelter will
be at the discretion of the city manager or his designee;
(B) Contiguous, and in addition to the (15' x 15') shelter, each animal will have access to a thirty feet by thirty
feet (30' x 30') exercise area. This area must be free of any items or materials that may pose a hazard to the
animal;
(C) Horses are allowed to be tethered outside the exercise area no more than eight (8) hours per day. A tether
is considered to be a lead-rope made of chain, ten feet (10') in length attached to a halter. The lead-rope shall be
attached to a sturdy material rope or chain with a length of twenty feet (20');
(D) Each animal shall have access to a sufficient supply of fresh, clean water while in the exercise area, the
shelter area, or tethered;
(E) The breeding of horses is strictly forbidden inside the city limits;
(F) All animals that are to be kept via a specific use permit will have all required vaccinations prior to being
allowed inside the city limits;
(G) All animals that are to be kept via a specific use permit will have all required “Coggins” papers prior to
being allowed inside the city limits;
(H) The board will consider the proximity of proposed horse facilities to on-site and neighboring residential
structures;
(I) All approved applicants will be issued a specific use permit placard which must be displayed at the location
specified in the application;
(J) The applicant will provide specific information about each animal to be located on the property on a form
developed by the city manager;
(K) Failure to adhere to the plan submitted by the applicant and conditions applied by the board will result in
the nonissuance of the permit;
(L) Failure to adhere to the plans submitted by the applicant and the conditions applied by the board after the
permit is issued will result in the immediate revocation of the permit;
(M) The board shall not issue a specific use permit to an applicant that has been convicted of any type of
animal abuse law;
(N) The board shall not issue a permit to any person convicted of a crime which involved the use of a horse;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 402/414
(O) Any person convicted of a crime where a horse was used in its commission will forfeit any permit issued
for the keeping of horses inside the city limits;
(P) After receiving authorization for a specific use permit from the board, and adherence to the plan, each
applicant will receive a permanent placard displaying the “specific use permit” label, the specific use permit
number. The placard will be permanently attached to a structure on the property. The placard will be furnished by
the city;
(Q) A specific use permit issued under this paragraph is site specific and nontransferable in any manner;
(R) Specific use permit applications that list the gender of any horse as a stallion will be charged an additional
two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each such animal;
(S) Facility review. The city manager (or his/her designee) will be responsible for monitoring compliance with
the permit and its conditions. General conditions include the following:
(i) All areas will be kept in a clean and healthy state with no unreasonable amounts of manure.
(ii) Stallions may only be tethered in the presence of the owner or his agent.
(iii) General abuse or neglect of any animal is reason for immediate revocation of the permit.
(T) Applicant will provide proof of ownership of the property proposed for use or documentation from the
property owner authorizing applicant to use the property for the keeping of livestock.
(2) Goats. Specific use permit applications for the keeping of goats will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis.
(Ordinance 2010-04, sec. B, adopted 7/6/10)
ARTICLE 14.800 ZONING CHANGES
Sec. 14.801 Initiation of Rezoning Action
(a) Action required to rezone one or more tracts of land from one or more zoning districts to another zoning district or districts
may be initiated by any landowner or group of landowners, by the commission, or by the council.
(b) Any individual landowner seeking to change the zoning of a tract to another zoning district shall make application with the
zoning administrator as provided in Section 14.802.
(c) Any group of landowners seeking to have all tracts rezoned to the same zoning district shall select an agent to act in their
behalf and petition the commission in writing for such rezoning. Upon receipt of such request, the commission shall proceed as if
the action were initiated by the commission.
(d) Any group of landowners seeking to change the zoning of tracts or portions of tracts into various zoning districts must
apply for such rezoning as individuals.
(e) The commission may initiate a change in zoning by making a request to the council. Upon receipt of the request, the council
may proceed as if the application were initiated by the council.
(f) The council may initiate a change in zoning. The council shall provide the zoning administrator with sufficient instructions
to initiate the application including accurate determination of the tract, tracts, or area for which rezoning is desired, along with the
appropriate zoning district or districts requested.
Sec. 14.802 Application
(a) The application for a rezoning request must be made by the title holder, their attorney-in-fact, an agent as in Section
14.801(c), or the council.
(b) An application for a rezoning request shall be obtained from the staff, and shall contain the following minimum
information:
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 403/414
(1) Name, mailing address, and contact telephone number of the property owner(s), their attorney-in-fact, or an
agent as in Section 14.801(c).
(2) Legal description and street or mailing address, if any, of the property for which the rezoning is requested. A
copy of the deed to the property, with recording data, and a copy of any power-of-attorney must be included as a part
of the application.
(3) The application shall be accompanied by maps and plans as specified in Section 14.1004.
(4) Current zoning district or districts.
(5) Requested zoning district or districts. Such district or the limits of various districts requested shall be shown on
the accompanying maps and plans.
(6) The applicant shall attest to the accuracy of all information given on or accompanying the application.
Sec. 14.803 Processing
(a) Upon application by landowner:
(1) After consultation with the zoning administrator, the application, accompanying information, and the
nonrefundable filing fee shall be submitted by the applicant.
(2) The zoning administrator shall review the application for completeness with this article. Should additional
information or modification to the application be necessary, the zoning administrator shall assist the applicant to make
such changes.
(b) Upon application by commission:
(1) The zoning administrator shall have a map prepared to an appropriate scale which shall show the owner of each
tract within the area to be rezoned as well as the current and the proposed zoning district or districts of each tract.
(2) The zoning administrator shall verify with the agent of the several owners that the map is correct with respect to
ownership and zoning district requested or with the mayor and/or commission chairman, as appropriate, as to
delineation of the zoning districts shown thereon.
(c) The zoning administrator shall then initiate the following actions:
(1) Preparation of a list, using a current tax appraisal map and the current city tax roll, of all owners of any property
within the area to be considered for rezoning and within two hundred (200) feet of such area.
(2) Determination of the date of the next meeting of the commission, not less than three (3) full weeks and not more
than seven (7) full weeks from the date of the application, place such request on the agenda of the commission, and
schedule a public hearing thereon.
(3) Mailing a letter to each of the property owners as above and including the applicant, stating the purpose of the
request, street address of the property for which rezoning is requested, date, time and place of the public hearing
before the commission, and that comments about the request must be made in writing or verbally before the
commission. The notification letters deposited at the post office as ordinary mail not less than two (2) weeks prior to
the meeting of the commission shall constitute constructive notice.
(4) Posting of the commission agenda in a public location at city hall in accordance with the Texas Open Meeting
Act.
(d) The city staff shall prepare a statement for presentation at the public hearing before the commission. The statement shall
contain at a minimum:
(1) Any information bearing upon the request that may not be evident from the application.
(2) Impact of approval of the zoning change upon utility service, drainage, streets, parking, police protection, and
fire protection in the local area.
(e) Commission Action.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 404/414
(1) The commission shall hold a public hearing pertaining to the rezoning request and shall receive comment in
writing or verbally.
(2) The commission shall consider the staff statement.
(3) The commission shall recommend in writing to the council that the rezoning request should be approved,
approved with modification, or denied.
(f) Council Action.
(1) The city secretary shall include in the notification letters and newspaper announcement concerning the public
hearing before the commission, that a public hearing will also be held before the council. The date, time, and place of
such hearing before the council will be given. The zoning administrator shall schedule such hearing to be an agenda
item at the next regular council meeting following action by the commission.
(2) The council shall hold a public hearing to receive comments in writing or verbally, shall consider the staff
statement, shall review the minutes of the commission meeting concerning such request, and shall consider the
recommendation of the commission.
(3) The council shall approve, approve with modification, or deny the request.
(4) If the request is uncontested, a majority vote of all council members shall enact the council decision. If a written
protest against the proposed zoning change is presented to the city secretary on or before seven (7) days prior to the
public hearing by the council, the change must be approved by a favorable vote of at least three-fourths of all council
members. The written protest shall be duly signed and acknowledged by at least twenty (20) percent of the owners of
the land area included in the proposed change or by at least twenty (20) percent of the owners of the land area with a
two hundred foot radius of the boundary of the proposed change.
(g) Subsequent Actions.
(1) Should there be any objection to the council action, the objecting party(ies) must apply within ten (10) days to a
court of competent jurisdiction for relief and shall so notify the zoning administrator that such action is being taken.
(2) If notice has not been received of such an appeal within ten (10) full days of the council action, the zoning
administrator shall have published in the public notice section of a local paper the action of the council and the areas
and zoning district provided for the area, unless the provisions for areas and zoning districts are the same as appeared
in the announcement of the public hearings, in which case only the action and ordinance number are required.
(3) The zoning administrator shall have the official zoning map amended as provided in Section 14.204.
(Ordinance 99-9 adopted 10/26/99)
Sec. 14.804 Planned Development (PD) District Procedures
(a) Development Standards.
(1) Steps for Approval: The review process for a PD district application may include the following steps:
(A) Pre-application conference;
(B) Concept plan;
(C) Site development plan;
(D) Construction of project.
(2) Completeness of application and official filing date.
(b) Application Requirements.
(1) Specific Items Required. No application for a PD shall be accepted by the city until the following items have
been submitted to the city by the applicant.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 405/414
(A) A completed city application form, including all requirements as stated on the application form.
(B) If the applicant is not the owner of record (by the appraisal district), a statement from the property owner
giving authorization to the applicant to file the request for rezoning shall be required as part of the rezoning
application.
(C) A legal description of the property under consideration, which also shows that such property includes the
minimum acreage required for a PD.
(D) A concept plan.
(E) A description of any development standards or requirements that are different from those in the base
zoning district.
(F) A description of how the proposed planned development fulfills the ideals, goals, objectives, and/or
concepts of the city's adopted comprehensive plan or any other formally adopted city planning document.
(G) A description that lists and fully explains the specific modifications of the provisions of the base zoning
district which are desired, as well as the purposes of the modifications (i.e., why they are necessary).
(H) A development schedule outlining a timetable for completion of the entire project.
(I) A copy of all agreements, provisions, or covenants which govern the use, maintenance, and continued
protection of the PD and any of its common areas, if applicable.
(J) The required application fee.
(c) Concept Plan.
(1) Requirement for Concept Plan. No PD district may be established without approval of a concept plan. The
concept plan shall be a fully dimensioned map(s) of the land within the proposed PD, and shall be incorporated as a
component part of the PD district regulations, and shall be construed in conjunction with the authorized uses and
development standards set forth in such regulations.
(2) Consistency Required. All development applications within the PD district shall be consistent with the
incorporated concept plan. Failure of a subsequent development application to conform to the approved concept plan
for the PD district shall result in denial of the application, unless the PD district regulations are first amended through
incorporation of a concept plan with which the development application is consistent. The degree of conformity
required between the concept plan and subsequent development applications shall be set forth in the adopting
ordinance.
(3) A site plan, prepared in accordance with this code may be submitted in lieu of a concept plan and shall qualify as
a concept plan.
(4) The planning administrator may waive concept plan requirements in cases where the nature of the PD is such
that a concept plan is not appropriate.
(d) Subsequent Development Applications.
(1) Development Applications Authorized. The development standards for a PD district shall be applied to the
authorized uses through a plat, site development plan, general site plan, or other development applications as set forth
in the adopting ordinance.
(2) Minor Deviations from Approved Concept Plan. In determining whether development applications are
consistent with the concept plan, minor deviations from the concept plan may be approved by the planning
administrator. Unless otherwise specified in the adopting ordinance, minor deviations are limited to the following:
(A) Corrections in spelling, distances, and other labeling that does not affect the overall development concept.
(B) Change in building layout, when shown, that is less than a ten percent (10%) increase in size.
(C) Changes in the proposed property lines internal to the PD as long as the originally approved district
boundaries are not altered.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 406/414
(D) Changes in parking layouts as long as the number of required spaces and general original design is
maintained.
(3) Major Deviations from Approved Concept Plan. All major deviations from the concept plan shall he submitted
to the planning and zoning commission and city council for approval as an amendment to the PD district.
(e) Approval Criteria for a Planned Development District.
(1) Factors. The following criteria will be used by the city in deciding whether to approve, approve with
modifications, or deny a petition for a PD district:
(A) The extent to which the land covered by the proposed PD district fits one or more of the special
circumstances warranting a PD district classification.
(B) The extent to which the proposed PD district furthers the policies of the city's adopted comprehensive plan
(as amended) and other formally adopted city planning documents.
(C) The extent to which the proposed PD district will result in a superior development than could be achieved
through conventional zoning classifications.
(D) The extent to which the proposed PD district will resolve or mitigate any compatibility issues with
surrounding development.
(E) The extent to which proposed uses and the configuration of uses depicted in the concept plan are
compatible with existing and planned adjoining uses;
(F) The extent to which the proposed development is consistent with adopted public facilities plans, including
those related to water, wastewater, transportation, drainage and other public facilities; and
(G) The extent to which the proposed open space and recreational amenities within the development provide a
superior living environment and enhanced recreational opportunities for residents of the district and for the
public generally.
(2) Conditions. The city council may impose such conditions to the PD district regulations and concept plan as are
necessary to assure that the purpose of the PD district is implemented.
(f) Adopting Ordinance.
(1) Items Specific to the Ordinance. The ordinance establishing a PD district shall incorporate the approved concept
plan as part of the district regulations and shall set forth the following:
(A) The base zoning district(s) to be overlaid, together with the boundaries of the district(s);
(B) A statement as to the purpose and intent of the PD district established therein;
(C) The permitted, conditional and accessory uses authorized in the district, the location of such uses, the
residential densities or other measurements of development intensity associated with base districts or phases of
the development in conformance with the approved concept plan;
(D) The general standards applicable to development within the district, with or without reference to the base
district, including:
(i) Density;
(ii) Lot area;
(iii) Lot width;
(iv) Lot depth;
(v) Yard depths and widths;
(vi) Building height;
(vii) Building elevations;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 407/414
(viii) Coverage;
(ix) Floor area ratio;
(x) Parking;
(xi) Access;
(xii) Accessory buildings;
(xiii) Signs;
(xiv) Lighting;
(xv) Usable open space;
(xvi) Adjacency;
(xvii) Hours of operation;
(xviii) Project phasing or scheduling;
(xix) Management associations;
(xx) Such other requirements as the city council may deem necessary in order to implement the
comprehensive plan, and the purposes of the PD district; and
(xxi) Sidewalks and bicycle facilities;
(E) Provisions stating that all zoning standards not expressly set forth for the district in the adopting ordinance
shall be as provided in the base zoning district(s), and that any standard in this LDC that has not been expressly
varied in the adopting ordinance shall be applicable to subsequent development permits for land within the PD
district;
(F) Design standards applicable to the development;
(G) A specific list of deviations from standards in the base zoning district(s), together with any standards in
the ordinance which are to be varied for development within the PD district;
(H) Required dedications of land or public improvements;
(I) A phasing schedule for the project, where applicable, setting forth the dates for submittal of site
development plans and the timing of performance by the developer for dedications of land or public
improvements and satisfaction of any conditions in relation to the phasing of development, where applicable;
and
(J) Identification of the levels of the deviation allowed between the concept plan and subsequent development
applications that may be approved by the planning director;
(K) Specification of whether a site development plan(s) is required to implement the district regulations;
(L) Such additional conditions as are established by the council to assure that the PD district and concept plan
are consistent with the stated purposes of the district.
(g) Documentation of PD Districts.
(1) Planned Development Ordinances Approved After Adoption. All planned development zoning districts
approved after adoption of this code section, as may be amended, shall be prefixed by a “PD” designation and
assigned a unique identification number (e.g., PD-1, PD-2, PD-3, and so on), and shall also be shown on the zoning
map[.]
(h) Reapplication Following Denial.
(1) Reapplication Time Period. Following denial of a zoning change request, another zoning change request for a
planned development district may not be resubmitted within six (6) months of the date upon which the previous
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 408/414
application was denied.
(Ordinance 2018-25 adopted 8/15/18)
ARTICLE 14.900 VARIANCES
Sec. 14.901 Defined; Scope
(a) A variance is an appeal by the applicant that a grant of relief be made from a specific requirement of the zoning regulations
or from the building codes because of a peculiar condition existing within or adjacent to a specific tract or structure located
thereon. Such variances are permitted where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provision of the zoning
regulations or of the building codes would result in exceptional difficulties or hardships upon the owner of the property.
(b) Variances shall not be granted if such variance:
(1) Is contrary to the public interest.
(2) Will adversely affect public health or safety.
(3) Will substantially or permanently injure the appropriate use of adjacent conforming property in the same district.
(4) Will alter the essential character of the zoning district within which the property is located.
(5) Will permit use for other than uses specifically authorized for the district within which the property is located.
(6) Will not be in harmony with the intent and purposes of the zoning regulations or will weaken the restrictions
herein established for the specific zoning district.
(c) Variances may be granted only in the following instances:
(1) To vary the applicable lot area, lot width or frontage, and lot depth requirements, provided that such reduction
shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the standard minimum for zoning district within which the tract is located.
(2) To vary the minimum building setback requirements, lot coverage, or maximum permitted building height.
(3) To vary the regulations pertaining to required off-street parking or loading.
(4) To vary the requirements pertaining to the restoration of damaged or destroyed nonconforming structures.
(5) To vary requirements of the building codes when such variance will not cause a hazard to the public health and
safety and such variance will not decrease the strength or expected life span of the structure.
Sec. 14.902 Application
(a) The application for a variance must be made by the property owner or their authorized agent.
(b) The application will contain the same minimum information as provided in Section 14.601 for a building permit
application.
(c) The application will include the specific variance requested and the reason as to why adhering to the zoning regulations
and/or building codes will constitute an exceptional difficulty or hardship upon the owner of the property.
(Ordinance 99-9 adopted 10/26/99)
Sec. 14.903 Processing; Fee
(a) After consultation with city staff, the application, accompanying information, and the ($300.00) filing fee shall be
submitted.
(b) Reserved.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 409/414
(Ordinance 2017-21 adopted 11/14/17)
(c) The zoning administrator shall review the application for completeness and for compliance with this article. Should
additional information or modification to the application be necessary to provide compliance, the zoning administrator shall assist
the applicant to make changes.
(d) Upon completion of review of the application and finding the application to be correct, the following actions shall be
initiated:
(1) The building official shall prepare a list, using the current tax appraisal map and the current city tax roll, of all
owners of any portion of a tract that is within two hundred (200) feet of any portion of the property for which the
variance is requested.
(2) The zoning administrator shall determine the date of the next meeting of the board, not less than three (3) full
weeks and not more than seven (7) full weeks from the date of the application, place such request on the agenda of the
board, and schedule a public meeting.
(3) The city secretary shall send a letter to each of the property owners as above and including the applicant, stating
the purpose of the request, street address of the property for which a variance is requested, date, time, and place of the
public meeting before the board, and that comment above the request must be made in writing or verbally before the
board. The notification letters, deposited at the post office as ordinary mail, not less than two (2) weeks prior to the
meeting of the board, shall constitute constructive notice.
(4) The agenda of the board which includes such public hearings shall be posted in a public location at city hall in
accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act.
(e) The city staff shall prepare a statement for presentation at the public meeting before the board. The statement shall contain
as a minimum:
(1) Any pertinent information bearing upon the application that may not be evident from the application.
(2) Compliance of the request with subsections (b) and (c) above, and impact of approval of the request upon utility
services, streets and parking in the local area.
(3) Any recommendations for modifications or any stipulations should the request be approved.
(f) The board, upon completion of the public meeting and after deliberation, shall make a determination for approval, approval
with modification, any stipulations upon approval, or for denial.
(g) Any person aggrieved by the action of the board may appeal such action as provided by Section 14.1105(e).
(h) Should such request be denied or should the applicant reject any modifications or stipulations attached to the approval of
the request, another request for the same or a similar variance for the same property or a portion of the same property shall not be
submitted for a full six (6) months. Further, if the permitted variance is not accepted and used within twelve (12) full months of
approval, such variance becomes automatically void.
(i) No application for a variance may be submitted when some other zoning action concerning the subject tract is pending.
However, a request for a zoning variance may be submitted concurrently with a subdivision plat.
ARTICLE 14.1000 PLANS AND MAPS
Sec. 14.1001 General Requirements
The information required on site plans, construction plans, and maps which accompany the various applications, is related to the
type and extent of changes that may occur as a result of approval of the application. The requirements stipulated below are the
minimum requirements, and additional information may be required by the building official, zoning administrator, commission,
board, or council to adequately evaluate an application. A request for additional information shall stay with the application until
such time as the applicant provides the requested material.
(Ordinance 99-9 adopted 10/26/99)
Sec. 14.1002 Building Permit
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 410/414
(a) Single-Family and Duplex Residences.
(1) A request to erect, place, or move a structure on (or) to a tract or to add to an existing structure that it will
change the exterior limits of the existing structure, shall require the following information:
(A) Complete set of construction plans for any structure to be erected upon the tract; and
(B) Construction plans for that portion of a structure having its exterior limits altered and including the
adjacent portions of the structure which will remain in place; or
(C) Appropriate foundation and other plans for structures to be placed or moved onto the tract; and
(D) A site plan at a scale sufficient to show all detail thereon and including location of exterior walls of
existing or proposed structures with dimensions and distances to property lines, existing or proposed drives,
walks, patios, porches, etc., property lines, easements, building lines, fences, existing utility lines not within any
easement and any new utility lines to be located upon the tract, except service lines to existing structures upon
that tract which will not be affected by the construction, and the street paving line. A north arrow, bar scale, the
scale in feet per inch, street address, approximate distance to and the name of the nearest intersecting street, and
an attestation by the applicant or agent as to the accuracy of all information shall be included.
(E) Homestead exempt single-family dwellings may increase up to fifteen percent (15%) of total square
footage of the primary structure. A set of construction plans under this subsection does not require a design
professional seal.
(2) A request for interior construction requires only a set of construction plans for that portion of the structure to be
changed and including the adjacent portions of the structure which will remain in place.
(b) All Other.
(1) The requirement of subsection (a) above will apply. In addition, site and/or construction plans must be prepared,
signed, and sealed by the appropriate professional(s) authorized by the state to prepare such site and/or construction
plans.
(2) The requirements of Chapter 3, Article 3.600, Flood Damage Prevention, apply and information required
thereby shall be submitted by the applicant.
(Ordinance 2012-30 adopted 9/4/12)
Sec. 14.1003 Specific Use Permits
(a) When approval of a specific use permit will not require any modification to the tract or structures thereon, no site and/or
construction plans need be submitted.
(b) When such approval will require modification to the tract or structures thereon, the site and/or construction plan
requirements of Section 14.1002(a) or (b) as appropriate, shall be submitted.
Sec. 14.1004 Zoning Change
(a) A vicinity map, at an appropriate scale, showing all properties and use thereof, streets, alleys, affected utilities, all zoning
district classifications, and any other pertinent features within a minimum distance of two hundred (200) feet of the tract shall be
submitted. When needed to show all pertinent data, the area shown on the map shall be extended. The map will include a north
arrow, bar scale, the scale in feet per inch, each street address, appropriate subdivision names, lots, and blocks, and an attest by
the applicant or agent as to the accuracy of all information.
(b) A site plan as provided in Section 14.1002(a) or (b) as appropriate, shall be submitted.
(c) If a structure or structures are to be modified or are to be erected, placed or moved onto a tract, any required construction
plans as provided in Section 14.1002(a)(1)(A) or 14.1002(a)(2) as appropriate, shall be submitted.
Sec. 14.1005 Variances or Special Exceptions
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 411/414
(a) Zoning Variance. A site plan as provided in Section 14.1002 (a) or (b), as appropriate, shall be submitted. The site plan shall
include the same detail for adjacent tracts at that portion of the tract for which the variance is requested. When the requested
variance is for an existing structure or for a structure to be erected, placed, or moved onto the tract, a set of construction plans as
provided in Section 14.1002(A)(1)(a) or 14.1002(a)(2), as appropriate, shall be submitted.
(b) Special Exception. When a request for a special exception will affect only the tract for which the exception is requested, the
site and/or construction plans required in Section 14.1002(a) or (b) as appropriate shall be submitted. When the extent of the
special request is such that adjoining tracts may be affected, the site and/or construction plans required in Section 14.1002, shall
be submitted.
ARTICLE 14.1100 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 14.1101 Building Official
(a) Building Official. The building official is the city staff member who is the chief code enforcement officer for zoning and for
building construction compliance. The building official and his alternate are appointed by the city manager. The building official
shall serve as a staff resource person during those meetings of the commission, the board, or the council when a zoning action is
before the body.
(b) Responsibilities and Duties. The building official shall have the following responsibilities and duties:
(1) Review and participate in staff processing of the following:
(A) Building permits;
(B) Zoning variance requests;
(C) Specific use permits;
(D) Rezoning requests;
(E) Special exceptions.
(2) Code Enforcement:
(A) The building official is responsible for enforcement of the building codes adopted by the council.
(B) As chief code enforcement officer the building official shall issue a stop order or a citation against any
person in violation of this article and shall revoke any permit where it appears that there is a departure from
plans, specifications, or conditions as required under the terms of the permit, where the permit was issued by
mistake, where the permit was procured by false representation, or where any provisions of the zoning
regulations are being violated.
Sec. 14.1102 Zoning Administrator
(a) The city secretary shall be the zoning administrator and shall appoint an alternate.
(b) Authority and Duties. The zoning administrator or alternate shall have the following authority and duties:
(1) Administer and enforce the provisions of this article.
(2) Serve as a nonvoting ex-officio member, serve as secretary, and maintain the offices of record of the commission
and the board.
(3) Review and coordinate staff activities with respect to the following applications:
(A) Zoning variance requests;
(B) Special use permits;
(C) Rezoning requests;
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 412/414
(D) Special exceptions.
(Ordinance 99-9 adopted 10/26/99)
Sec. 14.1103 Planning and Zoning Commission
(a) Composition and Method of Appointment.
(1) The commission shall consist of seven (7) members, each appointed by the council for a two-year term. Such
terms shall expire on the last day of September, however, those members whose terms have expired shall continue to
serve until reappointment or appointment of a successor by the council. Four (4) members shall be appointed within
ninety (90) days of the beginning of each even-numbered calendar year and three (3) members shall be appointed
within ninety (90) days of the beginning of each odd-numbered calendar year. Each member shall reside or own real
property within the city. (Ordinance 2014-24 adopted 9/2/14)
(2) The council may remove any member of the commission who has been absent from three (3) consecutive
regularly scheduled meetings.
(3) Vacancies shall be filled by the council for the unexpired term of any member whose position becomes vacant.
(4) The chairman and vice-chairman of the commission shall be elected by majority vote of the commission
members at the first regularly scheduled meeting of a year. In the absence of the chairman and the vice-chairman at
any meeting, an acting chairman shall be elected by a majority vote of all members present.
(5) The zoning administrator shall be a nonvoting ex officio member of the commission, shall serve as secretary of
the commission, and shall maintain the records of the commission.
(6) A quorum of the commission shall consist of a minimum of four (4) members of the commission and any issue
shall be decided by a majority vote of those members present. The member serving as chairman for the meeting is
entitled to vote but has no veto power.
(b) Meetings.
(1) The commission shall meet upon call of the mayor, city manager, zoning administrator, or chairman when there
is a case to be heard by the commission or when there is such other business to be conducted that is within the
responsibility of the commission.
(2) All meetings of the commission shall be open to the public and minutes shall be kept and maintained as public
records.
(c) Authority. The commission shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) Review application for zoning changes, hear public comments, and make recommendations to the council
regarding such applications.
(2) Review proposed preliminary subdivision plats, engineering plans, requested plat and plan variances, and
proposed restrictive covenants and make recommendations to the council pertaining to each.
(3) Review proposed plats and plans for mobile home parks and for such other developments as may be required by
ordinance and make recommendations to the council pertaining to such.
(4) Recommend to the council amendments, extensions, and additions to the comprehensive master plan of the city,
including the land use plan and the thoroughfare plan.
(5) Recommend to the council changes to the official zoning map of the city.
(6) When appropriate, make a determination of appropriate zoning or use.
(7) Perform such other duties as may be duly delegated to them from time to time by the council.
(d) Appeal. Any person aggrieved by the action of the commission shall bring such grievance to the council at the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the council.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 413/414
State law reference–Authority of municipality to establish planning and zoning commission, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 211.007.
Sec. 14.1104 City Council
(a) The council shall have the following authority under this article:
(1) Appoint members and alternate members when appropriate to both the commission and the board.
(2) Remove from office members of the commission and the board when appropriate.
(3) Adopt or reject, after public meeting, changes to any portion of this article.
(4) Repeal, after public meeting, this article or any portion thereof.
(5) Act upon recommendations of the commission concerning amendments, extensions, and additions to the
comprehensive master plan of the city and to the official zoning map of the city.
(6) Receive applications for zoning changes that have been reviewed by the commission, hear public comments, and
grant, grant with modification, or deny such applications.
(7) Hear appeals from applicants concerning actions by the commission, hear public comments, and grant, grant
with modification, or deny such appeals.
(8) Establish a schedule of fees or charges for any application or action under this article.
(b) To provide for control of development, the council shall review and hear public comment concerning the following
applications that have been reviewed by the commission:
(1) Proposed preliminary subdivision plats, engineering plans, requested plat and plan variances, and proposed
restrictive covenants.
(2) Proposed plats and plans for mobile home parks and such other developments as may be required by ordinance.
(c) Appeal. Any person aggrieved by action of the council may appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction for relief.
(Ordinance 99-9 adopted 10/26/99)
Sec. 14.1105 Board of Adjustment
(a) Composition and Method of Appointment.
(1) The board shall consist of five (5) regular members, each appointed by the council for a two-year term. Such
terms shall expire on the last day of December however, those members whose terms have expired shall continue to
serve until reappointment or appointment of a successor by the council. Each shall reside or own real property within
the city limits.
(2) The council shall appoint two (2) alternant members, each to serve a two-year term, who shall serve in the
absence of one or more of the regular members when requested to do so by the zoning administrator. Such alternate
member shall reside or own real property within the city limits.
(Ordinance 2014-24 adopted 9/2/14)
(3) Prior to the expiration of the term of appointment, any member or alternate member may be removed from
office for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after public hearing.
(4) Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose position becomes vacant.
(5) The chairman and vice-chairman of the board shall be elected from the regular membership by a majority vote
of those members present at the first meeting of a year. In the absence of the chairman and the vice-chairman at any
meeting, an acting chairman shall be elected by a majority vote of all members present.
7/15/2019 https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 414/414
(6) The zoning administrator shall be a nonvoting ex officio member of the board, shall serve as secretary of the
board, and shall maintain the records of the board.
(7) A quorum of the board shall consist of a minimum of three (3) members. Each case before the board must be
heard by at least three (3) members.
(8) The concurring vote of three (3) members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement,
decision, or determination of any administrative official. To decide in favor of an applicant on a matter on which the
board is required to pass under these zoning regulations or to authorize a variation from the terms of these zoning
regulations shall require a majority vote.
(b) City Council as Board. When the city council elects to be the board, the membership of the board shall be determined and
composed of the following manner:
(1) The term of each member of the board shall begin at the time of the council term and shall end at the time of the
council term, resignation, or recall.
(2) The mayor shall serve as chairman of the board and the mayor pro-tem shall serve as the vice-chairman of the
board.
(c) Meetings.
(1) The board shall meet upon call of the chairman or zoning administrator when there is a case to be heard by the
board.
(2) All meetings of the board shall be open to the public.
(3) Minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote,
indicating such fact, shall be kept. Records of its examinations and other official actions shall be maintained in the
office of the board and shall be a public record.
(d) Authority. The board shall have the following powers:
(1) To hear and decide appeals where the applicant alleges that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision,
or determination made by the city staff, the commission, or the city council in the enforcement of the zoning
regulations.
(2) To hear and decide variances and special exceptions as provided in Sections 14.505 and 14.901 through 14.903
to any provision of these zoning regulations.
(e) Appeal. Any person, taxpayer, city staff member, or the commission or city council, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any
decision of the board, may present to a court of competent jurisdiction a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is
illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of the illegality. Such petition shall be presented to the court within ten (10)
days after the filing of the decision. Attestation by the zoning administrator of the minutes of the board meeting in which such
decision was rendered shall constitute such filing.
(Ordinance 99-9 adopted 10/26/99)
State law reference–Establishment and authority of zoning board of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, Sec. 211.008, et. seq.
ARTICLE 14.1200 PENALTY
All violations of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor and violators shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty
provision set forth in Section 1.109 of this code. Each day the violation occurs shall be considered a separate violation.
(Ordinance adopting Code)