CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF GALENA PARK, TEXAS 
____________ 
Published in 2015 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
 
____________ 
Esmeralda Moya 
Mayor 
____________ 
Rodney Chersky 
Oscar Silva, Jr. 
Eric Broussard 
Barry Ponder 
City Council 
____________ 
Mayra Gonzales 
City Secretary 
____________ 
Robert Collins 
City Attorney  
GALENA PARK OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Esmeralda Moya 
Mayor 
____________ 
Danny Simms 
Lois Killough 
Maricela Serna 
Juan Flores 
City Council 
____________ 
Mayra Gonzalez 
City Secretary 
____________ 
Jim L. DeFoyd 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Robert Pruett 
City Administrator  
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Galena Park, Texas. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1996 Code, as updated through September 3, 2013, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2015 Code, as updated, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
RELATED LAWS 	RL:1 
SPECIAL ACTS 	SA:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	RLCT:1 
SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	SACT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Jim Jenkins, Senior Code Attorney, and Andrea Gill, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Mayra Gonzales, City Secretary, and Mr. Jim L. DeFoyd, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Galena Park, Texas. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Galena Park, Texas. 
©  Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Galena Park, Texas. 2015.  
PART I - HOME RULE CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter for the City of Galena Park, Texas, as adopted on May 31, 1946. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines (and punctuation therein) have been made uniform. Capitalization and expression of numbers in text have been made consistent with the scheme of the document. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Adoption, amendment, etc., of Charter by home rule cities, Texas Local Government Code § 9.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - CORPORATE NAME, BOUNDARIES, AND POWERS 
 
Sec. 1. - Incorporation and Corporate Powers. 
The inhabitants of the City of Galena Park, in Harris County, Texas, as the boundaries and limits of the City are now or may hereafter be established shall be a body politic, and corporate by the name of the City of Galena Park and under sued; may acquire property within or without its boundaries for any municipal purpose, that name shall have a perpetual succession; may use a corporate seal; may sue and be in fee simple or lesser interest or estate by purchase, gift, devise, lease or condemnation and may sell, lease, hold, manage and control such property as its interest may require; and, except as prohibited by the Constitution and Laws of the State of Texas or restricted by this Charter, the City shall have and may exercise all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of every nature whatsoever.  
Sec. 2. - Enumerated Powers Not Exclusive. 
The enumeration of particular powers by this Charter shall not be held or deemed to be exclusive, but, in addition to the powers enumerated therein or implied thereby, or appropriate to the exercise of such powers, it is intended that the City of Galena Park shall have, and may exercise, all powers of local self-government, and all powers enumerated in Chapter 13, Title 28, Article 1175 of the Revised Civil Statutes of the State of Texas of 1925 [Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1175], and any amendments thereof, or any other powers which, under the Constitution and Laws of the State of Texas, it would be competent for this Charter specifically to enumerate. All powers of the City, whether expressed or implied, shall be exercised in the manner prescribed therein, then in the manner provided by the General Laws of Texas relating to cities and towns.  
Sec. 3. - Boundaries. 
The boundaries and limits of the City of Galena Park as same are now fixed and established are as follows: 
BEGINNING at a point 25,000 feet north of the thread of the stream of the Houston Ship Channel, the same being 60 feet, more or less, north of the southeast corner, Block 6, Universal City Addition; 
THENCE north 4,920 feet, more or less, to the north side of the abandoned portion of 19th Street; 
THENCE west 2,140 feet, more or less, to the west side of Keene Street, if extended north; 
THENCE 1,500 feet, more or less, in a southwesterly direction to the northeast corner of Lot 505, Woodland Addition, the same being 170 feet, more or less, north of the north side of 18th Street; 
THENCE 11,511.1 feet, more or less, west to the northwest corner of Lot 521, Woodland Addition; 
THENCE 2,560 feet, more or less, south to the point of intersection of the north side of First Street of the Highlands Addition, the same being the street running east and west along the north side of the Highlands Addition, with the west boundary of the Woodland Addition; 
THENCE 1,170 feet, more or less, west to the west side of Fourth Avenue of Highlands Addition, the same being the street running north and south along the west side of the Highlands Addition; 
THENCE 2,321 feet, more or less, south along the west side of Fourth Avenue of the Highlands Addition, the same being the street running north and south along the west side of the Highlands Addition, to a point 50 feet north of the center line of Clinton Road; 
THENCE 2,721.1 feet, more or less, east to the southeast corner of the Woodlands Addition, the same being 50 feet north of the center line of Clinton Road; 
THENCE 1,800 feet, more or less, south to a point 2,500 feet north of the thread of the stream of the Houston Ship Channel; 
THENCE in a northeast direction, 2,500 feet north of and parallel with the thread of the stream of the Houston Ship Channel to the point of beginning.  
Sec. 4. - Extension of Boundaries. 
The boundaries of the City of Galena Park may be enlarged and extended by the annexation of additional territory, irrespective of size and configuration, in any of the methods hereinafter designated. 
A.	Extending Limits in Accordance with Article 974 of The Revised Civil Statutes [Texas Local Government Code § 43.129]. Where such additional territory adjoins the corporate limits of the City and contains three or more inhabitants qualified to vote for members of the State Legislature, such adjacent territory may be annexed to the City in the manner and in conformity with the procedure set forth in Article 974 of the Revised Civil Statutes of the State of Texas of 1925 [Texas Local Government Code § 43.129]; provided the limit of one-half mile in width contained in said Article shall not be applied and shall not limit the width of any such area to be annexed. 
B.	Extending Limits by Action of City Commission. The City Commission shall have power by ordinance to fix the boundary limits of the said City and to provide for the extension of said boundary limits and the annexation of additional territory lying adjacent to said City, with or without the consent of the owners of and/or the inhabitants of the territory annexed. Upon the introduction of an ordinance before the City Commission providing for the annexation of such territory without the consent of the inhabitants thereof, same shall be considered by the City Commission and may be passed upon the first reading thereof. If passed by the affirmative vote of a majority of the City Commission, it shall then be published in the official newspaper of the City of Galena Park one time, and shall not thereafter be finally passed until at least 30 days have elapsed after said publication, and when said ordinance is finally passed, the said territory so annexed shall be a part of the City, and the inhabitants thereof shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges of other citizens, and shall be bound by the acts, ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the said City. 
C.	Annexation of Unoccupied Lands by Petition of Owners. The owner, or owners of any land which is without residents, contiguous and adjacent to the City may, by petition in writing to the governing body, request the annexation of such contiguous and adjacent land, describing it by metes and bounds. The governing body shall thereafter, and not less than five and not more than 30 days after the filing of such petition, hear such petition and the arguments for and against the same, and grant or refuse such petition as the governing body may see fit. 
If the governing body grants such petition, it may by proper ordinance receive and annex such territory as a part of the City. 
D.	Annexation by Amendment to Charter. The boundary limits of the City may be fixed and additional territory added or annexed thereto by Amendment to the Charter of the City. 
E.	Annexation by Any other Method Provided by Law. Additional territory may also be annexed to the City in any manner and in any procedure that may now be provided by law or that may be hereafter provided by law; same shall be in addition to the methods hereinabove provided. 
F.	Annexed Territory to Become Part of the City. Upon completion of any one of the procedures hereinabove provided, the territory so annexed shall become a part of the City, and said land and its inhabitants and future inhabitants shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges of other citizens of the City, [and] shall be bound by the acts, ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the City. 
State Law reference— Municipal boundaries and annexation generally, Texas Local Government Code § 41.001 et seq.; authority of home rule municipality to annex area and take other actions regarding boundaries, Texas Local Government Code § 43.021.  
Sec. 5. - Discontinuance and Relinquishment of Territory. 
A.	Territory within the corporate limits of the City and adjacent to the corporate boundary thereof may be relinquished and discontinued as a part of the corporate area upon the terms and under the conditions provided for in Article 973 and 975 of the Revised Civil Statutes of the State of Texas [Texas Local Government Code § 43.142], as same now exist or may hereafter be amended. 
B.	Whenever there exists within the corporate limits of the City and adjacent to the boundary line thereof, territory not exceeding one percent of the corporate area, lying contiguous and in a body, inhabited or uninhabited, to which area the City is not able to extend its water system, or sewer system, or police protection, or to lay out and maintain properly therein streets, for adequately serving such area and the inhabitants thereof, without an unreasonable outlay of such funds as it may have available for such purposes, and upon a finding by the City Commission that the City cannot adequately serve said area in one or more of said respects, and upon a finding further by the City Commission that the discontinuance of such area will not materially affect the revenues of the City, nor materially impair the security of the holders of tax obligations and/or bonds of the City, the Mayor and City Commission may, by ordinance duly passed, discontinue said territory as a part of the City; and when said ordinance has been duly passed, same shall be entered on the Minutes of the City, and from and after the entry thereof, said territory shall cease to be a part of the City. 
C.	Whenever there exists within the corporate limits of the City territory not exceeding one percent of the corporate area, lying contiguous and in a body, inhabited, or uninhabited, and adjoining a boundary line of the City, which area by reason of its location is better suited to industrial development rather than residential improvement, such area may be relinquished and discontinued as a part of the City by ordinance duly passed by the Mayor and City Commission, provided the owners of at least three-fourths of any such area shall petition the City Commission to so relinquish and discontinue such territory, provided further that the City Commission finds that the discontinuance of such area will not materially impair the security of the holders of tax obligations and/or bonds of the City, and when such ordinance has been duly passed and entered upon the Minutes of the City Commission, said territory shall cease to be a part of the City. 
D.	The aggregate of all areas discontinued and relinquished under the terms of Paragraphs "B" and "C" of this Section during any five-year period shall not exceed one percent of the corporate area as same exists at the time of passage of the ordinance relinquishing such area, and the City Commission shall find and incorporate in each such ordinance relinquishing territory, that the territory relinquished by such ordinance together with all territory theretofore relinquished during the five years prior thereto does not exceed one percent of the corporate area as same exists at the time of such ordinance.  
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL POWERS AND PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1. - General Powers. 
The City may assess, levy and collect any and all character of taxes for general and special purposes on all subjects or objects, including occupation taxes, license taxes and excise taxes, which the City may lawfully assess, levy and collect under the Constitution and Laws of the State of Texas; may appropriate the money of the City and any department thereof for all lawful purposes; may create, provide for, construct, regulate and maintain all things of the nature of public works and improvements, whether for pleasure or otherwise; may levy and collect assessments for local improvements; may license and regulate persons, corporations, associations and partnerships engaged in any business, occupation, profession or trade not prohibited by the Constitution and Laws of the State of Texas; may define, prohibit, abate, suppress and prevent all things detrimental to the health, morals, comforts, safety, convenience and welfare of the inhabitants of the City, and all nuisances and cause thereof; may regulate and restrict the construction, height and the material used in all buildings and the maintenance and occupancy thereof; may regulate and restrict and control the use, for whatever purposes, of the streets, alleys and other public ways and places; may create, establish, abolish and organize offices and fix the salaries and compensations and fees of all officers and employees; may make and enforce local police, health, and sanitary and other regulations; and, may pass such ordinances as may be expedient for maintaining and promoting the peace, good government, safety and welfare of the City, and for the performance of the functions thereof. 
State Law reference— General powers of home rule cities, Texas Local Government Code § 51.071 et seq.  
Sec. 2. - Public Property Exempt from Executions. 
No public property, or any other character of property owned or held by said City, shall be subject to any execution of any kind or nature.  
Sec. 3. - City Funds Not Subject to Garnishment. 
No funds of the City shall be subject to garnishment and the City shall never be required to answer in any garnishment proceedings.  
Sec. 4. - Exemption from Liability for Damages. 
Reserved.  
Sec. 5. - Right of Eminent Domain. 
The City shall have the right of eminent domain and the power to condemn and appropriate private property for public purposes, whether such property be within or without the City limits, in such cases as is now or may hereafter be provided by the General Laws of Texas governing cities and towns and the procedure to be followed is that prescribed by the general laws of Texas as is now, or may hereafter become, applicable to municipal and political subdivisions of the State of Texas.  
Sec. 6. - May Accept Governmental Aid, Etc. 
The City may accept monetary aid or other character of aid or benefit from the Federal Government, the State Government, the County Government, and from any agency thereof, and/or any individual, and/or a private agency; and shall have the full right, power and authority to do the things and perform the acts necessary to permit the City to receive such aid.  
Sec. 7. - Streets and Subdivisions. 
Should any property lying within the City limits or adjacent thereto be hereafter platted into Blocks and Lots, the owner of said property shall plat and lay the same off to conform to the streets of the City abutting said property, which map and subdivision shall be subject to the approval of the Mayor and City Commission before same can be effective and valid and before same can be filed for record in the Map or Deed Records of Harris County, and after same has been recorded in the Map or Deed Records of Harris County, a completed copy thereof bearing the certificate of the County Clerk showing the date of filing and place of record thereof shall be filed with the City Secretary and retained as a permanent record of the City. 
In no case shall the City of Galena Park be required to pay for any of the streets, alleys, or easements shown upon such plat or map, but when opened by reason of the platting of said property, at whatever date platted, such streets, alleys, and easements shall become by such act, the property of the City of Galena Park for public use to which same are dedicated by the plat, and shall be cared for as such.  
Sec. 8. - Frame Building Regulations. 
The City may prohibit the erection, building, placing, moving or repairing of wooden buildings within such limits of the City as it may designate and prescribe, in order to guard against the calamities of fire; and may within said limits prohibit the moving or putting up of any wooden building from without said limits, and may also prohibit the removal of any wooden building from one place to another within said limits, and may direct that all buildings within the limits so designated as aforesaid shall be made or constructed of fireproof materials, and may declare any dilapidated building to be a nuisance and direct the same to be repaired, removed or abated in such manner as they shall direct; to declare all wooden buildings in the fire limits which they deem dangerous to contiguous buildings, or in causing or promoting fires, to be nuisances, and require and cause the same to be removed in such manner as they shall prescribe.  
Sec. 9. - Establishment of Building Lines and Assessments Therefor. 
The governing body of the City may establish a building line or lines by adopting a resolution or ordinance describing the street, highway or part thereof to be affected, and the location of the building line or lines, and except as herein otherwise provided, by following the same procedure as that authorized by law in the City for the acquiring of land for the opening of streets. After the establishment of any such lines, no building or other structures shall be erected, reconstructed or substantially repaired, and no new buildings, or other structure, or part thereof, shall be erected or re-erected within said lines so established. The procedure for instituting and conducting the condemnation proceedings to condemn the easements and interests necessary to be taken and acquired to establish a building line under the authority of this Section, and to assess and collect benefits against property owners and their property abutting on or in the vicinity of said building line arising out of the establishment of said building line, shall be the same as that authorized by law in the City in connection with the opening of streets. In the condemnation of any tract where the ownership of or interests in said tract is in controversy or is unknown, the award may be made in bulk as to such tract, and paid into Court for the use of the parties owning or interested therein, whoever they may be, as their interests may appear. The awards and findings of the Special Commissioners when filed with the Judge of the County Court, or other Court having jurisdiction over the condemnation proceedings, shall be final, and shall be made the judgment of said Court. Compensation shall be due and payable upon rendition of the judgment by the Court adopting the award. Whenever and wherever a building line shall be established under authority of this Section, all structures extending within such building lines shall be required to conform to the new line within a period of not more than 25 years from the time of establishing said lines; such time to be provided in the ordinance providing for the establishment of such line. At any time, however, before or after the expiration of the time so fixed, the proper municipal authorities shall have the power to proceed in the manner then provided by law relating to condemnation proceedings by the City to remove all structures and to condemn any property then within such line, and to assess benefits against property owners and their property benefited thereby; provided, however, that all owners of property so affected shall receive due notice and hearing in the manner then provided by law in the determination of the additional damages then sustained by the removal of such structures or the taking of land then within the building line and the determination of benefits to be assessed against property owners affected, and their property affected. This Section shall be in addition to and cumulative of any powers not or hereafter conferred by law on the City.  
Sec. 10. - Building Lines. 
In addition to the power provided by the above and foregoing section, the City shall have the further power, for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare, acting through its governing body, under the public power to provide by suitable ordinance building lines on any street or streets, or any block of any street or streets, and to require their observance by suitable penalties.  
Sec. 11. - Broad Powers Herein Granted. 
The City shall have all the powers that now are, or hereafter may be granted to municipalities by the Constitution or Laws of the State of Texas, and all such powers, whether expressed or implied in this Charter, shall be exercised and enforced in the manner prescribed by this Charter, or when not prescribed herein, then in such manner as may be prescribed by the General Laws of Texas, applicable to cities and towns, and if the manner be not therein prescribed, then as same shall be provided by ordinance or resolution of the City Commission.  
ARTICLE III. - TAXATION 
 
Sec. 1. - Power to Tax. 
The City Commission shall have the power and is hereby authorized to annually levy, assess and collect taxes not to exceed the maximum rate provided by the Constitution and Laws of Texas for cities having more than 5,000 inhabitants, which taxes shall be levied and assessed upon all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the City of Galena Park, not exempt from taxation by the Constitution and Laws of the State of Texas.  
Sec. 2. - License Fees. 
The City Commission shall have power to levy and collect taxes commonly known as licenses, in accordance with Article 1031 of the Revised Civil Statutes of Texas [Texas Tax Code § 302.102]. The enumeration in said Article shall not be held to deprive the City Commission of the right to levy and collect other licenses and taxes, and from other persons and firms under the authority which they have by virtue of being a home rule city.  
Sec. 3. - Franchise Tax. 
The City shall have the power, annually, to levy and collect a franchise tax and/or a gross receipt tax, or ground rental tax, from any public service corporation using and occupying the public streets, alleys, or grounds of the City, separately from the ad valorem tax on the tangible property of such corporation, and to levy and collect, annually, a tax upon the intangible property and values, including the shares of corporations and joint stock associations, as the same is now or may be hereafter permitted by the Laws of Texas, and shall have full power to enforce the collection of all such taxes.  
Sec. 4. - The Commission Failing to Pass Tax Ordinances for Any Municipal Year. 
The City Commission at its first meeting in June of each year, or as soon thereafter as practicable, shall levy the annual tax for such year, but special taxes or assessments provided by this Charter may be levied, assessed, and collected at such time or times as the Commission may provide; provided that if, for any cause, the Commission shall fail or neglect to pass a tax ordinance, levying taxes for that year, then, and in that event, the tax levying ordinance last passed will and shall be considered in force and effect as the tax levying ordinance, and the failure so to pass such ordinance for any one year shall in no wise invalidate the collection of taxes for that year.  
Sec. 5. - Property Liable for Taxes. 
All real, personal or mixed property, owned, held or situated in the City, shall be liable for all municipal taxes due by the owners thereof, regardless of where such owners may resold, including taxes on real estate, personal and mixed property. All personal property may be levied upon, seized and sold by the person performing the duties of collector of taxes that may be due and by the owner thereof, without further warrant of authority than production of his tax roll, which sale, when made, shall convey a prima facie title to the purchaser thereof; or the amount of tax due by any person upon any species of property may be sued in any Court having jurisdiction and a personal judgment may be recovered against any delinquent taxpayer or against any person to whom personal property on which the City tax is due has been sold, or who owns, holds or claims possession of said personal property.  
Sec. 6. - Lien Fixed Against Property for Taxes. 
All taxes levied by the City are hereby declared to be a lien, charge and encumbrance on the property for which the tax is due, which lien, charge and encumbrance the City is entitled to enforce and foreclose in any Court having jurisdiction of the same; and the lien, charge and encumbrance on the property in favor of the City for the amount of taxes due on such property, if such as to give the State Courts jurisdiction to enforce and foreclose said lien on the property on which tax is due, not only as against any resident of the State, or any person whose residence is unknown, but also against the unknown heirs of any person who owns the property on which the tax is due and against nonresidents. 
All taxes upon real estate shall especially be a lien and a charge upon the property upon which the taxes are due, which lien may be foreclosed and the tax collected by suit in any Court having jurisdiction.  
Sec. 7. 
The City of Galena Park hereby adopts the General Tax Laws of Texas as applicable to cities and towns, except where otherwise provided by this Charter, and shall be governed thereby in the rendition and assessment of property for taxes, and in the levy and collection thereof, shall keep such records thereof as are prescribed by the General Law, and shall proceed thereunder in the collection of all taxes, including the collection of delinquent taxes, and may enforce its liens for taxes either by summary sale or delinquent tax suits in the manner and in such cases as the General Law may provide.  
Sec. 8. - Assessor and Collector of Taxes Shall Furnish Certificate. 
It shall be the duty of the Assessor and Collector of Taxes, whenever written request is filed with him by any person, to furnish a written statement properly certified to by him, showing all taxes due on any particular tract of land situated within the City of Galena Park up to and including the year for which the taxes are last due, and for each such statement so furnished by him, he shall collect not to exceed $0.50 which shall be paid into the City Treasury.  
Sec. 9. - Board of Appraisement and Equalization. 
The governing body of the City shall create annually a Board of Equalization, consisting of three qualified voters and property taxpayers of the City, and said Board of Equalization shall have such powers and duties as are [governed by State Law]. The City Commission shall prescribe the compensation of the members of said Board, and enact all ordinances necessary to regulate and control the equalization of value by such board.  
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCES AND BONDS 
 
Sec. 1. - Fiscal Year. 
The fiscal year for the City of Galena Park shall be from October 1, to and including September 30, following. 
State Law reference— Power of home rule city to prescribe its fiscal year, Texas Tax Code § 1.05.  
Sec. 2. - Scope of the City Budget. 
The budget for the City Government shall present a complete financial plan for the ensuing fiscal year. It shall set forth all proposed expenditures for the administration, operation, and maintenance of all departments and agencies of the City Government for which appropriations are required to be made or taxes levied by the City; to said budget there shall be annexed a budget of the water and sewer system, and such system may be shown in the annexed budget as a self-supporting enterprise; all expenditures for capital projects to be undertaken or executed during the fiscal year; all interest and debt redemption charges during the fiscal year; and the actual or estimated operating deficits from prior fiscal years. In addition thereto, the budget shall set forth the anticipated income and other means of financing the total proposed expenditures of the city government for the fiscal year. 
State Law reference— Circumstances under which Charter provisions control regarding annual municipal budget, Texas Local Government Code § 102.011.  
Sec. 3. - The Budget Document. 
The budget document, presenting a financial plan for the city government as outlined in the preceding Section, shall consist of three parts, as follows: 
Part I shall contain: 
(1)	A budget message prepared by the Mayor which shall outline a fiscal policy for the City Government, describing therein the important features of the budget with reference both to proposed expenditures and anticipated income; 
(2)	A general budget summary with a few supporting schedules, which shall be in accordance with the Texas Uniform Budget Law. 
Part II shall contain: 
(1)	Detailed estimates of all proposed expenditures, showing the corresponding expenditures for each item for the current fiscal year and the last preceding fiscal year with explanation of increases or decreases recommended as compared with appropriations for the current fiscal year; 
(2)	Detailed estimates of anticipated revenues and other income; 
(3)	Delinquent taxes, if any, for current and preceding years, with percentage collectible; 
(4)	Statements of the bonded and other indebtedness of the city government, showing the debt redemption and interest requirements, the debt authorized and unissued, the condition of the sinking funds, if any, and the borrowing capacity of the City. 
Part III shall contain complete drafts of the budget ordinances, including an appropriation ordinance and such other ordinances as may be required to finance the budget.  
Sec. 4. - The Preparation and Adoption of the Budget. 
At least 60 days prior to the beginning of the fiscal year, the departments and agencies of the City Government shall transmit estimates of their budgetary requirements to the Mayor. The Commission may revise, alter, increase, or decrease the items of the budget, provided that when it shall lancers the total proposed expenditures, it shall also increase the total anticipated income so that the total means of financing the budget shall at least equal in amount the aggregate proposed expenditures. When the Commission shall make such changes, it shall issue a statement setting forth clearly its action on the budget. At least ten days before the beginning of the fiscal year, the Commission shall approve the budget plan and shall enact the appropriation ordinance. As soon thereafter as possible, the Commission shall pass the tax levy ordinance and such other ordinances as may be required to make the budget effective.  
Sec. 5. - Transfer of Appropriations. 
The Commission may, upon the recommendation of the Mayor, transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance or any portion thereof within a department or agency of the City Government or from one department or agency to another.  
Sec. 6. - Money to Be Drawn from Treasury in Accordance with Appropriation. 
No money shall be drawn from the Treasury of the City, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except in pursuance of the annual appropriation ordinance or of such ordinance when changed as authorized by the next preceding Section of this Charter. At the close of each fiscal year, any unencumbered balance of any appropriation shall revert to the fund from which appropriated and shall be subject to reappropriation; but appropriations may be made by the Commission, to be paid out of the income of the current year, in furtherance of improvements or other objects or works which will not be completed within such year, and any such appropriation shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned.  
Sec. 6-A. 
Nothing in Sections 2 to 6 of this Article shall be construed to affect the authorization of bonds and warrants and the expenditures of the proceeds thereof, whether or not provision has been made therefor in the annual budget.  
Sec. 7. - Custody of City Money. 
All money received by any department or agency of the City for or in connection with the business of the City shall be paid promptly into the Treasury and shall be deposited with responsible banking institutions. These institutions shall be designated by the Mayor, with the approval of the Commission, and in accordance with such regulations and subject to such requirements as to security for deposits and interest thereon as may be established by ordinance. All interest on money belonging to the City shall accrue to the benefit of the City. 
Editor's note— Res. No. R02-2015, § 1, adopted by the city council Feb. 3, 2015, designated the Comerica Bank as the city's depository bank and treasury management service provider.  
Sec. 8. - Bonds. 
The governing authority of the City shall have the power to appropriate so much of the general revenue of the City as may be necessary for the purpose of retiring and discharging the accrued interest and indebtedness of the City; to issue bonds to pay for any property or public improvements which the City may lawfully acquire or construct, to pay for any improvement the cost of which is to be assessed wholly or in part against abutting or benefiting property, or to fund or refund any indebtedness outstanding at the time this Charter takes effect for which inadequate provision for payment has been made; but no bonds shall be issued to pay current expenses; all bonds of the City issued which are a lien on the taxable property located within the City limits of Galena Park shall be authorized by an ordinance passed by an affirmative vote of at least a majority of the members of the Commission, and except funding and refunding bonds, and repair bonds not exceeding $2,000.00 shall be submitted at an election to the qualified voters who are taxpayers of the City, and should a majority of the votes cast in said election be in favor of issuance of the bonds the same shall be issued in accordance with the Laws of Texas and this Charter, but should said election fail to carry, the bonds shall not be issued. The election provided for above shall be conducted as other elections under the state law, after giving notice by publication in accordance with state law. 
All bonds hereafter issued by the City shall be subject to call for payment, redemption or refunding at par and accrued interest ten years after the date thereof and on any interest paying date thereafter, and the right of call for payment, redemption or refunding shall be expressly set forth in any and all ordinances of the City Commission providing for the issuance of such bonds, also in the face of the bonds themselves. The City Commission is hereby fully empowered to provide for such call for payment, redemption or refunding privileges, as it may deem advisable and for the best interests of the City of Galena Park, to be exercised on any interest prior to ten years after the issuance of any such bonds, and such privileges shall be expressly set forth in the ordinance of the Commission providing for the issuance of such bonds in the face of the bonds themselves. 
All bonds hereafter issued by said City shall specify for what purpose they were issued, shall be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the person performing the duties of City Secretary with the seal of said City attached.  
Sec. 9. - Funding Debts. 
The Commission shall have the power to pass all necessary ordinances to provide for the refunding of the whole or any part of the bonded debt and time warrant debt of said City, by cancellation of the evidences thereof, and issuing to the holders or creditors bonds with coupons bearing interest at the same or a lower rate, and no election shall be necessary as a prerequisite thereof.  
Sec. 10. - Loans in Anticipation of Bond Sales. 
At any time after a bond ordinance has taken effect as provided in this Charter, the City may borrow money for the purposes for which bonds are to be issued, in anticipation of the receipt of the proceeds of the sale of bonds, and within the maximum authorized amount of the bond issue. Such loans shall be due and payable not later than three years after the time of taking effect of the ordinance authorizing the bonds upon which they are predicated. But the limits of the life of the bonds, as herein prescribed, shall be construed to include the terms of such temporary loan.  
Sec. 11. - Contracts for City Improvements. 
Any City improvement costing more than $3,000.00 shall be executed by contract except where such improvements are authorized by the affirmative vote of a majority of the Commission to be executed directly by the City in conformity with detailed plans, specifications and estimates. 
(Election of 11-6-1979)  
Sec. 12. - Independent Audit. 
As soon as practicable after the close of each fiscal year, an independent audit shall be made of all accounts of the City Government by qualified public accountants, selected by the Commission, who have no personal interest directly or indirectly in the financial affairs of the City Government or any of its officers. If the City Commission deems it advisable, it may by resolution or ordinance provide for semi-annual or quarterly audits in lieu of the annual audit as herein specified.  
Sec. 13. - Promissory Notes. 
The City is hereby authorized to issue its promissory notes in payment for any real estate which it is authorized and empowered under the Laws of Texas and this Charter to purchase for any municipal purpose, including lands needed for public park purposes, which notes, if deemed advisable by the City Commission, may be secured by the Vendor's lien to be retained in the conveyance thereof to the City, and/or by deed of trust upon such land, containing provisions for sale by trustee and such other terms as the City Commission may deem advisable. Provided, however, that such notes shall never bear a rate of interest in excess of current interest rates, nor mature more than ten years after [the] date thereof, and provided, further, that at the time of the issuance of such notes, the City Commission shall make such an appropriation of revenues or provision for levy of taxes as shall be sufficient to create a sliding fund for the payment of the principal of such notes and the interest thereon as same mature. 
(Election of 11-6-1979)  
Sec. 14. -   
The City of Galena Park shall have all the right, powers and privileges granted to cities and towns by [State Law].  
Sec. 15. -   
There is hereby reserved to the City of Galena Park the power and authority to be exercised by the City Commission of issuing bonds, and other evidence of indebtedness in amounts and under the conditions as authorized by the Constitution and Laws of the State of Texas. 
(Election of 11-6-1979)  
ARTICLE V. - ACQUISITION AND OPERATION OF REVENUE PRODUCING PROPERTIES 
 
Sec. 1. -   
The City Commission is hereby authorized in the manner hereinafter provided to acquire through purchase, condemnation, construction or in any other manner, and to own, operate, maintain, extend, improve and equip, either entirely within and without the City, any revenue producing property or properties or any combination of such properties, including, but not in limitation thereof, an electric light and power plant and system, a water works plant and system, a sewer and sewage disposal plant and system, a natural or artificial gas plant and system, causeways, bridges and tunnels and approaches and appurtenances thereto, and any part thereof, for the purpose of supplying the commodities and services to be supplied by such properties to the City and its inhabitants and to persons residing outside the corporate limits of said City. Any revenue producing property or properties, including those above defined or any part thereof, or combination thereof, are herein referred to as the "utility" and shall be construed to include flowage rights, easements, franchises, contracts and real and personal property of every nature used or useful in the operation of such utility. No part of any such utility may be located more than 50 miles from the corporate limits of the City. Any such utility may lie wholly or partly within territory over which any other city or town has acquired jurisdiction under authority of [State Law] and the consent of such other city or town shall not be requisite thereto.  
Sec. 2. -   
In acquiring a utility under the provisions of this Article, the City Commission may provide for the acquisition of an existing utility or utilities, or for the acquisition of such part thereof as the City Commission may consider is necessary or desirable to acquire. The City is also authorized to acquire jointly with any other municipality or municipal entity a utility or any part of a utility and to enter into such agreement with such other municipality or entity for the joint or several operation of such utility or part thereof as may be determined by the City Commission.  
Sec. 3. -   
The City Commission shall prescribe rates to be charged for services or commodities supplied or furnished by any utility acquired, improved or extended under the provisions of this Article, which rates shall be equal and uniform and shall be fully sufficient to produce revenues adequate to pay, and the City Commission shall cause to be paid, all operating, maintenance, depreciation, replacement, betterment and interest charges, and to provide an interest and sinking fund and reserve therefor sufficient to pay all bonds issued hereunder to acquire, improve, or extend the utility. No free service shall be rendered by any such utility except to the extent that any existing law may require free service or commodities to be rendered to schools or other buildings and institutions operated by the City.  
Sec. 4. -   
The City Commission may by resolution authorize the issuance of bonds of the City, payable solely out of the revenues of the utility for the purpose of paying, wholly or in part, the cost of the acquisition, extension, improvement or equipment of the utility or for the purpose of refunding any bonds theretofore issued under authority of this Article. Such bonds shall not constitute an indebtedness or pledge of the credit of the City and shall contain this clause, "The holder hereof shall never have the right to demand payment of this obligation out of any funds raised or to be raised by taxation." The bonds may be in registered or coupon form, and if in coupon form, may be registerable as to principal, and shall be in such denomination or denominations, bear interest at such rate or rates not to exceed five percent per annum, and shall mature serially or at one time nor more than 40 years from their date in such manner as may be provided by the City Commission. The bonds may be made redeemable prior to maturity at such premium or premiums as the City Commission may determine and shall be sold in such manner and at such times as the City Commission shall determine to be expedient, or may be delivered at not less than their par value in payment of all or part of the acquisition cost of such utility or any part thereof, provided that if the said bonds shall in no event be sold for a price which will result in an interest yield therefrom of more than five percent per annum computed to maturity according to standard bond tables in general use by banks and insurance companies. 
If more than one series of bonds shall be issued under this Article, priority of lien against the pledged revenues shall depend on the time of delivery of such bonds, each series enjoying a lien prior and superior to that enjoyed by any series of bonds subsequently delivered; provided, however, that as to any issue or series of bonds which may be authorized as a unit but delivered from time to time in blocks, the City Commission may in the proceedings authorizing the bonds provide that all of the bonds of such series or issue shall be co-equal as to lien regardless of the time of delivery. All bonds issued under this Section shall constitute negotiable instruments within the meaning of the Negotiable Instrument Law. 
The resolution or resolutions authorizing the issuance of bonds hereunder may contain such provisions, agreements and covenants as may be considered desirable by the City Commission with respect to the creation, securing and disposition of sinking funds and other funds, pledge, allocation and apportionment of revenues, application or revenues to retirement of the bonds through purchase, redemption prior to maturity, or payment, insurance of the utility, the keeping of records and accounts, and all other matters having to do with the security and payment of the bonds. Provision may be made in the resolution for the execution of a trust indenture for the purpose of securing the bonds, in which event the matters herein mentioned may be provided for in such indenture and such duties may be delegated to and imposed in the Trustee under the indenture as may be considered desirable by the City Commission  
Sec. 5. -   
The management and control of the utility during the time it is encumbered may by the terms of the resolution or trust indenture be placed in the hands of the City Commission or may be placed in the hands of a Board of Trustees to be named therein, consisting of not more than five members, one of whom shall be the Mayor of the City. The terms of office of such board, its powers and duties, the manner of exercising same, the election of the successor trustees, and all matters pertaining to their organization and duties may be specified in such resolution or trust indenture. The compensation of the trustees shall be fixed therein but shall never exceed five percent of the gross receipts of the utility in any one year.  
Sec. 6. -   
All money received from the sale of any bonds issued under this Article shall be applied solely to the payment of the cost of the acquisition, extension, improvement or equipment of such utility, including all engineers', architects' and attorneys' fees and similar incidental expenses reasonably incurred in connection with such acquisition, extension, improvement or equipment and in connection with the authorization and issuance of such bonds, and including the payment of interest on the bonds prior to and during the period occupied by the construction of the utility and for one year thereafter. If the utility to be acquired consists of a bridge, tunnel, causeway or combination thereof and the City Commission shall consider it desirable to acquire through purchase or lease existing ferry properties for the purpose of operating such properties during the period of construction over or near the route to be traversed by the utility, such properties may be so acquired and the cost thereof paid from the proceeds of the bonds. Any preliminary expenses paid by the City from its general funds shall be repaid from the proceeds of the bonds when available.  
Sec. 7. -   
Any holder of the said bonds or coupons may either at law or in equity by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceeding, enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this Article to be performed by the City of Galena Park, its City Commission, the Board of Trustees charged with the operation of the utility, or any officers thereof, including the making and collection of reasonable and sufficient rates or charges lawfully established for the services and commodities furnished by the utility, the segregation of the income and revenues thereof and the accumulation and application of the respective funds created by the resolution or trust indenture. If there be any default in the payment of the principal of or interest on any of such bonds, the holders of a majority in principal amount of the bonds then outstanding shall be entitled to have an administrator or receiver appointed by any Court having jurisdiction to administer and operate the utility in behalf of the City and all of the bond and coupon holders, with power to charge and collect rates sufficient to provide for the payment of operation and maintenance expenses as hereinabove defined, and to pay any bonds or interest coupons payable from the revenues of the utility and to apply the income and revenue thereof in conformity with the provisions of this Article and the proceedings authorizing the bonds.  
Sec. 8. -   
The City Commission is hereby granted full power and right of eminent domain in accomplishing the purposes of this Article and full power to condemn all necessary property, franchises, leases and contracts, which powers shall be exercised in the manner provided by general law at the time of such exercise.  
Sec. 9. -   
No election need be held on the question of the issuance of bonds or the pledge of revenues under this Article and no notice or opportunity for referendum need be given unless such election, notice or opportunity for referendum shall at the time be required by the provisions of any General Law or Laws of the State of Texas, in which event such election shall be held or notice or opportunity for referendum shall be given in the manner required by such general law or laws.  
Sec. 10. -   
Any bonds authorized under this Article, and the transcript of proceedings relating to their authorization, shall be submitted to the Attorney General of the State of Texas for approval and to the State Comptroller for registration in like manner and with like effect as is provided by general law for the approval and registration of ad valorem tax bonds of Texas municipalities.  
Sec. 11. -   
The City may accept any loan, gift or grant from the United States of America or the State of Texas or any agency or instrumentality thereof and may enter into any agreement or agreements not prohibited by law which may be necessary to obtain such loan, grant, or gift. Construction contracts may be awarded with or without advertised notice for bids in such manner as may be deemed advisable by the City Commission. The City may enter on any lands, waters and premises for the purpose of making surveys, soundings and examinations.  
Sec. 12. -   
Prior to the issuance of any bonds authorized under this Article, temporary or interim bonds or certificates, with or without coupons, exchangeable for definitive bonds may be issued.  
Sec. 13. -   
Where any utility acquired under this Article shall consist of a causeway, bridge, tunnel and approaches thereto, or any combination or part thereof, the City Commission may enter into such agreement as shall be deemed desirable with the State Highway Commission pursuant to which the utility may be operated and maintained by the State Highway Commission under such provisions as may be set forth in the agreement and pursuant to which the State Highway Commission may contribute to the cost of the operation and maintenance of the utility. Such agreement may provide for the lease of the utility to the State Highway Commission under such terms not inconsistent with the provisions of the bond resolution or trust indenture as may be agreed upon.  
Sec. 14. -   
This Article without reference to other provisions of the Charter of the City of Galena Park shall constitute full authority for the authorization and issuance of bonds hereunder and for the accomplishment of all things herein authorized to be done and no proceeding, notice or publication relating to the acquisition or issuance of such bonds or the doing of such things shall be necessary except as are in this Article required. The provisions of this Article shall constitute a contract between the City of Galena Park and the holder or holders of any bonds or coupons issued hereunder and after the issuance of such bonds no amendment shall be made hereto which shall in any manner impair the rights of the holders of the bonds and coupons then outstanding.  
Sec. 15. -   
The City of Galena Park shall have all the rights, powers and privileges to be exercised by its City Commission, as therein are provided, granted to home rule cities [under State Law], together with all amendments thereto and as same may hereafter be amended by the Legislature of the State of Texas, the provisions of said Articles to be followed by the City Commission in lieu of anything to the contrary in the foregoing sections of this Article, as the City Commission may elect.  
ARTICLE VI. - PUBLIC UTILITIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Grant of franchise by home rule cities, Texas Local Government Code § 282.003. 
 
Sec. 1. - Franchise. 
The right of control, easement, user and the ownership of and title to the streets, highways, public thoroughfares and property of the City of Galena Park, its avenues, parks, bridges, and all other public places and property are hereby declared to be inalienable, except by ordinance duly passed by the affirmative vote of a majority of all the members of the City Commission; and no grant of any franchise, or lease or right to use the same, either on, along, through, across, under or over the same by any private corporation, association, or individual, shall be granted by the City Commission for a longer period than 50 years, unless submitted to the vote of the legally qualified voters of the City; provided, however, that whenever application is made by any person or corporation for any grant or franchise, lease, right, or privilege in or to the streets and public thoroughfares of the City for a longer period than 50 years, the Commission shall submit such proposed grant at an election called for said purpose, the expense of which shall be borne by the applicant for said franchise, and after said election, if the majority of the votes cast by the legally qualified voters shall be in favor of making said grant, as applied for, said grant may be made for such a term of years as is specified in the ordinance submitting the same at said election. 
(Election of 9-1958)  
Sec. 2. - Franchise Ordinances May Be Referred on Motion of Commission. 
The City Commission may also, upon its own motion, submit all applications or ordinances requesting the granting of franchise or special privileges in and to the streets, public thoroughfares and highways of the City, to an election, at which the people shall vote upon the propositions therein submitted; the expense of said election shall be paid by applicant or the applicants therefor.  
Sec. 3. - Franchise Ordinances Must Be Read at Three Regular Meetings. 
No such franchise shall ever be granted until the ordinance granting the same has been read in full at three regular meetings of the Commission, nor shall any such franchise, grant, right or easement ever be made to any private individual, corporation or association unless it provides for adequate compensation or consideration therefor to be paid to the City, and in addition to any other form of compensation, [the] grantee shall pay annually such fixed charge as may be prescribed in the franchise.  
Sec. 4. - Right to Regulate Charges, Etc., of Holders of Franchise or Privilege. 
Said City shall have the power to determine, fix, and regulate the charges, fares and rates of any person, firm or corporation exercising, or that may hereafter exercise, any right of franchise or public privilege in said City, and to prescribe the kind of service to be furnished and the equipment to be used, and the manner in which service shall be rendered, and to change such regulations from time to time. In order to ascertain all of the facts necessary for a proper understanding of what is or should be a reasonable rate or regulation, the City Commission shall have full power to inspect the books and other records of such person, firm or corporation and compel the attendance of witnesses for such purposes; provided that in determining, fixing and regulating such charges, fares or rates of compensation, the same shall be based upon the fair value of the property of such person, firm or corporation devoted to furnishing service to the City, or the inhabitants thereof, and not upon any stocks or bonds issued or authorized to be issued by, or any other indebtedness of, such person, firm or corporation. 
To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service, and the maintenance of the plant and fixtures at the highest practical standard of efficiency. 
To prescribe the form of accounts and at any time to examine and audit the accounts and other records of any such utility and to require annual and other reports by each such public utility; provided that if a public service commission or any other authority shall be given the power by law to prescribe the forms of accounts for public utilities throughout the state or throughout any district of which the City is a part, the forms so prescribed shall be controlling so far as they go, but the Commission may prescribe other and more detailed forms for the utilities within its jurisdiction. 
To impose such other regulations as may be conducive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the public.  
Sec. 5. - Ordinance Amending or Renewing Existing Grants. 
No grant or franchise, or lease, or right of user, in, upon, along, through, or over the public streets, highways or public thoroughfares of the City of Galena Park shall be made or given nor shall any rights of any kind whatever be conferred upon any person, private corporation, individual or association of any kind whatever, except the same be made by ordinance duly passed by the Commission; nor shall any amendment, renewal, extension or enlargement of any rights, or powers previously granted to any corporation, person or association of persons, in, upon, along, through, under or over the streets of the City of Galena Park be made, except in the manner and subject to all the conditions provided in the preceding sections of this Charter for the making of original grants and franchises.  
Sec. 6. - Occupying Streets without Franchise. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation or association of persons to use or occupy any public grounds whatever, in the City or any space above or below any public ground for the purpose of conducting any public utility wherein service is rendered to the public for hire or charge, unless permission is first had from the Commission in the manner provided in this Charter. All public utilities whose franchise or grant expires by limitation expressed in the grant, shall, within six months from date of the expiration of the grant or franchise, remove all properties belonging to them from the public grounds and restore the grounds and surface of the streets to its original condition, unless before the expiration of the grant or within 90 days thereafter a new franchise or extension of the old franchise be granted under the same rules governing the granting of a new franchise, as in this Charter provided.  
Sec. 7. - Forfeiture of Franchise. 
The Commission shall enforce all regulations of public utilities, whether such regulations are prescribed in the franchise under which they may be operating or by ordinances passed thereafter or by this Charter, and may for adequate cause enforce the forfeiture of any franchise in any Court of competent jurisdiction; adequate cause shall be deemed to be a persistent refusal, after due notice, to comply with reasonable regulations or demands of the Commission, or refusal to obey and comply with the law and the ordinances of the City or any contract.  
Sec. 8. - Grant not to be Exclusive. 
No grant or franchise to construct, maintain or operate a public utility and no renewal or extension of such grant shall be exclusive.  
Sec. 9. - Valuation of Plant for Rate Making Purpose. 
No grant or franchise, and no renewal, extension or amendment of such grant, shall be valid unless special contract provision is made therein between the City and the grantee or grantees, to the effect that for all rate making purposes, whether before the Commission of said City or in the Courts of the Country, the valuation of such utility shall be the fair value of the property of such grantee devoted to furnishing service to the City, or the inhabitants thereof. 
(Election of 9-1958)  
Sec. 10. - Assignment of Grant. 
No grant, franchise, or other special privilege, unless expressly granted to the grantee and his or its successors and assigns, shall be leased, assigned or otherwise amended except with the consent of the Commission expressed by an affirmative vote of at least three-fifths of its members. 
(Election of 9-1958)  
Sec. 11. - Exclusive Right to Own, Maintain and Operate Water Works, Etc. 
The City shall have the right to own, erect, improve, enlarge, maintain and operate water works systems within or without the City limits, and the exclusive right within the City limits; shall regulate the same and have power to prescribe rates for water furnished, and to acquire by purchase, donation, condemnation or otherwise suitable grounds, within or without the limits of the City, on which to erect any such works and all incidentals necessary to operate and maintain such water works or water works system, and to compel the owners of all property and the agents of such owners or persons in control thereof to pay all charges for water furnished upon such property.  
Sec. 12. - Exclusive Right to Own, Operate and Maintain Sewer Systems, Etc. 
The City shall have the right to own, erect, maintain, and operate sewer systems or sewage disposal plants, filtering beds and emptying grounds for sewage systems, and garbage and incinerator plants, within or without the City limits, and exclusive rights within the City limits; to regulate the same and to have power to prescribe rates for the service so furnished and to acquire by purchase, donation, condemnation or otherwise, suitable grounds within or without the limits of the City, on which to erect any such sewer system, or systems, sewage disposal plant or plants and filtering beds and emptying grounds for all sewer systems, and for garbage and incinerator plants, and the necessary rights-of-way, and to do and perform whatsoever may be necessary to operate and maintain said sewer system or systems, sewage disposal plants, filtering beds and emptying grounds for sewer systems, and for garbage and incinerator plants, and to compel owners of property and the agents of such owners or persons in control thereof to pay all charges for sewer service furnished upon such property, and shall have the power to compel owners of property and the agents or persons in control thereof to connect with such sewer system, and to pass all ordinances necessary for the enforcement of this power.  
Sec. 13. -   
A.	The City shall have power to mortgage and encumber its water systems and sewer systems, either, both or all, and the franchise and income thereof and everything pertaining thereto, acquired or to be acquired, to secure the payment of funds to purchase the same or to purchase additional water powers, riparian rights, or to build, improve, enlarge, extend or repair such system, and to refund any existing indebtedness, or either or all of them, and as additional security therefor by the terms of such encumbrances, may grant to the purchaser under sale or foreclosure thereunder, a franchise to operate the system and properties so purchased for a term of not over 20 years after such purchase, subject to all laws regulating same then in force. No such obligation shall ever be a debt of the City, but solely a charge upon the properties so encumbered, and shall never be reckoned in determining the power of the City of Galena Park to issue any bonds for any purpose authorized by law. 
B.	No such water or sewer system shall ever be sold until such sale is authorized by a majority of the qualified voters of the City of Galena Park. 
C.	Whenever the income of any water or sewer system shall be encumbered under these provisions the expense of operation and maintenance, including all salaries, labor, material, interest, repairs and extensions necessary to render efficient service and every proper item of expense, shall always be a first lien and charge against such income. The rates charged for services furnished by said systems shall be equitable and uniform and no free service shall be allowed except for buildings and institutions owned or operated by and/or for said City. There shall be charged and collected for such services a sufficient rate to pay for all operating, maintenance, depreciation, replacement, betterment and interest charges, and for interest and sinking fund sufficient to pay any mortgage indebtedness, to purchase, construct or improve any such system, or of any outstanding indebtedness against same.  
Sec. 14. - Sale of Water and Sewer Services. 
The City shall have the power and authority to sell and/or distribute water and to sell and provide for sewer services to any person or corporation outside the limits of the City, and to permit them to connect with said systems under contract with the City, under such terms and conditions as may appear to be for the best interests of the City; provided the charges fixed for such services outside the City limits shall be reasonable when considered in the light of all the circumstances, to be determined by the City Commission. 
Also the City shall have the power and authority to prescribe the kind of water or sewer pipes within or beyond the limits of the City of Galena Park, where it furnishes the service, and to inspect the same and require them to be kept in good order and condition at all times and to make such rules and regulations and prescribe penalties concerning same, as shall be necessary and proper.  
Sec. 15. - Underground Construction. 
The Commission may require the placing of all wires or overhead construction of public utilities, or such part thereof as may be deemed best, from time to time, under the surface of the ground, under such regulations as may be prescribed by the City Commission, and may provide for such construction or change thereof in any franchise hereafter granted, and may require all public service corporations now having their construction of wires and appliances above the ground to place the same, or any part thereof, below the ground under such regulations as the City Commission may prescribe.  
Sec. 16. -   
The provisions of this Article relating to the granting of any franchise are not applicable to the franchise, or franchises, which may be granted as part of an indenture authorized for the purpose of securing the payment of revenue bonds.  
Sec. 17. -   
The City of Galena Park shall have all the rights, powers and privileges to be exercised by its City Commission, as therein provided, granted to home rule cities [under State Law], together with all amendments thereto and as same may hereafter be amended by the Legislature of the State of Texas, and nothing in this Charter shall be construed to deny or preclude any of such rights, powers and privileges.  
ARTICLE VII. - STREET, CURBS, GUTTERS AND SIDEWALKS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city relative to streets and other public property, Texas Transportation Code § 311.001; authority of city to develop and improve streets, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1175. 
 
Sec. 1. - Street Powers. 
The City shall have exclusive dominion, control and jurisdiction in, upon, over and under the public streets, avenues, alleys and highways of the City.  
Sec. 2. -   
The City of Galena Park hereby adopts in full Chapter 106 of the General and Special Laws, enacted by the 40th Legislature of the State of Texas at its first called session, in 1927, and all amendments thereto, which act and amendments thereto have been codified as [State Law], with reference to construction and improvement of streets, avenues, alleys, highways, boulevards, drives, public places, squares, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, and making provision to pay therefor. Said statute and amendments thereto are hereby adopted in their entirety, as completely as if here copied and set out in full. It is not intended that this section shall be exclusive, and the City of Galena Park shall also have as alternative powers the powers and provisions of all other Laws of the State of Texas in anywise relating to the same subject matter.  
Sec. 3. - Sidewalks, Improvements, Defective May Be Declared Nuisance. 
The City shall have the power to provide for the construction, improvement or repair of any such sidewalk, or the construction of any such curb, by penal ordinance, and to declare defective sidewalks to be a public nuisance.  
Sec. 4. - Repair of Paved Streets. 
After the paving of any street in the City, it shall become the duty of the City to keep said street in repair and to pay for same out of the general fund of the City.  
Sec. 5. - Removal of Obstructions. 
The Commission shall have power to order the removal of obstructions on all streets, avenues, alleys and highways of the City.  
Sec. 6. -   
The City shall have power to control, regulate and remove all obstructions or other encroachments or encumbrances on any public streets, alleys or grounds, and to narrow, alter, widen or straighten any such streets, alleys, avenues or boulevards, and to vacate and abandon and to close any such streets, alleys, avenues or boulevards, and to regulate and control the removing of buildings or other structures over or upon such streets of the City, and shall have any and all other powers over streets, alleys, avenues and boulevards of the City as may now be given by the Law of Texas to cities adopting home rule charter, or that may hereafter be given to such cities by Acts of the Legislature of the State of Texas.  
ARTICLE VIII. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1. - Execution, Garnishment, and Assignments. 
Any funds belonging to said City, in the hands of any person, shall not be liable to garnishment on account of any debt it may owe or funds it may have on hand due any person, nor shall the City or any of its officers or agents be required to answer to any writ of garnishment on any account whatsoever, nor shall the City be liable to the assignee of any wages of any officer, agent or employee of said City, whether earned or unearned, upon any claim or account whatsoever, and as to the City any such assignment shall be absolutely void.  
Sec. 2. - Power to Remit Penalties. 
The City Commission shall have the right to remit, in whole or in part, any fine or penalty belonging to the City, which may be imposed under any ordinance or resolution.  
Sec. 3. - Building Permits. 
The City shall have power to prohibit the erection or construction of any building or structure of any kind within the City without a permit first having been issued by the City for the construction or erection of such building or structure, and may authorize a fee to be charged for such permit, and in pursuance of said authority may authorize the inspection by the City of all buildings or structures during the progress of their construction and may require that all buildings shall be constructed in conformity with the building regulations which exist in said City or which shall hereafter be passed.  
Sec. 4. - [Reserved.] 
Editor's note— Article VIII, Section 4, was repealed by Amendment No. 4 of a Charter Amendment Election held November 6, 1979.  
Sec. 5. - Designation of Official Newspaper. 
All ordinances and official notices required to be published shall be published in the official newspaper of the City, which newspaper shall be selected annually as such official newspaper. 
Editor's note— Res. No. R03-2015, § 1, adopted by the City Council Feb. 17, 2015, designated the North Channel Star newspaper, whose address is 5906 Star Lane, Houston, Harris County, Texas, as the City's official newspaper for the publication of all ordinances and official notices required to be published by the City Charter and laws of the State of Texas, for the year 2015.  
Sec. 6. - Designation of Governing Body. 
The term "City Commission," "City Council," "Governing Body," and/or other similar designation wherever used in this Charter shall mean the City Commission or other governing body of the City of Galena Park.  
Sec. 7. -   
This Charter, if adopted by the voters of the City of Galena Park, shall be effective immediately upon the entry upon the Minutes of the City of Galena Park of an order by the Board of Commissioners thereof declaring the same adopted in accordance with Article 1169 of the Revised Civil Statutes of the State of Texas, 1925 [Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1169].  
Sec. 8. - Publicity of Records. 
All records and acts of every department of the City shall be open to inspection by any citizen or by any representative of the press at all reasonable times and under reasonable regulations established by the City Commission.  
Sec. 9. - Official Bond. 
The City Secretary and such other officers or employees as the City Commission may by general ordinance require to do so, shall give bond in such amount and with a solvent surety company as may be approved by the City Commission. The premiums on such bonds shall be paid by the City.  
Sec. 10. - Absentee Voting. 
Absentee voting shall be governed by the election laws of the State of Texas in so far as applicable and where any detail prescribed by the State Law is not applicable, absentee voting shall be governed by such ordinance or ordinances as may be passed by the City Commission for controlling the same.  
Sec. 11. - Oath of Office. 
Every officer of the City, whether elective or appointive, shall qualify by taking the oath prescribed by the Constitution of the State of Texas, and by executing such bond as may be required under the provisions of this Charter and the ordinances and resolutions of the City.  
Sec. 12. - Compensation of Officers and Employees. 
The City Commission shall fix and determine the compensation of all elective and appointive officers and employees of the City, and provide for the payment thereof, except where such compensation is fixed by this Charter.  
Sec. 13. - Payment of Claims. 
No warrant for the payment of any claims shall be issued by the City, unless such claim shall be evidenced by an itemized account approved by the Mayor and audited and allowed by the Commission at a regular or special meeting, and all warrants shall be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the party acting as City Secretary.  
Sec. 14. - Continuance of Present Officer. 
All persons holding administrative office at the time this Charter takes effect shall continue in office and in the performance of their duties until provision shall have been made in accordance herewith for the performance of such duties or the discontinuance of such office. The powers conferred and the duties imposed upon any officer, commission, board or department of the City by the Laws of the State, shall, if such office, commission, board or department be abolished by this Charter, be thereafter exercised and discharged by the office or department designated by the City Commission unless otherwise provided herein.  
Sec. 15. - Continuance of Contract. 
All contracts entered into by the City, or for its benefit, prior to the taking effect of this Charter, shall continue in full force and effect. Public improvements for which legislative steps have been taken under laws or ordinances existing at the time this Charter takes effect may be carried to completion in accordance with the provisions of such existing laws and ordinance provisions.  
Sec. 16. - Sanitary Code. 
In providing for health provisions, the Sanitary Code of Texas shall be followed as far as practicable.  
Sec. 17. - Building Code. 
The City Commission may establish a Building Code for the construction of all buildings in the City.  
Sec. 18. - Fire Department. 
The City shall continue to maintain and support a competent and adequate fire department for the protection of property and lives from fire within the corporate limits and the City Commission shall levy and collect annually a sufficient tax to support, carry on and maintain said department.  
Sec. 19. - Amendments. 
This Charter, after its adoption by the qualified voters of the City, may be amended in accordance with [State Law], and any amendments thereto.  
Sec. 20. - Ordinances Continued in Force. 
All ordinances and resolutions in force at the time of the talking effect of this Charter not inconsistent with its provisions shall continue in full force and effect until amended or repealed.  
Sec. 21. - No Bond for Costs. 
The City shall not be required in any action, suit or proceeding in any Court by or against it, to give security for costs.  
Sec. 22. - Real Estate. 
All real estate, personal property and rights [of] whatever character owned and/or controlled by the City of Galena Park at the date of the adoption of this Charter shall vest in, inure, remain and be the property of the City.  
Sec. 23. - Words, Meaning of. 
The provisions of this Charter shall be liberally construed for the purpose of effecting the objects and ends thereof. Unless some other meaning is manifest the word "City" shall be construed to mean the "City of Galena Park," and the word "and" may be read "or" and the word "or" may be read "and," if the sense requires; the words in the present tense include future tense, except when a more restricted meaning is manifest, and singular may mean plural. Throughout this Charter words used in expressing masculine gender shall be construed to include the feminine. The word "City Secretary" refers to the person performing the duties of the city secretary. The word "Commission" shall be construed to mean the "City Commission of the City of Galena Park, Texas."  
Sec. 24. - Saving Clause, Etc. 
All powers granted heretofore to cities are hereby preserved. In case of any irreconcilable conflict between the provisions of this Charter and any superior law, the powers of the City and its officers shall be as defined in such superior laws. In case of any insufficiency or omission in this Charter which insufficiency or omission may be supplied by reference to the general laws, such provisions of the general laws are hereby adopted, and the City shall have and exercise all of the powers that it could have acquired by expressly adopting and incorporating into this Charter all of the provisions of such superior and general laws, it being the intent of this Charter that no lawful power of the City shall fall because of any omission, insufficiency or inconsistency in this Charter appearing. The insufficiency or invalidity of any portion or portions of this Charter shall not in anywise affect the remainder of the Charter but the same shall be construed as if adopted without such portion so found invalid or impotent.  
ARTICLE IX. - ADMINISTRATION PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1. - City Commission. 
The powers of the municipal government and the administration of business affairs of the City shall be conducted by a Mayor and four Commissioners, who, together, shall be known and designated as the City Commission, each and all of whom shall be elected by the qualified voters of the City at large, and who shall hold their respective offices for two years, and until their successors are elected and qualified, unless sooner removed as provided by this Charter or the Laws of the State of Texas. The Mayor shall be for all the purposes a member of the City Commission and he shall vote on all ordinances, resolutions and questions presented to the Commission.  
Sec. 2. - Qualifications of Mayor and Commissioners. 
No person shall be elected Mayor or Commissioner unless he be a citizen of the United States, shall have been for one year immediately preceding such election a citizen and bona fide inhabitant of the City of Galena Park, and at the time of his election a qualified voter of said City. The City Commission shall be judge of the election and qualifications of its own members, subject to review by the Courts in case of contest. 
(Election of 11-6-1979)  
Sec. 3. - Commissioners. 
The four Commissioners to be elected at the regular City election on the first Tuesday in April, 1948, and in each regular biennial City election thereafter shall be designated and denominated as follows: 
Commissioner-Position No. 1; 
Commissioner-Position No. 2; 
Commissioner-Position No. 3; 
Commissioner-Position No. 4. 
In all elections each candidate shall have his name placed on the official ballot as a candidate for the particular position he seeks. 
Editor's note— The reference to a "regular biennial city election" in the above section has been superseded by the State authorized election dates pursuant to Texas Election Code §§ 41.001 ("Uniform election dates") and 41.005 ("General election of political subdivision other than county").  
Sec. 4. - Elections. 
There shall be held on the first Tuesday in April, 1948, and every two years thereafter, until otherwise provided by laws, a regular City election for Mayor and four Commissioners, who shall assume their offices upon the first day of May thereafter, and who shall perform the duties and discharge the obligations conferred and imposed by the provisions of this Charter, and by law, and shall hold their offices for two years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
Editor's note— The reference to a "every two years" in the above section has been superseded by the State authorized election dates pursuant to Texas Election Code §§ 41.001 ("Uniform election dates") and 41.005 ("General election of political subdivision other than county").  
Sec. 5. - Resignation of Mayor and Commissioners. 
The Mayor and Commissioners may resign upon written application to the City Commission. Such resignation shall be effective at the time indicated in the application. If no time is indicated, it shall be effective at the first meeting of the City Commission.  
Sec. 6. - Vacancies in the City Commission—How Filled. 
Vacancies in the City Commission, where the same do not exceed two at any one time if within one year of a general City election, shall be filled by a majority vote of the remaining members of the Commission; and the persons selected to fill such vacancies shall serve only until the next general City election, when such vacancies shall be filled as in the case of an original election. Where more than two vacancies shall occur at any one time a special election shall be called, in the manner provided for general City elections, to elect their successor to fill the unexpired terms. However, if such vacancies shall occur within 90 days of the general City election no special election to fill such vacancies shall be called, but the remaining members of the Commission shall, by majority vote, fill such vacancies, and the persons so selected shall serve until the nest general City election when such vacancies shall be filled as in the case of an original election.  
Sec. 7. - Compensation of Mayor and Commissioners. 
The compensation of the Mayor shall be $300.00 per month and the City Commissioners shall be $200.00 per month. In addition, the Mayor and members of the City Commission shall be entitled to be paid for the actual loss of wages and for expenses incurred on behalf of the City of Galena Park as presented to the City Secretary and approved by the City Commission. 
(Election of 11-6-1979)  
Sec. 8. - Mayor Pro-Tem. 
The City Commission shall at its first meeting elect one of its members as Mayor Pro-tem who shall perform the duties of the Mayor in case of the absence or inability to perform the duties of his office, and who shall for the time being, be vested with all the powers of the Mayor.  
Sec. 9. - Acting Mayor. 
In case of the absence or inability of both the Mayor and the Mayor pro-tem, to perform the duties of their office, the remaining Commissioners shall elect one of their members to act for that particular meeting in the place of the Mayor or Mayor Pro-tem. An acting Mayor shall be selected to perform such duties for only one meeting of the City Commission, and for that particular meeting he shall be vested with all the powers of the Mayor.  
Sec. 10. - Meetings of the City Commission. 
Not less than two regular meetings of the City Commission shall be held in each calendar month, the time thereof to be fixed by the City Commission, and the City Commission by ordinance may provide for additional regular meetings from time to time as may be teemed advisable. As many special meetings as may be necessary to attend to the municipal business may be called by the City Secretary upon the written request of the Mayor or three Commissioners. Notice of special meetings of the City Commission at least 24 hours prior to such meeting, which notice shall state the subject to be considered at such meeting and no other subject shall be there considered except with the unanimous consent of the Commissioners. All meetings of the City Commission shall be held at the City Hall in the City of Galena Park, Texas, and shall be open to the public. 
(Election of 11-6-1979)  
Sec. 11. - Quorum of City Commission. 
A quorum of the City Commission for the transaction of business shall consist of three members, except where the City Commission is reduced to less than three on account of vacancies, in which event, a quorum shall consist of all the remaining members of the City Commission, provided, however, that all decisions of the Board of Commissioners to be effective shall require a majority vote. However, a less number than quorum may adjourn from time to time and compel the attendance of absent members. 
(Election of 4-1963)  
Sec. 12. - Voting on Ordinances and Resolutions. 
The ayes and noes shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances and resolutions and entered upon the Minutes of the proceedings of the City Commission; and every ordinance and resolution shall require on final passage the affirmative vote of a majority of the members present, except where otherwise specifically provided in this Charter or by law.  
Sec. 13. - No Members Excused from Voting. 
Each member of the City Commission present at any meeting shall be required to announce his vote on each question, ordinance and resolution placed before the City Commission, except on matters involving the consideration of his own official conduct or where his financial interests are involved, in which event such member shall not vote, but shall give his reasons for not voting, which reasons shall be spread upon the Minutes of the City Commission.  
Sec. 14. - City Commission May Summon Witnesses, Etc. 
The City Commission shall have power to summon and compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books and papers before it whenever it may be necessary for the more effective discharge of its duties, and shall have the power to punish for contempt before it with the same fines and penalties as the County Judge may punish for contempt before the County Court at Law. All processes shall be signed by the Mayor (or Mayor Pro-tem as acting Mayor, as the case may be), and attested by the City Secretary and shall be served by any police officer of the City.  
Sec. 15. - Power to Administer Oaths. 
The Mayor, any Commissioner, City Secretary or assistant City Secretary shall have authority to administer oaths in any manner pertaining to municipal affairs.  
Sec. 16. - City Secretary. 
The City Commission shall appoint the City Secretary and prescribe the duties and compensation of said officer and provide him with such assistants as it may deem necessary. He and his assistants shall hold office during the pleasure of the City Commission.  
Sec. 17. - Appointive Officers. 
The City Commission shall appoint a competent person to be City Secretary, who may also be Treasurer and Assessor and Collector of Taxes of the City and may perform such other duties as the City Commission may prescribe. He shall before, entering upon the duties of his office, give a good and sufficient bond of not less than $5,000.00, the amount thereof to be fixed by the City Commission and said bond to be approved by said City Commission and filed and recorded in the Minutes thereof. Said City Secretary shall be invested and charged with and shall exercise all the powers, and rights and duties conferred upon and imposed by the General Laws of Texas, upon the Clerk, Treasurer, and Assessor and Collector of Taxes of cities and towns, except such powers, rights and duties as the City Commission may by ordinance delegate to another, and shall exercise such other powers and rights and perform such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance of the City Commission. 
The City Commission shall also have the power and authority by ordinance to create such boards, commissions, agencies and offices, in addition to those specially provided for by this Charter or by the Laws of the State of Texas, and to appoint the members of such boards, commissions, or agencies, and the officers to such offices as it may create, and to provide for the expense of operation of same and the compensation to be paid such members, officers and/or employees as it may deem advisable. Such boards, commission, agencies and officers shall have all the powers and privileges and perform the duties that may be prescribed by ordinance, and the City Commission may abolish at any time it may see fit any board, commission, agency or office which it creates, and may discharge any officer, member or employee which it appoints; providing the offices of City Secretary may not be abolished under the terms of this section.  
Sec. 18. - Bond of Officers. 
The Mayor and each Commissioner shall enter into a bond in the sum of $3,000.00 each, conditional for the faithful performance of the duties of their office, and be payable to the City of Galena Park for its use and benefit. The bonds of all other officials and/or employees of the City shall be for such sums as may be fixed by the City Commission, and shall be conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of their office and shall be payable to the City of Galena Park. All bonds of officers or employees shall be approved by the City Commission.  
Sec. 19. - General Powers of the Mayor and City Commission. 
The Mayor and City Commission shall have and exercise such powers, prerogatives and authority as conferred upon the governing bodies of cities and towns [under State Law], as same now exist or may hereafter be amended, including such powers and authority as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Charter. And the Mayor shall have further such powers, prerogatives, and authority as may be conferred upon him by the City Commission, not inconsistent with the general purposes and provisions of this Charter, and shall have the power to administer oaths and also the right and privilege of veto. 
Subject to the confirmation of the City Commission he shall have the power to appoint all boards, commissions, agencies and officers provided for in this Charter or by ordinance of the City Commission pursuant to terms hereof.  
Sec. 19-A. - Duties of City Commission. 
The Mayor and the City Commission shall, by ordinance, within 60 days following the approval of this amendment, designate the powers, functions and duties of each of the following named Commissioners: 
1.	Water and Sewage Commissioner; 
2.	Police and Fire Commissioner; 
3.	Park and Recreation Commissioner; 
4.	Street and Bridge Commissioner; 
and, during the term of office of said Commissioners, no powers, functions and duties shall be added or withdrawn except such as shall be consistent with and related to the powers, functions and duties designated as hereinabove provided. 
(Election of 4-1963)  
Sec. 20. - Veto. 
The Mayor shall have the power of veto of any ordinance or resolution passed by the City Commission, and the affirmative vote of all Commissioners shall be required to finally pass any ordinance or resolution over such veto. [State Law] pertaining to ordinances and resolutions are hereby adopted as fully as if incorporated verbatim herein, except where same may be in conflict with some other provision of this Charter.  
Sec. 21. - Passage of Ordinances and Resolutions. 
Ordinances and resolutions shall be introduced in the Commission only in written or printed form. All ordinances, except ordinances making appropriations and ordinances codifying or rearranging existing ordinances or enacting a code of ordinances, shall be confined to one subject, and the subject, or subjects, of all ordinances shall be clearly expressed in the title. No ordinance shall be passed until it has been read on two separate days, unless the requirement for reading it on two separate days be dispensed with by the affirmative vote of a majority of the Commission. The final reading of each ordinance shall be in full unless a written or printed copy thereof shall have been furnished to each member of the Commission prior to such reading. The yeas and nays shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances and resolutions and entered upon the Journal of the Proceedings of the Commission. The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be "Be it ordained by the City of Galena Park," but the same may be omitted when published in book or pamphlet form.  
Sec. 22. - Publication of Ordinances and Resolutions. 
The caption only and the penalty of every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine, or forfeiture for violation of its provisions shall, after passage thereof, be published in one issue of the official newspaper of the City. The affidavit of such publication made by the printer or publisher of such newspaper before any officer authorized to administer oaths and filed with the City Secretary, together with a printed copy thereof, shall in all Courts be conclusive evidence of the legal publication and promulgation of such ordinance. No other character of ordinance need be published. Amendments and corrections made in digesting any revision for publication in book form need not be so published, even though they be a penal or forfeiture ordinance or amendment thereto. The failure to publish any such ordinance as here required shall not invalidate it as a civil ordinance regulating civil rights and liabilities.  
Sec. 23. - Printed Ordinances Admitted in Courts. 
All ordinances of the City, when printed and published and bearing on the title page thereof "Ordained and Published by the City Commission of the City of Galena Park", or words of like import, shall be prima facie evidence of their authenticity and shall be admitted and received in all Courts and places without further proof.  
Sec. 24. - How Plead. 
In all judicial proceedings it shall be sufficient to plead any ordinance by caption, or by the number of sections thereof wanted, and it shall not be necessary to plead the entire ordinance or section.  
Sec. 25. - Authentication of Ordinances and Resolutions. 
Upon final passage each ordinance and resolution shall be authenticated by the signature of the Mayor and City Secretary and shall be recorded in a book kept for that purpose. All such ordinances and resolutions, or certified copies thereof under the seal of the City and the hand of the City Secretary, shall be admissible in evidence in any Court without further proof of their legal adoption by the City Commission.  
Sec. 26. - Revision and Codification of Ordinances. 
Should this Charter be adopted by the qualified electors of the City, then all ordinances now in force and effect, and which are not inconsistent with this Charter, shall be and remain in force and effect until repealed or amended by the governing body; and it shall become the duty of the Commission, as soon thereafter as practical, to require the City Attorney to carefully search the various records of the City and compile and report to said Commission a list of the ordinances and resolutions then in force, with his recommendations as to which are obsolete and should be repealed or revised, and which should continue in force; and said Commission shall pass such ordinances or resolutions as may be necessary to repeal all such obsolete ordinances as may then appear to the Commission to be obsolete; and pass and adopt such additional ordinances, in lieu thereof, as may be necessary to properly protect health, life and property, and to prevent and summarily abate and remove all nuisances, and to preserve and enforce good government, order and security of the City and its inhabitants, and such additional ordinances and resolutions as may be necessary to put into effect those provisions of this Charter which are not self enacting; and in aid of such other provisions as said Commission may deem necessary, including ordinances and resolutions covering departmental regulations; and after said obsolete laws shall have been repealed and such additional ordinances mentioned above shall have been passed by said Commission, it shall be the duty of said Commission to cause this Charter to be properly indexed and the then laws of said City to be carefully codified, by said Attorney, and this Charter and said laws, shall then be published in book or pamphlet form "By authority of the Commission of the City of Galena Park."  
Sec. 27. - [Reserved.] 
Editor's note— Article IX, Section 27, was repealed by Amendment No. 9 of a Charter Amendment Election held November 6, 1979.  
ARTICLE X. - ELECTIONS 
 
Sec. 1. - Method of Holding Elections. 
A ten day notice of any regular biennial election shall be given by posting at the City Hall and by publication in one issue of the official newspaper of the City, and the provisions of [State Law] pertaining to municipal elections as same now exists or may hereafter be amended are hereby adopted in so far as not in conflict with some provision of this Charter. All elections shall be by non-partisan ballot. 
Editor's note— The reference to a "regular biennial city election" in the above section has been superseded by the State authorized election dates pursuant to Texas Election Code §§ 41.001 ("Uniform election dates") and 41.005 ("General election of political subdivision other than county").  
Sec. 2. - How to Get Name on Ballot. 
Any qualified elector of the City, otherwise eligible under the terms of this Charter, shall have the right to file an application to have his name placed on the official ballot as a candidate for any elective office, and such application in writing, signed by such candidate and delivered to the City Secretary not less than 30 days prior to the date of the election, shall entitle such applicant to a place on the official ballot; provided that all candidates seeking election to the office of Mayor and City Commissioner shall pay a filing fee of $100.00 for Mayor, and $50.00 for Commissioner. The names of such candidates shall be printed on the official ballot in the order in which such candidates file their applications, and the applications of such candidates shall designate the place which they seek and the number or position thereof if it be for Commissioner. 
(Election of 4-1963) 
State Law reference— Persons residing in annexed territory that was not formerly within the corporate limits of the City can satisfy the residency requirement and qualify for candidacy for local office if the area is part of the City on the date that is the basis for determining the applicable period of residence, Texas Election Code § 141.004.  
Sec. 2-A. - Runoff Elections. 
In all City elections, a majority of all votes cast for an office shall be necessary for election to that office. If no candidate receives a majority of such votes, then a second election, to be known as a "runoff election," shall be held not less than 30 nor more than 40 days following the first election. In such "runoff election," only the offices for which no candidate received a majority vote in the first election shall appear on the ballot, and only the two candidates who received the highest and next highest total vote for such offices as appear on the "runoff election" ballot shall have their names on such ballot as candidates for such offices. 
(Election of 4-1963) 
State Law reference— Authority of home rule city charter to prescribe runoff election date later than the period prescribed under state law, Texas Election Code § 2.025.  
Sec. 3. - Official Ballot. 
The official ballots shall be printed not less than 20 days before the date of the election. They shall be printed with black ink on clear white paper of uniform style and sufficient thickness to prevent the marks thereon to be seen through the paper. Such printing shall be of uniform style and type. At the head of each ballot there shall be printed "Official Ballot." No party designations shall appear thereon. The names of the respective candidates shall be printed on the ballot beneath the designation of the office and position for which they are candidates.  
Sec. 4. - Failure to Qualify. 
In the event any person who may be elected to any office in the City of Galena Park fails to qualify prior to June 1 next after his election, if elected at a regular election, or within 30 days after the date of his election if elected at a special election, the office which he is elected to fill shall be filled as prescribed by this Charter.  
Sec. 5. - Special Elections. 
The provisions of this Article shall apply to special elections for municipal officers.  
Sec. 6. - Miscellaneous. 
Except as herein provided, all special elections within the City of Galena Park shall be governed by the provisions of [State Law] and the General Election Laws of Texas so far as they are applicable to cities and towns.  
Sec. 7. - Qualified Voters. 
Every person who is a qualified voter under the Laws of the State of Texas and who shall have resided within the corporate limits of the City of Galena Park for six months preceding an election shall be entitled to vote at such election.  
ARTICLE XI. - PARKS 
 
Sec. 1. - Power. 
The City shall have and may exercise all the powers provided by the General Laws of Texas applicable to cities and towns for the purpose of acquiring, establishing, improving and maintaining public parks or a system of public parks within or adjacent to the City of Galena Park.  
Sec. 2. -   
When deemed for the best interest of the City by the City Commission, any lands held for park purposes by the City may be disposed of for such consideration and upon such terms as the City Commission may determine provided that the proceeds from the sale of park lands and property shall be used only for the purpose of acquiring, maintaining, and/or improving other public park properties owned by the City.  
ARTICLE XII. - SUBMISSION OF CHARTER TO VOTERS 
 
Secs. 1—3. - [Reserved.] 
Editor's note— Article XII, Sections 1, 2, and 3, were repealed by Amendment No. 10 of a Charter Amendment Election held November 6, 1979.  
Sec. 4. - Record of Charter. 
The City Secretary shall record at length upon the records of the City this Charter, and shall furnish the Mayor a copy of the Charter so adopted and authenticated by his signature and the seal of the City, which copy shall be forwarded by the Mayor to the Secretary of State and show the approval of this Charter by a majority vote of the qualified voters of the City of Galena Park. 
April 12th, 1946 
TO THE MAYOR AND MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF THE CITY OF GALENA PARK, TEXAS: 
We the undersigned members of the Charter Commission appointed by you to prepare a Home Rule Charter for submission to the voters of the City of Galena Park, Texas, do hereby submit the above and foregoing draft of such Charter, with the approval of this Commission, and recommend its submission to the voters of the City as provided by Law. 
J. Paul Rodgers, Chairman 
J. C. Boyle 
C. N. Brinkley 
E. Q. Middleton 
Z. L. Adams 
H. N. Watts 
Glenn Gross 
C. N. Jarrell 
R. P. Childress 
E. W. Smallwood 
Rogers DuBose 
C. B. Smith 
Ed Moore 
Earl Bowman 
W. H. Robb 
RECEIPT OF CITY SECRETARY 
The official copy of the proposed Home Rule Charter for the City of Galena Park, Texas, was received from the Charter Commission and filed by me on the 12th day of April, 1946. 
GIVEN UNDER MY HAND AND SEAL OF OFFICE at Galena Park, Texas, this 12th day of April, 1946. 
WILLARD T. HALL, City Secretary. 
MINUTES OF BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS ORDERING ELECTION 
The Board of Commissioners of the City of Galena Park met on Friday, the 12th day of April, 1946, for further action with reference to the proposed Home Rule Charter prepared and submitted by the Charter Commission heretofore appointed by this Board. 
Upon motion made by Commissioner Knight and duly seconded by Commissioner Fargason, and placed upon vote, the Charter was unanimously accepted and approved and the election for its approval or rejection by the qualified voters of the City of Galena Park, Texas, was set for Friday, the 31st day of May, 1946, as set forth in Order recorded in the Minutes of this Board. 
WILLIAM J. PHILPOT, Mayor 
JOHN H. FARGASON, Commissioner 
C. M. KNIGHT, Commissioner 
ATTEST: 
WILLARD T. HALL, City Secretary  
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Galena Park, Texas," and may be so cited. This Code may also be cited as "Galena Park City Code." 
(Code 1996, § 1.101) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt a civil and criminal code of ordinances, Texas Local Government Code § 53.001.  
Sec. 1-2. - Catchlines of articles and sections, history notes, and editor's notes. 
(a)	The catchlines of the several articles and sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the article section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such articles and sections, nor as any part of the articles and sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such articles and sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)	The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes, cross references, and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)	All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1996, § 1.102)  
Sec. 1-3. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city commission, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city commission: 
Generally. The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. In all interpretations the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the council, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provision s. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. The specific controls over the general. 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Charter. The term "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Galena Park, as printed in Part I of this volume. 
City. The term "the city" or "this city" means the City of Galena Park, the County of Harris and the State of Texas. 
City commission. The term "city commission" refers to the governing body of the City of Galena Park, Texas. The terms "city council," "board of aldermen," "councilmen," "councilmembers," and "governing body" shall mean the city commission. 
City commissioner. The term "city commissioner" refers to a member of the governing body of the City of Galena Park, Texas. The terms "city commissioner" and "city councilmember" shall be interchangeable herein. 
City manager, city secretary and other city officers or departments. The terms "city manager", "city secretary" and "other city officers or departments" shall be construed to mean the city manager, city secretary or such other municipal officers or departments, respectively, of the City of Galena Park, Texas. Reference to an officer or employee by title includes his duly authorized assistants or representatives. The term "city clerk" is to be interpreted to mean the city secretary of the City of Galena Park, Texas. 
Code. The term "Code" means this Code of Ordinances, Galena Park, Texas, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall not be counted. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Texas Government Code § 311.014. 
Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either…or," the conjunction is to be interpreted as follows, provided in appropriate cases the terms "and" and "or" are interchangeable: 
(1)	The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)	The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)	The term "either…or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 
Council, city council, city commission, or commission. Whenever the term "council," "this council," "the council," "city council," "city commission," or "commission" is used, it means the city commission of the City of Galena Park, Texas. 
County. The term "county" or "this county" means Harris County, Texas. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code requires or authorizes an officer or employee of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it is to be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty, unless the terms of the provision specifically provide otherwise. 
Gender. Words of one gender include all other genders. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Texas Government Code §§ 311.012, 312.003. 
Governing body. The term "governing body" refers to the governing body of the City of Galena Park. The terms "governing body" and "board of aldermen" shall mean the city council. 
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons are to be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Texas Government Code § 312.004. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Texas Government Code § 312.011(7). 
Must . The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Number. Any word importing the singular number includes the plural, and any word importing the plural number includes the singular. 
State Law reference— Similar state law, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 10. 
Oath. The term "oath" is to be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be submitted for an oath, and in such cases, the terms "swear" and "sworn" are to be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Texas Government Code § 312.011(8). 
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein, they mean standard time or daylight savings time, as may be in current use in the city. 
Officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies . Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies by title only, the reference refers to the officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of the city. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" extends and applies to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships, fiduciaries, representatives and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Texas Government Code § 311.005(2). 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as herein described. 
Preceding and following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Texas Government Code § 312.011(11). 
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the catchline or the lateral line of a roadway, and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when a person cannot write. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Texas Government Code § 312.011(14). 
State. The term "the state" or "this state" is to be construed to mean the State of Texas. 
Street. The term "street" has its commonly accepted meaning and shall include highways, sidewalks, alleys, avenues, recessed parking areas and other public rights-of-way including the entire right-of-way. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Texas Transportation Code § 541.301(5). 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Texas Government Code § 312.003(a). 
Tex. Admin. Code. This refers to the Texas Administrative Code. 
Tex. [subject] Code. This identifies a specific subject matter code of legislatively adopted statutes, as classified and numbered by the Texas Legislative Council under authority of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 5429b-1, predecessor to Texas Government Code § 323.007. 
Vernon's Ann. Civ. St . The abbreviation "Vernon's Ann. Civ. St." means the latest edition or supplement to Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes. 
V.T.C.A. The term "V.T.C.A." means Vernon's Texas Codes Annotated, as amended from time to time. 
State Law reference— Statutory references, Texas Government Code § 312.008. 
Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" is to be construed to include any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Texas Government Code § 312.011(17). 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Texas Government Code § 312.011(18). 
(Code 1996, § 1.103)  
Sec. 1-4. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)	All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code, which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, article, section or subsection, or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence on such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the city commission. 
(b)	Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the article and section number of this Code in the following language: "That Chapter ____________ , Article ____________ , Section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Galena Park, Texas, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)	In the event a new article or section not heretofore existing in the code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That Chapter ____________ , of the Code of Ordinances, City of Galena Park, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered Article/Section ____________ , which said article/section shall read as follows:…." The new article or section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)	It is hereby provided, however, that any subsequent ordinance which fails to amend this Code in the manner provided for above shall not be deemed invalid as a result of such failure to follow the procedure outlined in this section. 
(Code 1996, § 1.104)  
Sec. 1-5. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)	By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city commission. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city commission or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)	In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)	Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)	Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for articles, sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to articles, sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing article or section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)	Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this section," "this subsection," etc., as the case may be; and 
(5)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance articles or sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1996, § 1.105)  
Sec. 1-6. - General penalty for Code violations. 
(a)	In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)	Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code, or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)	Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)	Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance, by statute adopted by reference in this Code, by state rule or regulation adopted by reference in this Code or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)	In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)	Unless a higher penalty is otherwise specified, whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful of an offense or a misdemeanor, or wherever in such Code or ordinance the doing of an act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00, except for: 
(1)	Violations of municipal ordinances that govern fire, safety, zoning, public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, vegetation and litter violations in which the maximum fine shall be $2,000.00 for each offense; and 
(2)	Violations of traffic laws and ordinances which are punishable as a Class C misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $200.00. However, no penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or similar offense under the laws of the state. 
(d)	Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. Any violation of any provision of this Code which constitutes an immediate danger to the health, safety, and welfare of the public may be enjoined in a suit brought by the city for such purposes. 
(e)	Unless otherwise specifically stated within the provisions of this Code, any violation of this Code or of any ordinance set forth herein that is punishable by a fine that does not exceed $500.00 does not require a culpable mental state, and a culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove any such offense. 
(f)	Unless otherwise specifically stated within the provisions of this Code, any violation of this Code or of any ordinance set forth herein that is punishable by a fine that exceeds $500.00 shall require a culpable mental state of intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence. 
(g)	In any prosecution in the municipal court of the city or of any other court of competent jurisdiction, a complaint charging a violation of this Code need not negate the existence of any affirmative defense or exception, but the existence of such may be raised by the defendant in any such prosecution by way of defense as provided in the Texas Penal Code. When the defendant shall rely upon any such exemption or exception as a defense or justification, the burden of proving the exemption or exception shall be upon the defendant. 
(h)	The imposition of a penalty under the provisions of this Code shall not prevent the revocation or suspension of any license, franchise or permit issued or granted under the provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1996, § 1.106)  
Sec. 1-7. - Violations of Code or ordinance; culpable mental state. 
(a)	In any prosecution filed under a provision of this Code or any ordinance of the city which expressly requires proof that the actor engaged in conduct intentionally or knowingly, then a person does not commit an offense unless he is shown to have engaged in such conduct as the definition of the offense requires. 
(b)	Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city an act or a failure to act is prohibited, or is made or declared to be unlawful, or an offense, or a misdemeanor, and such provision does not expressly require proof of a culpable mental state, proof of a culpable mental state is not required for conviction of such offense, it being the intent of the city commission to dispense with the requirement of any culpable mental state in prosecutions filed under such provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city; provided, however, that if such offense is punishable by a fine exceeding the amount authorized by Texas Penal Code § 12.23, a person does not commit such offense unless he is shown to have recklessly engaged in such conduct as the definition of the offense requires. 
(c)	Proof of a higher degree of culpability than that charged constitutes proof of the culpability charged.  
Sec. 1-8. - Severability of parts of Code. 
(a)	It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city commission that the articles, sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable and, if any article, section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining articles, sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code since the same would have been enacted by the city commission without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional article, section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase. 
(b)	If any provision of this Code or the application thereof to any person, fact, situation or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this Code and the application of such provision to other persons, facts, situations or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
(Code 1996, § 1.107)  
Sec. 1-9. - Provisions considered as continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this and the following chapters and sections, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances or resolutions existing at the time of the adoption of this Code, shall be considered as a continuation thereof and not as new enactments. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Texas Government Code §§ 311.030, 312.007.  
Sec. 1-10. - Prior offenses, penalties and rights not affected by adoption of Code. 
(a)	Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty of forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)	Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the city repealed in this chapter, and all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing and not a new enactment of the same ordinance. This chapter shall not be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue or as affecting the liability of any person or as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or section thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this Code. 
State Law reference— Similar provision, Texas Government Code § 312.011(17).  
Sec. 1-11. - Rates, charges, and fees established. 
(a)	Unless otherwise provided for, all rates, charges, or fees necessary for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this Code shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by motion, resolution or ordinance of the city commission, from time to time. Any rates, charges, or fees established by the city pursuant to the regulations or requirements established herein may be changed from time to time by the city commission, and such changes shall both be considered an amendment to this Code. 
(b)	Whenever any provision of this Code provides that a rate, charge, or fee shall be established by the city commission, from time to time, and the amount of such rate, charge, or fee is not expressed in this Code in any dollar amount, then the amount of such rate, charge, or fee shall be the most recent and latest amount established, set or fixed by the city commission by ordinance, resolution or motion.  
Sec. 1-12. - Certain ordinances not affected by adoption of the Code. 
(a)	Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)	Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)	Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(3)	Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(4)	Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee. 
(5)	Any ordinance or resolution establishing and/or prescribing employment, benefits, and/or personnel policies and procedures. 
(6)	Any intergovernmental or mutual aid agreement entered into by the city. 
(7)	Any right or franchise granted by the city. 
(8)	Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(9)	Any appropriation ordinance. 
(10)	Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(11)	Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for such improvements. 
(12)	Any zoning ordinance. 
(13)	Any ordinance dedicating or accepting, or vacating any subdivision plat. 
(14)	Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city. 
(15)	The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(16)	Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code. 
(17)	Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the county. 
(18)	Any ordinance setting the rate of ad valorem taxes. 
(19)	Any ordinance adopting or amending the comprehensive plan. 
(20)	Any ordinance that is temporary, although general in effect. 
(21)	Any ordinance that is special, although permanent in effect. 
(22)	Any ordinance, the purpose of which has been accomplished. 
(b)	No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part of an ordinance that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance repealed by this chapter; and all such ordinances are recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Competitive bidding. 
(a)	Before the city makes a purchase that requires an expenditure of more than $50,000.00 from one or more municipal funds, the city will: 
(1)	Comply with the procedure prescribed by this Texas Local Government Code § 252.021 et seq. (Subchapter B) and Texas Local Government Code § 252.041 et seq. (Subchapter C) for competitive sealed bidding or competitive sealed proposals; 
(2)	Use the reverse auction procedure, as defined by Texas Local Government Code § 2155.062(d), for purchasing; or 
(3)	Comply with a method described by Chapter 2269, Texas Government Code. 
(b)	The city specifically adopts the purchasing allowance without competitive bidding as required under state law. 
(c)	Notwithstanding the above, all purchases must be approved by a majority vote of all commissioners. 
(Code 1996, art. 1.1000; Ord. of 1-4-1994, §§ 1—3) 
State Law reference— Purchasing and contracting authority of municipalities, Texas Local Government Code § 252.001 et seq.; competitive bidding and proposal requirements, Texas Local Government Code § 252.021.  
Sec. 2-2. - Returned check charge. 
The charge for any check returned to the city due to insufficient funds shall be as provided for in the fee schedule. 
(Code 1996, art. 1.1600; Ord. of 11-19-1991)  
Sec. 2-3. - Emergency medical service fees. 
The fees, as provided for in the fee schedule, is hereby adopted and shall be charged by the city and collected by the city secretary/treasurer or such other person designated by the city secretary/treasurer and approved by the mayor for all emergency medical service including materials and supplies used in connection with such services; and including fees for mileage required for transportation of individuals using the emergency medical services provided by the city. 
(Code 1996, art. 1.1700; Ord. of 3-21-1995)  
Sec. 2-4. - Elections. 
The date for run-off elections that may become necessary in elections for the offices of mayor and city commissioners of the city shall occur not later than the fifth day after the date the final canvass of the main election is completed. 
(Code 1975, § 1-2; Code 1996, art. 1.400)  
Secs. 2-5—2-26. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-27. - Days of regular meetings. 
The city commission shall hold two meetings each month which shall be the regular meeting of the city commission for the purpose of transacting the business of the city and such regular meeting shall be held at city hall on the first and third Tuesdays of each month. 
(Code 1996, § 1.301; Ord. of 6-16-1992, § 1) 
State Law reference— Meetings, Texas Local Government Code § 22.038; quorum of governing body, Texas Local Government Code § 22.039.  
Sec. 2-28. - Time of regular meetings. 
The date of the regular meetings of the city commission shall be on the first and third Tuesdays of each month at such times as designated by the city commission. 
(Code 1996, § 1.302; Ord. of 6-16-1992, § 2)  
Sec. 2-29. - Change of regular meetings. 
The city commission may change the day and the time of a regular meeting when the same falls upon a holiday or when the city commission determines that it is in the best interest of the citizens to reschedule such meetings; provided that the notice of the temporary change of meeting time and date shall be given at least two weeks prior to the regular meeting and such notice is published in the official newspaper of the city and such notice is otherwise posted in the city hall and at such other places as may be necessary to notify the citizens of such temporary change. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, the city commission shall have at least two meetings each month as prescribed by the city Charter and shall have such other meetings, both emergency and special, as may be needed or deemed in the best interest of the city as prescribed in the city Charter. 
(Code 1996, § 1.303; Ord. of 6-16-1992, § 3)  
Secs. 2-30—2-46. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-03, § 1, adopted June 7, 2016, repealed art. III, §§ 2-47—2-51, which pertained to city administrator and derived from Code 1996, §§ 8.101—8.105; an ord. adopted March 1, 1991, §§ 1—5. 
 
Secs. 2-47—2-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - EMPLOYEES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-76. - Social security. 
The city commission shall enter into all necessary agreements for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of Public Law 734, 81st Congress (Pub. L. No. 734) in order to secure the benefits of social security for city employees. The mayor is hereby appointed as agent of the city commission and of the city to execute all necessary agreements and instruments for and in behalf of the city commission and the city. The city secretary is responsible for making assessments, collections, payments, and reports, as required. A sufficient sum of money shall be allocated and set aside from available funds for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the social security laws, such money so allocated and set aside to be known as the city social security fund, which fund shall be set aside and maintained in the regular city depository. 
(Code 1975, § 7-1; Code 1996, art. 8.200)  
Sec. 2-77. - Exemption from Volunteer Firefighter's Relief and Retirement Fund Act. 
The city elects to exempt itself from the requirements of the Volunteer Firefighter's Relief and Retirement Fund Act as authorized by section 2(b) of said Act, also known as Article 6243e.3, V.T.C.S. (Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6243e.3). 
(Code 1975, § 7-2; Code 1996, § 8.315)  
Secs. 2-78—2-97. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Texas Municipal Retirement System generally, Texas Government Code § 851.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-98. - Participation in retirement system. 
(a)	On behalf of the city, the city commission hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and all of the employees participate in the state municipal retirement system as provided in Chapter 75, Acts of the 50th Legislature, as amended, Texas Government Code § 851.001 et seq., and all of the benefits and obligations of such system are hereby accepted as to such employees. 
(b)	The mayor is hereby directed to notify the board of trustees of the state municipal retirement system that the city has elected to participate and have the employees of the above departments participate in said system. 
(c)	Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the effective date of participation of such department shall become a member of the state municipal retirement system as a condition of his employment. The city may in the future refuse to add new departments or new employees to such system, but shall never discontinue as to any participants. 
(d)	In accordance with the provisions of the statute, the deposits to be made to the state municipal retirement system on account of current service of the employees of the several participating departments are hereby fixed at the rate of seven percent of the earnings of each employee of said departments, and in determining the deposits to be made on account of such service the earnings of any employee of any such department in excess of the sum of $6,000.00 in any one year shall not be considered. 
(e)	The city secretary is hereby directed to remit to the board of trustees of the state municipal retirement system, at its office in Austin, Texas, the city's contributions to the system and the amounts which shall be deducted from the compensation or payroll of employees, all as required by said board under the provisions of Chapter 75, Acts of the 50th Legislature of the state, as amended, and the said city secretary is hereby authorized and directed to ascertain and certify officially on behalf of the city the prior service rendered to the said municipality by each of the employees of the participating departments, and the average prior service compensation received by each, and to make and execute all prior service certifications and all other reports and certifications which may be required of the city, under the provisions of Chapter 75, Acts Regular Session, 50th Legislature, as amended, or in compliance with the rules and regulations of the board of trustees of the state municipal retirement system. 
(Code 1975, § 7-2; Code 1996, § 8.301; Ord. of 9-7-1993, § 1)  
Sec. 2-99. - Participation in supplemental benefits fund. 
(a)	The city, by its city commission, hereby elects to have the employees of all participating departments of said city participate in and be covered by the supplemental benefits fund of the state municipal retirement system, as provided by Chapter 312, Acts Regular Session, 56th Legislature (Texas Government Code § 854.201); and all the benefits and obligations of participation in said secretary are hereby accepted by the city as to such employees. 
(b)	The mayor is hereby directed to notify the board of trustees of the state municipal retirement system, that the city has elected to participate and have the employees of the above-mentioned departments participate in the supplemental benefits fund of said system. 
(c)	Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the effective date of participation of such department in said fund shall as a condition of his employment be covered into the supplemental benefits fund of said system. The city may in the future refuse to add new departments or new employees to said system, but shall never discontinue as to any members who are covered into the system. 
(d)	The city secretary is hereby directed to remit monthly to the board of trustees of the state municipal retirement system, at its office in Austin, Texas, as the city's contributions to the supplemental benefits fund of the state municipal retirement system, such percentage of earnings of the above-mentioned employees of said city as may be fixed by the board of trustees of the state municipal retirement system, provided that the rate of contribution to said system shall not exceed one-half of one percent of the earnings of the employees of said city who are covered under said system; and such official shall make for the city such reports as the board of trustees of the state municipal retirement system may prescribe. 
(e)	Participation of the above-mentioned employees in the supplemental benefits fund shall be effective January 1, 1960, or on such later date as the board of trustees of the state municipal retirement system shall declare said secretary to be operative. 
(Code 1996, § 8.302)  
Sec. 2-100. - Participation in supplemental death benefits fund. 
(a)	The city hereby elects to participate in the supplemental death benefits fund of the state municipal retirement system beginning on the first day of the calendar month following written notification to the system of the adoption of this subsection, for the purpose of providing in-service death benefits in the amounts and on the terms provided for in Section XIX of the TMRS Act (Texas Government Code § 854.603) for each of the city's employees who are members of said system, and for the purpose of providing post-retirement death benefits as provided in said Section XIX (Texas Government Code § 854.603) for annuitants whose last covered employment was as an employee of this city. 
(b)	The city is hereby authorized and directed to notify the director of the system of adoption of this subsection, and of the participation of the city in said secretary. 
(c)	Participation of the above-mentioned employees and annuitants in the supplemental death benefits fund shall be effective on January 1, 1980. 
(Code 1996, § 8.305)  
Secs. 2-101—2-128. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-129—2-154. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RECREATION COMMITTEE 
 
Sec. 2-155. - Creation of committee. 
There is hereby created and established a recreation committee for the city. 
(Code 1996, § 1.501)  
Sec. 2-156. - Appointment. 
The recreation committee shall consist of five persons who shall be appointed by the city commission. 
(Code 1996, § 1.502)  
Sec. 2-157. - Terms. 
The members of the recreation committee shall be appointed for two-year terms. 
(Code 1996, § 1.503)  
Sec. 2-158. - Vacancies. 
In the event of a vacancy occurring during the term of a committee member, the remaining committee members and the parks and recreation commissioner shall recommend a new member to fill the remainder of the term subject to the approval of such new member by the city commission. 
(Code 1996, § 1.504)  
Sec. 2-159. - Meetings. 
Immediately after their appointment the committee members shall meet and organize by electing one of their members to be chairperson and one of their members to be secretary of the recreation committee. The committee secretary shall keep accurate minutes of each meeting. The committee shall promptly notify the city commission of the officers elected to serve as chairperson and secretary. Thereafter, the recreation committee shall schedule regular meetings as it deems necessary to fulfill its duties; provided, however, that the committee must meet at least once every three months. The committee must submit a written report to the city commission of its findings and recommendations at least once every three months, or sooner, if the committee deems necessary. 
(Code 1996, § 1.505)  
Sec. 2-160. - Duties. 
The recreation committee shall monitor all of the city's parks and recreation properties, facilities, and equipment. The committee shall also monitor and review the recreation department's programs and activities to assist the city in serving its citizens and those who utilize the city's recreation facilities and activities. It shall provide the city commission, park superintendent, parks and recreation commissioner with a written report of its findings as to the physical conditions of such properties, facilities and equipment along with the committee's recommendations for improvements needed to properly maintain the city's recreation department properties, facilities and equipment. The report shall also include any comments and recommendations the committee may have with regard to the recreation department's programs and activities. Such written report shall be delivered to the city commission, park superintendent, and parks and recreation commissioner at least once every three months, or sooner, if the committee determines it is necessary to make its findings and recommendations known to the city commission. 
(Code 1996, § 1.506; Ord. No. 2011-01, 4-5-2011)  
Secs. 2-161—2-188. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - LAW ENFORCEMENT[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of home rule municipality to provide for reserve police department force, Texas Local Government Code § 341.012. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-189. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-02, § 1, adopted June 7, 2016, repealed § 2-189, which pertained to police reserve force established and derived from Code 1975, § 7-7; Code 1996, art. 8.900; Ord. No. 2012-01, § 1, adopted March 6, 2012.  
Sec. 2-190. - Excessive force. 
It is the policy of the city to prohibit the use of excessive force by the law enforcement agencies within its jurisdiction against any individual engaged in non-violent civil rights demonstrations. The city/county also prohibits the physical barring of any entrance to, or exit from, such a facility within its jurisdiction. 
(Res. No. R05-2013, § 1, 8-6-2013)  
Secs. 2-191—2-218. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RESERVE POLICE OFFICERS 
 
Sec. 2-219. - Compensation. 
The city shall furnish uniforms for said officers at the discretion of the chief of police. 
(Code 1996, § 8.1002)  
Sec. 2-220. - Duties. 
Reserve police officers shall act only in a supplementary capacity to the regular police force of the city, and shall in no case assume the full-time duties of regular police officers without first complying with all requirements for such regular police officers. All reserve police officers will comply with all applicable policies and procedures of the city police department general manual. Failure to do so is grounds for immediate dismissal from the department. 
(Code 1975, § 7-8; Code 1996, § 8.1005)  
Secs. 2-221—2-254. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - POLICEMEN'S CIVIL SERVICE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal civil service for firefighters and police officers, Texas Local Government Code § 143.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-255. - Civil service act adopted. 
(a)	Pursuant to an election held on October 11, 1960, the Civil Service Act, as provided by state law, is hereby adopted as the Policemen's Civil Service Act of the city. All affairs of the police department shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Firefighters' and Police Officers' Civil Service, Texas Local Government Code ch. 143, and all other provisions of state law pertaining thereto. 
(b)	The office of assistant chief of police is hereby abolished. 
(Code 1996 § 8.401; Ord. No. 2010-06, 12-7-2010)  
Sec. 2-256. - Class specifications for each class of position. 
(a)	Upon the recommendation of the director of civil service, the city civil service commission has established and adopted the classification plan herein set forth as the official classification plan of all positions in the classified service of the police department of the city. The city commission reserves to itself the sole right to designate new classes of positions, or combine, divide, alter or abolish existing class's subject only to the provisions of the civil service law of the state and this section. 
(b)	The classified employees of the police department are hereby divided into two classes to be known as patrolman and sergeant. The following positions in the police department which are hereby created shall be classified as follows: 
Grade 	Number of Positions 
Patrolman 	16 
Sergeant 	4 
 
(c)	Class specifications; generally. The civil service commission is hereby directed to prepare and submit to the city commission within 30 days from the final passage of this section for its consideration and adoption, each class specification which shall constitute the official statement of the duties, responsibilities and requirements of each class. The city commission shall establish the number of positions in each class which shall be shown on the annual budget of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 8.403; Ord. No. 2010-06, 12-7-2010; Ord. No. 2013-02, § I, 6-4-2013)  
Secs. 2-257—2-275. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - COURTS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-276. - Municipal court building security fund. 
The municipal court clerk shall collect, in addition to the presently state authorized court costs, an additional court cost, as provided for in the fee schedule, on each and every fine levied by the judge of the municipal court of the city which shall be set aside and used for court security and for such other purposes as authorized by law. 
(Code 1996, art. 1.1500; Ord. No. 96-02, §1, 12-19-1995) 
State Law reference— Authority to establish municipal court building security fund, Texas-C.C.P. art. 102.017.  
Sec. 2-277. - Associate municipal court judge. 
(a)	There is hereby created and established the office of one or more associate municipal court judges for the municipal court of the city. 
(b)	The mayor will determine the need, if any, for one or more associate municipal court judges and will appoint any such judges, subject to the approval of the city commission. 
(c)	The term of any associate municipal court judge will commence as determined by the mayor, subject to the approval of the city commission. The mayor will have the right to terminate any municipal court judge, at any time, with or without cause, subject to the approval of the city commission. 
(d)	Compensation of associate municipal court judges, if any, will be set by the mayor, subject to the approval of the city commission. 
(Code 1996, art. 8.1400; Ord. No. 2004-07, 10-19-2004; Ord. No. 2016-05, 7-19-2016)  
Secs. 2-278—2-302. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MUNICIPAL COURT TECHNOLOGY FUND[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to establish municipal court technology fund, Texas-C.C.P. art. 102.0172. 
 
Sec. 2-303. - Establishment. 
(a)	There is hereby created and established a municipal court technology fund, here-in-now known as the fund, pursuant to Article 102.0172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Texas-C.C.P. art. 102.0172). 
(b)	The fund may be maintained in an interest bearing account and may be maintained in the general revenue account. 
(Code 1996, § 8.1201)  
Sec. 2-304. - Establishment of amount of the fee and assessment and collection. 
(a)	The fee shall be as provided for in the fee schedule. 
(b)	The fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in the municipal court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if: 
(1)	A sentence is imposed on the person; 
(2)	The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community supervision; or 
(3)	The court defers final disposition of the person's case. 
(c)	The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and pay the fee to the municipal treasurer (or other official who discharges or performs the duties of the treasurer) of the city, who shall deposit the fee into the municipal court technology fund. 
(Code 1996, § 8.1202)  
Sec. 2-305. - Designated use of the fund and administration. 
(a)	The fund shall be used only to finance the purchase of technological enhancements for the municipal court of the city, including: 
(1)	Computer systems; 
(2)	Computer networks; 
(3)	Computer hardware; 
(4)	Computer software; 
(5)	Imaging systems; 
(6)	Electronic kiosks; 
(7)	Electronic ticket writers; or 
(8)	Docket management systems. 
(b)	The fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the city commission. 
(Code 1996, § 8.1203; Ord. No. 99-06, 9-26-1999)  
Chapter 6 - ANIMAL CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Treatment of animals, Texas Health and Safety Code § 821.001 et seq.; dangerous dogs generally, Texas Health and Safety Code § 822.001 et seq.; Rabies Control Act, Texas Health and Safety Code § 826.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Keeping of poultry, fowl, and rabbits. 
(a)	Whatever is dangerous to human health, whatever renders the ground, water, air or food a hazard or injury to human health, and the following specific acts, conditions and things, are, each and all of them, declared to constitute nuisances: 
(1)	The keeping, harboring, maintaining or permitting the presence of any poultry or fowls exceeding 12 in number, or rabbits exceeding two in number on any one lot or parcel of land in an unsanitary condition. 
(2)	The keeping of any poultry, fowls or rabbits within any structure in the city, without scraping the floors of such room, coop, box or compartment and thoroughly cleaning the area within which such fowls, poultry or rabbits are kept at least once in every 24 hours and so maintaining such structure and enclosure that no odors are emitted therefrom. 
(3)	The keeping of any chickens, fowls or rabbits within any structure, the interior of which is not whitewashed at least once every six months and/or without spraying an effective disinfectant on the roosting places at least once in each calendar month and/or keeping same covered with deep dry litter to discourage insects, fleas, mites, and flies. 
(4)	Permitting garbage, trash, rubbish, offals, tin cans, decaying animal or vegetable matter, decayed fruits, or other refuse matter to be on any property in this city except when same is deposited within a trash can or other receptacle with a close fitting top thereon placed within easy reach of but not in any alley or street for immediate removal. 
(5)	The deposit of garbage in anything but fly-proof, water-tight receptacles. 
(6)	The disposal of accumulation of any fowl, decaying or putrescent substance of other offensive material dangerous to public health, in or upon any lot, street or highway, or the escape of any gases to such extent that the same or any of them shall be reason of offensive odors, become a source of discomfort to persons living or passing in the vicinity. 
(b)	If any person, within the limits of the city, shall permit or suffer any of the nuisances described in subsection (a) of this section on premises occupied by him or under his control, any police officer or the animal control officer shall order the owner or occupant thereof to remove and abate such nuisance at his expense within a time not to exceed 24 hours. The said order shall be sufficient, if delivered orally to such owner or occupant or to his representative if such owner or occupant cannot then be found within the city or said order may be in writing. When such order is written, it shall be served by a police officer of sanitary inspector by delivering a copy thereof to the owner, occupant or agent of such property. If the owner or agent of the property is unknown or absent, with no known representative or agent, upon whom the notice can be served, then the police officer or sanitary inspector shall post a written or printed notice upon the property or premises setting forth that unless the nuisance is removed or abated within 24 hours, at the expense of the owner or occupant, the nuisance will be abated at the expense of the owner. 
(c)	All poultry, fowls or rabbits removed to abate a nuisance shall be impounded at the city pound. 
(1)	If, within 48 hours after any poultry, fowls or rabbits have been impounded, the owner thereof pays the cost of abating such nuisance and agrees that upon the return of such poultry, fowls or rabbits, as has been removed from his property, he will forthwith dispose of such poultry, fowls or rabbits in a manner which does not violate any ordinance of this city such poultry, fowls or rabbits shall be released to its owner at the city pound. 
(2)	If the owner of poultry, fowls or rabbits so impounded shall fail, neglect or refuse to call at the city pound within 48 hours after the impounding of such poultry, fowls or rabbits or to pay the cost of abating such nuisance and agree to dispose of such poultry, fowls or rabbits in a manner which does not violate any ordinance of this city, the sanitary inspector shall sell the poultry, fowls or rabbits to a poultry dealer and immediately turn the proceeds over to the city auditor, who will credit the amount against the cost of abating the nuisance and pay over the excess, if any, to the owner of such poultry, fowls or rabbits. 
(d)	The term "poultry or fowls," as used in this chapter, means chickens, turkeys, guineas, ducks and geese. 
(e)	There shall be no poultry, fowls or rabbits kept, harbored, maintained or raised within 200 feet of any residence within the city limits. 
(f)	Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter not otherwise provided for shall, upon conviction, be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1-6. Each day shall be considered and constitute a separate violation. 
(Code 1975, § 2-5; Code 1996, art. 2.400)  
Sec. 6-2. - Humane society agreement. 
The mayor is hereby authorized to enter into such agreements as he deems necessary with the nonprofit Houston Humane Society to care for and, when he deems necessary, to euthanize, all stray or abandoned animals found in the city. 
(Code 1996, art. 2.500; Ord. of 7-21-1992; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 6-3. - Dangerous dogs. 
(a)	As used in this chapter, the term "dangerous dog" means a dog that makes an unprovoked attack on a person that causes bodily injury and occurs in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own; or commits unprovoked acts in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog was being kept and that was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the enclosure on its own and those acts cause a person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack and cause bodily injury to that person. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to keep, harbor, or maintain a dangerous dog within the city limits. 
(c)	Whether a dog is dangerous shall be determined as provided in Chapter 822 of the Texas Health and Safety Code (Texas Health and Safety Code § 822.041 et seq.). 
(Code 1996, art. 2.700) 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to regulate dangerous dogs, Texas Health and Safety Code § 822.041 et seq.  
Sec. 6-4. - To run at large, defined. 
As used in this chapter, the term "to run at large" means to go free or be free on private or public property outside of secure enclosure and without leash securely attached to the dog or cat and without such leash being held by a person of competent strength to hold and control said animal, or without such leash being securely fastened in a manner to cause such animal to be unable to leave the property under the control or in the use of the owner or harborer of such animal. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1; Code 1996, § 2.111)  
Secs. 6-5—6-26. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING OF DOGS AND CATS AND CONTROL OF RABIES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipalities to establish rabies control programs, Texas Health and Safety Code § 826.015. 
 
Sec. 6-27. - License and fee. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, or have in his possession any dog or cat, over four months of age, within the corporate limits of the city, unless a license fee for said dog or cat has been paid for the current year. On or before February 1 of each year, each person owning, keeping or having in his possession any dog or cat shall pay an annual license fee, as provided for in the fee schedule, on each dog or cat, which license shall be effective for the ensuing calendar year. 
(Code 1996, § 2.101)  
Sec. 6-28. - Vaccination. 
Before any license is issued for any dog or cat, the owner or person applying for the license shall present to the city secretary a certificate from a licensed veterinarian stating that said dog or cat has been vaccinated against rabies, within a 30 day period preceding licensing. 
(Code 1996, § 2.102)  
Sec. 6-29. - Tags. 
It shall be the duty of each person owning, keeping or having in his possession any dog or cat to keep the city license and vaccination tags for the current year attached to the collar or harness of the dog or cat for which it was issued. 
(Code 1996, § 2.103)  
Sec. 6-30. - Duty of owner or harborer of any dog or cat. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or harborer of any dog or cat to permit said dog or cat to run at large within the city limits. 
(Code 1996, § 2.104)  
Sec. 6-31. - Duty of officers to impound. 
It shall be the duty of the city health officer, the chief of police, or any police officer of the city to cause to be taken up or impounded all dogs or cats loose or at large in violation of the terms of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1; Code 1996, § 2.105)  
Sec. 6-32. - Right to redeem. 
The person entitled to the possession of any dog or cat taken up and delivered to the city pound, upon proper application within 72 hours from time of impounding of said dog or cat, shall be entitled to have said dog or cat delivered to him, after applying for and receiving a license as provided in sections 6-27 and 6-28, and the payment of a impounding fee as provided for in the fee schedule. 
(Code 1975, § 2-1; Code 1996, §2.106; Ord. of 11-19-1991(01))  
Sec. 6-33. - Dogs or cats not redeemed. 
It shall be the duty of the city to destroy or offer for sale all dogs or cats not redeemed within 72 hours after impoundment. No dog or cat shall be sold for less than the impoundment and kennel fees. 
(Code 1996, § 2.107)  
Sec. 6-34. - Quarantining of dogs or cats exposed to rabies. 
Any dog or cat that has rabies or symptoms thereof, or that is suspected of having rabies, or that has been exposed to rabies, shall at once be released by its possessor for disposal or confinement in a veterinary hospital approved by the city health officer; or immediately and securely confined by tying with a chain of good quality and kept there under the supervision of the department of health for a period of not less than 60 days or as otherwise directed by the health officer. 
(Code 1996, § 2.108)  
Sec. 6-35. - Quarantining of rabid dogs or cats or animals which have bitten persons. 
Every dog or cat that has rabies or symptoms thereof, or any animal that bites, scratches or otherwise attacks any person, shall be immediately and securely confined by the owner, or one having custody, by tying with a chain of good quality for a period of ten days in such a place that no person or animal may be bitten by it, and there held subject to inspection from time to time so as to be able to determine whether said animal is affected by rabies; or said animal shall be quarantined and held for a like time in any veterinary hospital approved by the city health officer, or shall be held at the city pound for ten days, after which time the dog or cat shall be killed if in quarantine at the city pound. 
(Code 1996, § 2.109)  
Sec. 6-36. - Keeping of dogs and cats. 
(a)	No person shall, within 500 feet of a residence, keep or maintain at one place within the corporate limits of the city more than two dogs or two cats, except that puppies or kittens less than three months of age when kept with their mother shall not be included. 
(b)	Any person who shall harbor or keep on his premises or in or about his premises or premises under his control any dog or animal of the dog kind, or any cat or animal of the cat kind, which, by loud barking, howling, or crying shall cause the peace and quiet of the neighborhood or the occupants of adjacent premises to be disturbed, or reasonably liable or be disturbed, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)	All pens, yards, buildings, and enclosures used for confining dogs or cats shall have all litter and droppings from such dogs or cats collected every other day and stored in a fly-tight container and hauled away at intervals of not to exceed four days. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally release a dog or cat within the limits of the city. 
(e)	No person shall interfere with, hinder, or molest any agent of the city or its agents except as provided in the ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1975, §2-2; Code 1996, art. 2.200)  
Secs. 6-37—6-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CONTROL OF LIVESTOCK 
 
Sec. 6-61. - Distance requirements for keeping cows. 
No person shall keep or milk more than one cow at any one place within the corporate limits of the city, which place is located closer than 100 feet to a house on the adjoining property, except that calves under six months of age when kept with their mothers shall not be included. This section shall not apply to cows, kept on acreage, for which a permit has been secured from the city commission to keep same within the city limits. Such permit may be granted by the city commission without cost, upon written application therefor, and shall be revocable at the will of the city commission on its own motion. 
(Code 1996, § 2.301)  
Sec. 6-62. - Dairy stables for more than one cow. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to build, erect, establish, operate or maintain within the limits of the city any dairy or cow stable where more than one cow is kept or milked, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city commission. 
(Code 1996, § 2.302)  
Sec. 6-63. - Keeping of horses, mules, jacks, jennets, goats, sheep or bulls at one place. 
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain, at one place, within the limits of the city any one or more of the following animals: horses, mules, jacks, jennets, goats, sheep and bulls. This section shall not apply to livestock, kept on acreage, for which a permit has been secured from the city commission to keep same within the city limits. Such permit may be granted by the city commission without cost, upon written application therefor, and shall be revocable at the will of the city commission on its own motion. 
(Code 1996, § 2.303)  
Sec. 6-64. - Disturbances by stabled animals. 
Any person who shall stable or keep a horse, mule, or any other animal in the city limits, in such a manner that said animal, by stamping or kicking, creates such a noise as shall be a disturbance to those living in the vicinity, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1996, § 2.304)  
Sec. 6-65. - Breeding. 
It shall be unlawful to breed, permit or cause to be bred any livestock within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 2.305)  
Sec. 6-66. - Tying on lots. 
Any person who shall stake, tie or hobble any animal whatsoever on any lot of which he is not the owner, or on any lot or block within the city limits in such a manner as to allow such animals to go upon the adjacent sidewalk or street, shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1996, § 2.306)  
Sec. 6-67. - Hitching to trees in streets or public places. 
Any person who ties or fastens any animal to any shade tree, or to the box around any tree planted or growing in any street or public place, shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1996, § 2.307)  
Sec. 6-68. - Display or sale of livestock on streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any street of the city as a place on which to display horses or other livestock for sale or to sell the same on said street in any manner that will create an annoyance, or which will create any inconveniences or nuisances to the public in the free and uninterrupted use of said street or streets. 
(Code 1996, § 2.308)  
Sec. 6-69. - Breaking horses or mules on streets. 
Any person who breaks, or attempts to break upon the streets, or who exercises in harness, or attempts to exercise in harness, any wild or unruly horse or mule upon the streets shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1996, § 2.309)  
Sec. 6-70. - Horse racing in streets, etc. 
Any person who shall run, or be in any way concerned in running, any horse race in, along or across any public square or street in this city shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1996, § 2.310)  
Sec. 6-71. - Running at large. 
The running at large of horses, mules, jacks, jennets, cattle, sheep, goats, bulls and hogs within the city limits is hereby declared to be a nuisance and shall be unlawful and constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1996, § 2.311)  
Sec. 6-72. - Duty of officers to impound. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police, or any police officer of the city, to cause all animals running at large in violation of this article to be impounded. 
(Code 1996, § 2.312)  
Sec. 6-73. - Right to redeem. 
The person entitled to the possession of any animal impounded by the city, upon proper application, shall be entitled to possession of such animal provided he has paid the city an impounding fee for each animal redeemed, and has paid any and all expense incurred by the city due to the impounding of said animal. The impounding fee shall be in an amount as established by the city commission from time to time. 
(Code 1996, § 2.313)  
Sec. 6-74. - Keeping of hogs and goats and sheep. 
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain within the limits of the city one or more hogs, swine, pigs or goats; provided that this section shall not apply to milch goats for which a permit has been secured from the city health officer to keep same within the city limits, which permit shall be revocable by the city health officer at any time the premises upon which such goats are not maintained in a sanitary condition. This section shall not apply to hogs, and goats, kept on acreage, for which a permit has been secured from the city commission to keep same within the city limits. Such permit may be granted by the city commission without cost, upon written application therefor, and shall be revocable at the will of the city commission on its own motion. 
(Code 1996, § 2.314)  
Sec. 6-75. - Temporary possession. 
Nothing in this article shall prohibit the temporary possession of livestock in the hands of packing houses or other slaughter houses, nor shall this article prohibit the temporary exhibition of livestock at stock shows. However, these exemptions shall not relieve the persons in charge of such livestock from the operation of other laws and ordinances of the city relative to the sanitary conditions and the noise from said livestock. 
(Code 1975, § 2-3; Code 1996, § 2.316)  
Secs. 6-76—6-93. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - WILD ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 6-94. - When unlawful to keep wild animals. 
It shall be unlawful within the city limits for any person to possess, keep, permit, suffer, cause or allow any wild animal within any residence or within 300 feet of any residence or building used for human habitation. 
(Code 1996, § 2.601)  
Sec. 6-95. - Wild animal defined. 
The term "wild animal" means and includes any mammal, amphibian, reptile or fowl which is of a species which is wild by nature, and of a species which, due to size, vicious nature or other characteristic, is dangerous to human beings. Such animals include, but are not limited to, lions, tigers, leopards, panthers, bears, wolves, raccoons, skunks (whether deodorized or not), apes, gorillas, monkeys of a species whose average adult weight is ten pounds or more, foxes, elephants, rhinoceroses, alligators, crocodiles, and all forms of poisonous reptiles. The term "wild animals" does not include gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, mice or rabbits. 
(Code 1996, § 2.602)  
Sec. 6-96. - Violation and penalty. 
Any person who shall possess, keep, permit, suffer, cause or allow any wild animal within any residence or within 300 feet of any residence or building used for human habitation in violation of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1-6. Each day any such violation of this article occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the keeping of more than one of such wild animals in violation hereof shall be a separate offense for each such wild animal. 
(Code 1996, § 2.603)  
Sec. 6-97. - Impoundment of wild animals. 
The animal control officer shall seize all animals found in violation of this article and impound all such animals at the city pound or such place as is suitable. The animal control officer or any police officer or any employee of the city as may be designated by the animal control officer shall have the right to enter any building to seize such wild animal in violation of this article upon the consent of any adult occupant of such building or the owner of such building or such person who has the right of possession of such building, or under a warrant issued by a magistrate. 
(Code 1996, § 2.604)  
Sec. 6-98. - Redemption of impounded animals. 
Upon a showing to the animal control officer or his authorized representative of clear and convincing proof of right of possession of any such impounded animal, such person may redeem such animal within seven days of the date of impoundment upon payment of the fees set out in section 6-99, provided that: 
(1)	Such animal is not infected or believed to be infected with rabies or any other disease. 
(2)	Such person submits to the animal control officer a sworn affidavit setting out the location where the wild animal will be kept, and that he will not permit, suffer, cause or allow such animal to be within any residence or within 300 feet of any residence in the city. 
(Code 1996, § 2.605)  
Sec. 6-99. - Impoundment fees. 
The fees, as provided for in the fee schedule, shall be charged for impoundment and boarding of wild animals. 
(Code 1996, § 2.606)  
Sec. 6-100. - Disposition of unredeemed animals. 
If such wild animal is not redeemed within seven days of the date of initial impoundment, the animal control officer shall be authorized to offer such animal to any public zoo or medical institutions using such animals for research. If such wild animal is not accepted by such public zoo or medical institution within 30 days of the date of initial impoundment, the animal control officer is hereby authorized to destroy any such animal. 
(Code 1996, § 2.607)  
Sec. 6-101. - Applicability of article. 
The provision of this article shall not apply to the keeping of wild animals for treatment in a facility open and operated by a veterinarian licensed by the state. 
(Code 1996, § 2.608)  
Sec. 6-102. - Use of live vaccine prohibited. 
No person shall vaccinate, or attempt to vaccinate, any wild animal against rabies by the use of live vaccine. 
(Code 1996, § 2.609)  
Sec. 6-103. - Possession of animals vaccinated with live vaccine prohibited. 
No person shall possess, keep, permit or allow any wild animal within the city if such animal has been vaccinated against rabies with the use of live vaccine. 
(Code 1996, § 2.610)  
Secs. 6-104—6-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - DOG PARK[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Resolution No. R02-2016, §§ 1—4, adopted Jan. 5, 2016, did not specify manner of inclusion, hence, codification as art. V, §§ 6-121—6-214 was at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 6-121. - [Dog park established.] 
That there is hereby established a dog park for use of the citizens of the City of Galena Park to exercise and train their dogs which shall be called the "Galena Park Dog Park" and shall be located on the city's property at 1302 Keene Street, Galena Park, Texas 77547. 
(Res. No. R02-2016, § 1, 1-5-2016)  
Sec. 6-122. - [Operation, control and maintenance.] 
That the director of parks and recreation department shall be responsible for the general operation, control and maintenance of the dog park subject to the approval of the city commission. 
(Res. No. R02-2016, § 2, 1-5-2016)  
Sec. 6-123. - [Rules and regulations.] 
That the following rules and regulations are hereby adopted governing the use and operation of the dog park, to-wit: 
(1)	Hours of operation. The Galena Park Dog Park shall be open daily from 7:00 a.m. and shall close at 9:00 p.m. 
(2)	Children at the dog park. Children under the age of 16 years old and under are to be accompanied by an adult and strictly supervised at all times. 
(3)	Dog owners are responsible for the actions and behavior of their dogs at all times while at the dog park. 
(4)	Dogs are required to be leashed when entering and exiting the dog park. 
(5)	Owners are required to accompany their dogs inside the fenced area, carry a leash, have their dog within sight and under voice control at all times. 
(6)	Items prohibited from dog park—Alcoholic beverages, glass containers, food of any kind, female dogs in season, aggressive dogs, sick dogs, dogs four months of age and under, and pets other than dogs are prohibited in the dog park. 
(7)	At the first sign of aggression, dogs are to be leashed and immediately removed from the dog park. 
(8)	Limit of two dogs per adult. No person shall be allowed to have more than two dogs in the dog park at the same time. 
(9)	All dogs shall meet vaccination and licensing requirements of the City of Galena Park as set forth in the City's Code of Ordinances at Article 2.100, Section 2.101 and Section 2.102. All dogs must display a valid and up-to-date rabies vaccination tag while at the dog park. Owners are required to carry a copy of the dog's vaccination certificate. 
(10)	Dog owners are responsible for picking up after their dogs and disposing of feces or waste from their dog. 
(11)	A large dog is one whose weight is more than 20 pounds and a small dog is one whose weight is less than 20 pounds. 
(Res. No. R02-2016, § 3, 1-5-2016)  
Sec. 6-124. - Enforcement. 
The director of parks and recreation of his designees shall be responsible for the enforcement of the foregoing rules and regulations governing the dog park and are authorized to order the removal of any owner and their dogs for the violation of such rules and regulations. 
(Res. No. R02-2016, § 4, 1-5-2016)  
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— General enforcement authority of municipalities for preservation of health, property and good government, Texas Local Government Code § 54.001 et seq.; International Residential Code adopted as municipal residential building code throughout the state, Texas Local Government Code § 214.212; International Building Code adopted as municipal commercial building code throughout the state, Texas Local Government Code § 214.216. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Heating and air conditioning work. 
The city secretary shall collect an inspection and permit fee at the time of issuing the permit in accordance with the schedule as provided for in the fee schedule. 
(Code 1996, art. 3.900; Ord. of 11-19-1991, § 1)  
Sec. 10-2. - Underground tanks. 
The fee for the installation and removal of underground tanks shall be as provided for in the fee schedule. 
(Code 1996, art. 3.1100; Ord. of 11-19-1991)  
Sec. 10-3. - Enforcement and citation authority. 
(a)	The building inspector, code enforcement officer, or other designee of the mayor are hereby authorized to enforce within the city the provisions of this chapter and the state minimum codes adopted herein. 
(b)	The building inspectors, code enforcement officer, their officers and assistants, or other designee of the mayor are hereby authorized to issue citations for violations of this chapter. The citations shall contain the following information: 
(1)	Name of alleged violator; 
(2)	Location of alleged violation; 
(3)	Description of alleged violation; 
(4)	Date violation observed; 
(5)	Name of issuing officer; 
(6)	Time and date to appear before court; and 
(7)	Name and address of municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 10-4. - Required. 
Unless otherwise exempted by this Code, the planning and zoning appendix, or a technical code as adopted by reference in this Code, no person shall construct, develop, reconstruct, alter, change, restore, remove, relocate, demolish or perform any building, construction, electrical, or plumbing work as covered by this chapter on any building or structure in the city without first obtaining a building permit as issued by the city.  
Sec. 10-5. - Fire hydrants. 
Contractors shall pay a deposit in an amount as established by the city commission from time to time for each water meter placed on a fire hydrant. Upon return of the water meter, the contractor's deposit shall be returned. 
(Code 1996, App. A, § 12.200; Ord. No. 2009-04, § 1, 6-2-2009)  
Sec. 10-6. - Contractor fees. 
(a)	All contractors performing work within the city, except for state licensed plumbing contractors, shall be required to register, prior to performing any work in the city by filing an application with the city secretary and paying a registration fee per year in an amount established by the city commission from time to time. 
(b)	All contractors, including plumbing contractors, shall provide the city secretary proof of public liability insurance in an amount of not less than $100,000.00 per occurrence, with an aggregate of $300,000.00 maximum per occurrence upon registering to perform work in the city. 
(Res. No. R15-2012, § 2, 11-20-2012)  
Secs. 10-7—10-26. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODES 
 
Sec. 10-27. - Codes adopted. 
(a)	The following named codes are hereby approved, adopted and incorporated by reference into this Code, to-wit: 
(1)	2009 International Building Code. 
(2)	2009 international Residential Code. 
(3)	2009 International Energy Efficiency Code. 
(4)	2009 International Property Maintenance Code. 
(5)	2009 Uniform Mechanical Code. 
(6)	2009 Uniform Plumbing Code. 
(7)	2011 National Electrical Code. 
(8)	2009 International Fire Code. 
(b)	Any subsequent editions or amendment to any of the codes adopted in subsection (a) of this section may be adopted by resolution of the city commission. 
(Code 1996, § 3.101; Ord. of 6-5-1990; Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 9-18-2012)  
Sec. 10-28. - Building permit fees. 
The city secretary shall collect an inspection and permit fee at the time of issuing a building permit for any additions or structural alterations done on any structures in the city, in accordance with the fee schedule, as provided for in the fee schedule, based upon the valuation of the work done on each structure. 
(Code 1996, art. 3.200; Ord. of 11-19-1991)  
Sec. 10-29. - Rules of construction for technical codes. 
(a)	Wherever the word "municipality" is used within the technical codes which are adopted by reference in this article, it shall be held to mean the city. 
(b)	Wherever the term "chief appointing authority" is used within the technical codes which are adopted by reference in this article, it shall be held to mean the city. 
(c)	Wherever the term "corporation counsel" or "legal counsel" is used within the technical codes which are adopted by reference in this article, it shall be held to mean the city attorney. 
(d)	Where reference is made to the duties of certain officials named within the technical codes which are adopted by reference in this article, then that designated official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in said technical code shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of that technical code are concerned.  
Sec. 10-30. - Interpretations. 
The building inspector, code enforcement officer, or other designee of the mayor is hereby authorized to render interpretations of this Code and the adopted technical codes, and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of their provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this chapter. Such policies and procedures shall not have the force and effect of law and shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this Code or in the adopted technical codes. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 10-31. - Administrative liability. 
No officer, agent, or employee of the city charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter and acting in good faith without malice in the discharge of those duties, shall render himself personally liable for any damage that may occur to any person or property as a result of any act required or permitted, or by reason of any act or omission, in the discharge of his duties under this chapter, and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of his duties.  
Sec. 10-32. - Referenced codes and standards. 
The technical codes and standards referenced in this Code shall be considered part of the requirements of this Code to the prescribed extent of each such reference. Where differences occur between provisions of this Code and the referenced technical codes and standards, the more stringent provisions shall apply.  
Secs. 10-33—10-52. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DANGEROUS STRUCTURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of governing body to appoint building and standards commission to hear and determine cases regarding the materials or methods used to construct a building or improvement and any dangerously damaged or deteriorated buildings or improvements, Texas Local Government Code § 54.031 et seq.; municipal authority regarding substandard buildings and structures, Texas Local Government Code § 214.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10-53. - Appointment of members, purpose. 
(a)	The city commission shall appoint a dangerous building board which shall consist of five members, none of whom shall hold any other public office or position in the city. The five members of the board shall be real property tax payers of the city. The mayor and city secretary shall serve as ex officio members of the board. The board shall elect its chairperson from among the appointive members. 
(b)	The purpose and object of said dangerous building board is to act as an appellate body to handle appeals from the building official's action declaring a building or structure dangerous and a nuisance requiring repair, vacation or demolition. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 1, 4-16-2013; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 10-54. - Office. 
A member of the dangerous building board can be removed for cause on a written charge. Before a decision regarding removal is made, the Commission must hold a public hearing on the matter if requested by the dangerous building board member subject to the removal action. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 2, 4-16-2013)  
Sec. 10-55. - Proceedings of the dangerous building board. 
The dangerous building board shall adopt rules necessary to conduct its affairs, and in keeping with the provisions of this article. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairperson, or in his absence, the acting chairperson. The acting chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public. The board shall keep minutes of the proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such facts, and it shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be a public record and shall be immediately filed in the office of the building official and city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 3, 4-16-2013)  
Sec. 10-56. - Appeals, hearings notice. 
(a)	Any person aggrieved, or any official or department of the governing body of the city affected by any decision or judgment of the building official concerning interpretation or administration of this article may appeal such decision or judgment to the dangerous building board. Such appeals shall be taken within 30 days by filing with the building official and with the dangerous building board a notice of appeal accompanied by a fee as established by the city commission, specifying the grounds thereof. The building official shall forthwith transmit to the board, all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(b)	The dangerous building board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. At the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 4, 4-16-2013)  
Sec. 10-57. - Stay of proceedings. 
Any appeal to the board stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action of the building official appealed from; provided, however, after the notice of appeal is filed with the building official, if the building official, certifies in writing that a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by the dangerous building board or by a court of record on application. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 5, 4-16-2013)  
Sec. 10-58. - Powers and duties of the dangerous building board. 
The dangerous building board shall have the authority and duty to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirements, decision or determination made by the building official in the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 6, 4-16-2013)  
Sec. 10-59. - Decisions of the dangerous building board. 
(a)	The dangerous building board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken 
(b)	The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the building official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this article, or to affect any variation in the application of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 7, 4-16-2013)  
Sec. 10-60. - Appeals from the dangerous building board. 
Any person or any board, taxpayer, department, board or bureau of the city aggrieved by any decision of the dangerous building board may seek review by a court of record of such decision, in the manner provided by the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 8, 5-7-2013)  
Sec. 10-61. - Intent. 
(a)	It is the intent of this article that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the board only on appeal from the decision of the building official and that recourse from the decisions of the board shall be to the courts as provided by the laws of the state. 
(b)	It is further the intent of this article that the duties of the city commission in connection with this article shall not include hearing and deciding questions of interpretation and enforcement that may arise. The procedure for deciding such questions shall be as stated in this section and this article. Under this article, the city commission shall have only the duties of: 
(1)	Considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments or the repeal of this article, as provided by law; and 
(2)	Establishing a schedule of fees and charges as stated in this article. 
(c)	The city commission shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses, and a collection procedure for appeals pertaining to this article. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 9, 4-16-2013)  
Sec. 10-62. - Dangerous buildings. 
(a)	Compliance with section and construction contrary to Code. 
(1)	No building or structure shall be constructed, altered, or removed, nor shall the equipment for the operation of a building, structure, or premises be constructed, installed, altered, or removed, except in conformity with generally accepted good practice and the provisions of all applicable building codes and ordinances of the city. 
(2)	Where construction or other work is being done contrary to the provisions of this Code or to the building code, or is being done in an unsafe or dangerous manner, the building official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on the person engaged in doing or causing such work to be done, and such person shall forthwith stop the work until authorized to recommence it by the building official. 
(b)	Defining "dangerous buildings," and declaring same as nuisances; providing standards for repair, vacation, or demolition; setting forth the administrative responsibility in such matters; and providing a penalty for violation of such standards. 
(1)	Defects. All buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects shall be deemed dangerous buildings: 
a.	Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base. 
b.	Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show 33 percent or more of damage or deterioration of the supporting members or 50 percent of damage or deterioration of nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or covering. 
c.	Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used. 
d.	Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have become dangerous to life, safety, morals, or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the people of the city. 
e.	Those which are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary, or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation, or are likely to cause sickness or disease, so as to work injury to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of those occupying such building. 
f.	Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health, morals, safety or general welfare of human beings who live or may live therein. 
g.	Those which have inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes, or other means of communication. 
h.	Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure members of the public or property. 
i.	Those which because of their condition are unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people of this city. 
j.	Those buildings existing in violation of any provisions of this Code, the building code, or other ordinances of this city. 
(2)	Standards for repair, vacation or demolition. 
a.	The following standards shall be followed in substance by the building inspectors and the building official in ordering repair or vacation or demolition: 
1.	If the dangerous building can reasonably be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this subsection, it shall be ordered repaired. 
2.	If the dangerous building is in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated. 
b.	In any case where a dangerous building is 50 percent damaged, decayed or deteriorated, it shall be repaired or demolished. In all cases where a building cannot be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the provisions of this subsection, it shall be demolished. In all cases where a dangerous building is a fire hazard existing or erected in violation of the terms of this subsection or of this Code, or of the building code, or of any other ordinance, or of any other requirement of law of the state, it shall be repaired or demolished. 
(3)	Dangerous buildings; nuisances. All dangerous buildings within the terms of subsection (b)(1) of this section are hereby declared to be public nuisances, and shall be repaired, vacated and repaired, or vacated and demolished as hereinbefore and hereinafter provided. 
(4)	Duties of building inspectors. The building inspectors shall: 
a.	Inspect any building, wall, or structure about which complaints are filed by any person to the effect that a building, wall or structure is or may be existing in violation of this section. 
b.	Inspect any building, wall, or structure reported (as hereinafter provided for) by the fire, health or police departments of this city as probably existing in violation of the terms of this section. 
c.	Inspect buildings in the city to determine whether they are dangerous buildings within the terms of subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
d.	Notify in writing the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent and all other persons having an interest in said building as shown by the deed records of the clerk of the county where the land is located, of any building found by him to be a dangerous building within the standards set forth in subsection (b)(1) of this section that: 
1.	The owner must vacate, vacate and repair, or vacate and demolish said building in accordance with the terms of the notice and this section. 
2.	The occupant or lessee must vacate said building or may have it repaired in accordance with the notice and remain in possession. 
3.	The mortgagee, agent or other persons having an interest in said building as shown by the deed records of the county clerk of the county where the land is located may, at his own risk, repair, vacate, or demolish or have such work done; provided that any person notified under this section to repair, vacate and repair, or vacate and demolish any building shall be given such reasonable time, not exceeding 30 days, unless, in the judgment of the building official after inspection thereof, it is determined to be necessary to extend such time to do or have done the work or act required by the notice provided for herein. Said building official shall specify, in writing, an additional notice of the date to which said extension is made. 
e.	Set forth in the notice provided for in subsection (b)(4)h of this section, provide a description of the building or structure deemed unsafe, a statement of the particulars which make the building or structure a dangerous building and an order requiring the same to be put in such condition as to comply with the terms provided for above. 
f.	Report to the building official any noncompliance with the notice provided for in subsections (b)(4) and (b)(5) of this section. 
g.	Appear at all hearings conducted by the building official and testify as to the conditions existing in the dangerous building. 
h.	If the building inspector completes inspection of a building and find it to be inherently dangerous and in the opinion of such inspector constitutes a nuisance per se, upon approval of such finding ex parte, by the building official, he shall place a notice on such building forthwith reading as follows: 
"THIS BUILDING HAS BEEN FOUND TO BE A DANGEROUS BUILDING BY THE PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT OF THE CITY OF GALENA PARK. THIS NOTICE IS TO REMAIN ON THIS BUILDING UNTIL IT IS REPAIRED, VACATED AND REPAIRED, OR VACATED AND DEMOLISHED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE NOTICE WHICH HAS BEEN GIVEN TO THE OWNER, OCCUPANT, LESSEE, MORTGAGEE, OR AGENT OF THIS BUILDING, AND ALL OTHER PERSONS HAVING AN INTEREST IN SAID BUILDING AS SHOWN BY THE DEED RECORDS OF THE COUNTY CLERK OF THE COUNTY IN WHICH THE LAND IS LOCATED. IT IS UNLAWFUL TO REMOVE THIS NOTICE UNTIL SUCH NOTICE IS COMPLIED WITH." 
Provided, however, the approval of said building official and the posting of said notice shall not be construed to deprive any person entitled thereto by this subsection to the notice and hearing prescribed herein. 
(5)	Duties of building official. The building official shall: 
a.	Supervise all inspections required by this subsection and cause the building inspectors to make inspections and perform all the duties required of them by this section. Upon receiving a complaint or report from any source that a dangerous building exists in the city, he shall cause an inspection to be made forthwith. If the building official deems it necessary to the performance of his duties and responsibilities imposed herein, he may request an inspection and report be made to him by the fire department of the city, by the police department, the health department or by any other city department. 
b.	Upon receipt of a report of the building inspection division of the public works department as provided for in subsection (b)(4) of this section, give written notice to the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, agent and all other persons having an interest in said building as shown by the deed records of the county clerk where the land is located, to appear before him on the date specified in the notice to show cause why the building or structure reported to be a dangerous building should not be repaired, vacated and repaired, or vacated and demolished in accordance with the statement of particulars set forth in the building official's notice provided for in subsection (b)(4) of this section. 
c.	Hold a hearing and hear such testimony as the inspectors of the building inspection division of the public works department who have inspected the premises of the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, or any other person having an interest in said building as shown by the deed records of the county where the land is located, shall offer relative to the dangerous building. 
d.	Make written findings of fact from the testimony offered pursuant to this subsection (b)(5) as to whether or not the building in question is a dangerous building within the terms of subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
e.	Issue an order based on findings of fact made pursuant to this subsection (b)(5), commanding the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, agent, and all other persons having an interest in said building as shown by the deed records of the county clerk where the land is located, to repair, vacate and repair, or vacate and demolish any building found to be a dangerous building within the terms of this subsection and provided that any person so notified shall have the privilege of either repairing or vacating, or repairing such building if such repair will comply with the building code of the city, or with other applicable ordinances of the city, or the owner or any person having an interest in said building as shown by the land records of the county clerk where the land is located may vacate and demolish said dangerous building at his own risk to prevent the acquiring by the city of a lien against the land where the dangerous building stands, as provided in this subsection (b)(5). 
f.	If the owner, occupant, mortgagee, or lessee fails to comply with the order or extension thereof, provided for in this subsection (b)(5), within ten days, the building official shall cause such building or structure to be repaired, vacated and repaired, or vacated and demolished, as the facts may warrant, under the standards provided for in subsection (b)(2) of this section; and the building official shall certify the charge for such repair, vacation or demolition to the tax assessor-collector of the city as a charge which shall constitute a lien on the real property affected; said charge shall be a lien upon said property and shall be enforced in the same manner as tax assessments and shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per annum until paid. 
g.	Report to the city attorney the names of all persons not complying with the order provided for in this subsection (b)(5). 
(6)	Violations; penalty for disregarding notices or orders. 
a.	The owner of any dangerous building who shall fail to comply with any notice or order to repair, vacate or demolish said building by any person authorized by this subsection to give such notice, or order, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not to exceed $200.00 for each offense, and each day's failure to so comply shall constitute a separate offense. 
b.	The occupant or lessee in possession, who fails to comply with any notice to vacate, and anyone having an interest in said building as shown by the deed records of the county clerk where the land is located, and under a legal duty to repair, who fails to repair said building in accordance with any notice given as provided for in this subsection, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not to exceed $200.00 for each offense, and each day's failure to so comply shall constitute a separate offense. 
c.	Any person removing the notice provided for in subsection (b)(4) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not exceeding $200.00 for each offense. 
(7)	Duties of the city attorney. The city attorney shall: 
a.	Prosecute all persons failing to comply with the terms of the notices provided for in subsection (b)(4) of this section and the order provided for in subsection (b)(5) of this section. 
b.	Appear at all hearings before the building official in regard to dangerous buildings. 
c.	Bring suit to collect all municipal charges, liens, or costs incurred by the building official in preparing or causing to be vacated or demolished dangerous buildings. 
d.	Take such other legal action as is necessary to carry out the terms and provisions of this subsection (b)(7). 
(8)	Emergencies. In cases where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to the health, life or safety of any person unless a dangerous building is immediately repaired, vacated and repaired, or vacated and demolished, the building inspector shall report such facts to the building official and the building official shall cause the immediate repair, vacation or demolition of such dangerous building. The cost of such emergency repair, vacation or demolition of such dangerous building shall be collected in the same manner as provided for in subsection (b)(5) of this section. 
(9)	Where owner absent from the city. In cases, except emergency cases, where the owner, occupant, lessee, or mortgagee is absent from the city, all notices or orders provided for herein shall be sent by registered mail or certified mail to the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee and all other persons having an interest in said building as shown by the deed records of the county clerk where the land is located, to the last-known address of each, and a copy of such notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the dangerous building to which it relates. Such posting and mailing shall be deemed adequate service. 
(10)	Administrative liability. No officer, agent, or employee of the city shall render himself personally liable for any damage that may occur to the person or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this subsection. 
(11)	Duty to report dangerous buildings. It shall be the duty of all city employees to make a report, in writing, to the building official or to any building inspector of the building inspection division of the public works department of the city of all buildings or structures which they believe are, may be, or are suspected to be dangerous buildings within the terms of this subsection. Such reports are to be made within a reasonable time after the discovery of such buildings or structures. 
(Ord. No. 2013-01, § 9, 4-16-2013)  
Sec. 10-63. - Order to remove; city's remedy on default. 
(a)	Whenever in the opinion of the city commission any building, fence, shed, awning or any erection of any kind, or any part thereof, is liable to fall down and endanger persons or property or is a dangerous structure, the city commission shall order the owner, agent, or occupant of the dangerous structure or the premises on which it stands or is attached to take down and remove the same or any part thereof within ten days after notice is served or published as directed by order of the city commission. 
(b)	In the event the owner, agent or occupant shall fail or refuse to remove the same after notice is served or published as directed by order of the city commission, then the city commission shall have the power to remove the same at the expense of the city on account of the owners of the property or premises and assess the expense on the land on which it stood or to which it was attached in such manner as may be directed in the order of the city commission. 
(c)	All buildings or structures which are structurally unsafe, or not provided with adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use constitute a hazard to safety, or health or public welfare, by reason of inadequate maintenance, or dilapidation, or obsolescence, or fire hazard, or abandonment, are hereby declared to be dangerous structures. All such dangerous structures are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in accordance with the procedure specified in this article. 
(Code 1996, § 3.301)  
Sec. 10-64. - Notice; service. 
(a)	The building official shall examine or cause to be examined every building or structure or portion thereof reported as dangerous, damaged, or unsafe and, if such is found to be an unsafe or dangerous structure under the provisions of this article or other effective ordinance of the city, the building official shall give the owner of such building or structure written notice stating the defects found to exist in violation of this article or in violation of any other effective ordinance of the city. 
(b)	The notice from the building official shall require the owner or person in charge of the building or premises to commence either the required repairs or improvements or demolition and removal of the building or structure or portions thereof within 15 days from the date such notice is received by the owner or person in charge of such building or premises, and all such work shall be completed within 90 days from date of notice, unless otherwise stipulated by the building official. Said notice shall also require that the owner be required to submit proof of the scope of any work that may be required and the time it will take to reasonably complete the work. Such notice may also require the building, structure, or portion thereof to be vacated forthwith and not occupied until the required repairs and improvements are completed, inspected, and approved by the building official. 
(c)	Service of such notice may be by certified mail or personal service. 
(d)	The building official shall cause to be posted at each entrance at such building a notice to read: "DO NOT ENTER. UNSAFE TO OCCUPY. BUILDING OFFICIAL, City of Galena Park." Such notice shall remain posted until the required repairs, demolition, or removal are completed. Such notice shall not be removed without written permission of the building official and no person shall enter the building except for the purpose of making the required repairs or demolishing the building. 
(e)	In case the owner shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the notice to repair, rehabilitate or to demolish said building or structure or portion thereof, the building official may proceed to prosecute said owner or person in charge of said building or structure as a violator of the provisions of this article or other applicable chapter of this Code or ordinance of the city. 
(f)	In case the owner shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with the notice to repair, rehabilitate or to demolish and remove said building or structure or portion thereof, the building official shall notify the city commission of such fact and the city commission may order the building official to proceed with the work specified in such notice or order such building or structure demolished or removed and may cause the cost of such work to be paid and levied as a special assessment against the property at a public hearing before the city commission. 
(g)	The city commission shall give notice to the owner or person in charge of such building or structure of the public hearing before the city commission and the order directing the building official to proceed with the work and assessing the cost thereof against the property. The city shall also make a diligent effort to discover each mortgagee and lienholder having an interest in the building or property and shall send to each a notice containing: 
(1)	An identification of the building and the property on which it is located; 
(2)	A description of the violation of municipal standards that is present at the building; 
(3)	A statement that the municipality will vacate, secure, remove or demolish the building or relocate the occupants of the building if the ordered action is not taken within a reasonable time; and 
(4)	A statement of the date, time, and place that the hearing before the board will take place. 
(h)	Notice of the public hearing to be held before the city commission shall be given by causing a notice of such hearing to be sent by certified mail with receipt return requested, or by delivery by the United States Postal Service using signature confirmation service, or by personal delivery at least ten days before the date of such hearing to the record owners of the affected property, and each holder of a recorded lien against the affected property and to all unknown owners, by posting a copy of the notice on the front door of each improvement situated on the affected property or as close to the front door as practicable by publication of a notice of such hearing before the city commission at least one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the city prior to the date of such hearing. 
(i)	If the owner, agent or occupant of the dangerous building or structure or of the premises on which it stands or is attached shall appear before the city commission at such hearing, no further notice shall be required, but if he fails to appear, then notice of the order of the city commission made at such hearing shall be by mailing a copy of such order to the owner, agent or occupant of the dangerous building or structure or the premises on which it stands or is attached at his last known address by certified mail and by publication of a copy of such order at least one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Code 1996, § 3.302)  
Sec. 10-65. - Procedure after service of notice. 
Upon the expiration of ten days from date of service of the order of the city commission upon the owner or person in charge of such dangerous structure and the publication thereof as required in this article, the building official shall proceed with the work specified in the order of the city commission. 
(Code 1996, § 3.303)  
Sec. 10-66. - Default of owner; suit to recover. 
In the event the owner, agent or occupant of the premises shall fail or refuse for a period of 30 days to pay off and discharge the expenses assessed by the city commission then the city may commence an action in any court having jurisdiction to recover the expenses assessed by the city commission. 
(Code 1996, § 3.304)  
Sec. 10-67. - Penalty. 
Any owner, agent or occupant of premises, including any person having ownership, occupancy or control of any property in the city on which there exists a nuisance as herein set out and shall fail, refuse or neglect to remove or abate such nuisance or refuse to allow the removal of said dangerous structure or part thereof after receiving due notice as herein set out, or refuse to abide by any order requiring the removal of said dangerous structure or part thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1-6. Each day such violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1975, § 3-1; Code 1996, § 3.305)  
Secs. 10-68—10-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MOBILE HOMES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act, Texas Occupations Code § 1201.001 et seq.; regulation by municipality of mobile and manufactured housing, Texas Occupations Code § 1201.008; regulation of certain types of housing and buildings, reservation of municipal authority, Texas Occupations Code § 1202.252. 
 
Sec. 10-91. - Codes adopted. 
The Texas Mobile Home Standards Act, including the rules and regulations adopted by the Mobile Home Division of the Texas Department of Labor and Standards, a copy of which is on file with the city secretary, is hereby adopted by the city and is incorporated in this Code by reference herein for all purposes. 
(Code 1996, § 3.401; Ord. of 7-17-1990)  
Sec. 10-92. - Administrative enforcement. 
The purpose of this article is to provide basic and uniform regulations and performance objectives establishing reasonable standards and safeguards for the safety, health, and welfare of the occupants and users of mobile homes, which shall be designed and constructed to comply with the provisions herein set forth and the parking and location of mobile homes in said city. This article is hereby declared to be remedial and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interest and purpose thereof, which will be health, sanitation, general public safety, and welfare, by regulating the location, installation, construction and maintenance of all mobile homes. 
(Code 1996, § 3.402)  
Sec. 10-93. - Scope. 
This article provides the minimum standards with respect to strength, durability, corrosive resistance, fire resistance and other qualities for materials, assemblies, construction and equipment. Also regulated under the provisions of this article are the use and occupancy of mobile homes, and the licensing thereof and permits and fees. Pre-fabricated and modular buildings (other than mobile homes) are not regulated by the provisions of this article, but are regulated by other code provisions and ordinances. 
(Code 1975, § 3-2; Code 1996, § 3.403)  
Sec. 10-94. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise specified, regulation of mobile homes herein shall be equally applicable to those structures classified as HUD-Code manufactured homes, and said terms shall be interpreted as being interchangeable. 
(Code 1996, § 3.404)  
Sec. 10-95. - Restrictions and zoning. 
The provisions of this article shall not be deemed or construed to repeal, modify or constitute an exception to any fire zone restrictions, zoning ordinance, deed restrictions, or restrictive covenants running with the land. No mobile home shall be parked, placed or permitted to remain on any lot or tract of land in the city in violation of the zoning ordinance of the city, any deed restrictions or restrictive covenants running with the land. Any permit or license issued hereunder for the placement of a mobile home upon any lot or tract in the city in violation of any zoning ordinance, deed restrictions or restrictive covenants running with the land shall be null and void and of no effect. 
(Code 1975, § 3-2; Code 1996, § 3.405)  
Sec. 10-96. - Maintenance and existing location of mobile homes. 
Mobile homes located within the city limits at the time of the passage of this article may continue to be so located and their occupancy continued if such use of occupancy was legal at the time of the passage of this article, and, further, provided that such continued use conforms to all requirements herein and is not dangerous to life. The replacement, relocation, or rearrangement of a mobile home shall not be permitted, unless such permission is granted under the provisions of this article. This prohibition specifically includes replacement of a mobile home with a HUD-Code manufactured home. All mobile homes, both existing and new, and all parts thereof shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by this article shall be maintained in good working order. 
(Code 1975, § 3-2; Code 1996, § 3.406)  
Sec. 10-97. - Placement of mobile homes prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to place any mobile home, as opposed to a manufactured home, in the city. Manufactured homes shall be allowed upon compliance with all relevant provisions of this article. Those mobile homes now present in the city shall be unaffected by this section, however, said mobile homes may not be moved to any new location in the city. 
(Code 1996, § 3.407)  
Sec. 10-98. - Duties and powers of director of public works. 
The director of public works and his authorized representatives shall enforce all the provisions of this article and shall act on any question relative to the mode or manner of construction and the materials to be used in the erection, addition to, alteration, repair, removal, location, occupancy, and maintenance of mobile homes, except as may otherwise be specifically provided for by statutory requirements, or as herein provided. 
(1)	Applications and permits. The director of public works shall receive applications and issue permits for the placement and alteration of mobile homes and inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued and enforce compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(2)	Building notices and orders. The director of public works shall issue all necessary notices or orders to remove illegal or unsafe conditions, to ensure compliance with all the requirements of this article for safety, health and general welfare of the public. 
(3)	Compliance with state law. All mobile homes constructed within the state or imported into the state after the effective date for compliance with the provisions of Texas Occupations Code § 1201.008 shall have a label or mark of compliance permanently affixed certifying compliance with the standards and provisions of said law. The city shall have the right to inspect all mobile homes for the purpose of determining that they are maintained so as to comply with the provisions of said state law and the city shall further have the right to inspect for safety and for compliance with the provisions of this article all mobile homes, whether constructed prior to or subsequent to the effective date of said Texas Occupations Code § 1201.008. 
(4)	Test reports. The director of public works may accept reports from recognized testing laboratories which have complied with the professional licensing laws of the state of the domicile, if any, with respect to new materials and methods of construction purposes for use and which are not specifically provided for in this article when such report certifies that such material or method of construction equals or exceeds the performance standards required by the provisions of this article. The cost of all such tests or other investigations required under this provision shall be paid for by the applicant. 
(Code 1996, § 3.408)  
Sec. 10-99. - Placement and compliance permit. 
(a)	Generally. No mobile home shall be placed on any lot or site in the city unless a permit therefor has been issued by the city approving said placement. Said placement permit shall not become final and absolute until said director of public works inspects said mobile home in place and certifies on said placement permit that said mobile home in place is in compliance with the terms of this article. Said mobile home owner or occupant shall have 20 days to secure the certification of compliance after the mobile home has been placed on a lot in the city. No placement permit will be issued until an affidavit has been submitted to the city stating that the purpose for which the permit is being sought will not violate this article, the city zoning ordinance, any deed restrictions, or covenants running with the land to which the property may be subject. The city shall not issue a permit fee required herein until the owner or occupant of said mobile home has paid said fee as provided for in the fee schedule. 
(b)	Outside licensed parks. It shall be unlawful for any person to locate or maintain for occupancy any mobile home or travel trailer in the city, other than in a duly licensed and lawful mobile home park or travel trailer park, unless application is made as hereinafter provided. 
(1)	Private lots. Persons desiring to place a mobile home for occupancy on a private lot, whether said lot is vacant or has improvements thereon, shall first secure a permit from the city by filing a written application for such permit with the city secretary, giving the name and address of the applicant, size of the mobile home, and a description of the property upon which said mobile home is to be located. 
(2)	When permits may be issued. 
a.	Thereafter it shall be the duty of the public works director, city building official or city engineer and city secretary to submit said application to the city commission at its first regularly scheduled meeting after the submission of the said application to him. The city commission may refuse to grant any such permit unless the applicant shall first show to the satisfaction of the city commission that such applicant can and will comply with the requirements of the Uniform Mobile Home Code, and Texas Mobile Home Standard Act, and other applicable ordinances. Further, no permit will be issued to any applicant unless he shall also show to the satisfaction of the city commission that: 
1.	Such mobile home will be located at least 25 feet from any property boundary line abutting upon a public street or highway and at least ten feet from any other property boundary lines. 
2.	Such mobile home will not be located closer than 50 feet from any building or residence. 
3.	The location of such mobile home is not in violation of any deed restrictions or covenants running the land. 
4.	The location of such mobile home is not within any area zoned for O-Residential, B-Residential, C-Residential, Duplex, or D-Apartment as set forth in the zoning ordinance of the city. 
5.	The applicant has submitted tie-down and foundation plans which meet the approval of the city's public works department. 
b.	If the city commission is satisfied that such application should be granted, the city commission shall issue a permit allowing the mobile home to be located as requested. There shall be no charge for the permit issued under this subsection. 
(3)	Unlawful to maintain mobile home without permit or license. It shall otherwise be unlawful for any person to maintain or allow to be maintained on any premises owned by them or under their control within the corporate limits of the city, any mobile home or travel trailer for occupancy upon the tract on which it rests without first obtaining a permit or a license as the case may require from the city. 
(c)	Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1-6. Further, each day shall constitute a separate violation and the person in violation shall be fined for each day such violation occurs. 
(Code 1975, § 3-2; Code 1996, § 3.409; Ord. of 7-17-1990)  
Sec. 10-100. - Mobile home tie-down. 
All mobile homes located within the city limits shall be provided with tie-downs. The mobile home shall be anchored to resist the overturning or sliding due to wind. Anchors, or tie-downs, such as cast-in-place concrete, "dead men," eyelets imbedded in concrete, screw augers or arrowhead anchors, shall be placed at least at each corner of the mobile home. Each device shall be able to sustain a minimum load of 4,800 pounds. 
(Code 1996, § 3.410)  
Sec. 10-101. - Slabs required. 
All mobile homes moved into the city limits after the passage of this article shall be provided with six-inch reinforced concrete slabs the same size or larger than the mobile home placed on said lot. 
(Code 1996, § 3.411)  
Sec. 10-102. - Skirts required. 
All mobile homes shall have installed within 20 days from the time said mobile home is moved on said lot, skirts of metal, brick or masonry construction extending from the slab to the lower frame of said mobile home. In the event that mobile homes are located in the city prior to the passage of this article without slabs, skirts of metal, brick or masonry construction shall be installed extending from the ground surface to the lower frame of said mobile home in the event there is no slab. 
(Code 1996, § 3.412)  
Sec. 10-103. - Other requirements. 
No mobile home shall be placed on a lot in the city that has an existing residential or commercial building on said lot. All mobile homes located in the city shall be required to have their own separate water and sewer connections. 
(Code 1996, § 3.413)  
Sec. 10-104. - Appeals. 
Any appeals which a person desires to make based upon the refusal of the city to issue permits or based upon an inspection disapproval, or any conditions required by this article, shall be made to the city commission. 
(Code 1996, § 3.414)  
Sec. 10-105. - Compliance, violations and penalties. 
When any person shall have been notified by a written notice issued by the city that a mobile home located in the city is in violation of this article, he shall commence immediately to abate the violation within the time specified in the written notice. Such time shall not exceed ten days and may provide for immediate compliance when a serious threat to life or substantial damage to property may be involved. 
(Code 1975, § 3-2; Code 1996, § 3.415)  
Secs. 10-106—10-123. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - HOUSE MOVING 
 
Sec. 10-124. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
House means any building or structure used or designed to be used for human habitation or occupancy in any manner or for any purpose. 
House moving means the transportation of a house from place to place along or across any public street within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 3.501)  
Sec. 10-125. - Permits. 
(a)	Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation desiring to move any house shall, prior to beginning work, apply to the city secretary for a permit, showing the present location of the house, the new location, the proposed route of moving, the size and type of construction of the house and such other information as may be required and shall pay a deposit per square foot outside measurement for each structure to be moved. The deposit shall be in an amount as established by the city commission from time to time. The permit shall show: 
(1)	The name of the person, firm, partnership or corporation who will move the house. 
(2)	The name of the owner of the house. 
(3)	The present location of the house. 
(4)	The proposed new location. 
(5)	The route of moving, as approved by the traffic engineer. 
(6)	The exact date and time during which the house will occupy the street. 
(7)	The time that the house is allowed to remain in the street. 
(8)	The size and type of construction of the house. 
(9)	Evidence that arrangements have been made with utility companies and/or the city, where necessary to prevent damage thereto. 
(10)	The receipt of the permit deposit. 
(11)	The business address and home address of the applicant. 
(12)	Furnish proof of liability insurance in a reputable insurance company to protect the public and the city from any damage caused by the applicant in moving the house for which the permit is requested. 
When the house moving operation is completed, and the city street and bridge superintendent has given the city secretary the assurance that no damage to life or property has been caused, the required deposit shall be reimbursed or returned to the applicant. 
(b)	Each permit shall be issued in duplicate, and one copy posted on the house to be moved. 
(c)	The maximum time during which a house may legally remain in a street, under a permit, shall be 48 hours. 
(d)	During the entire time that the house is occupying the street, or any portion of same, the mover shall keep it continuously in motion toward its destination and shall not allow the work or moving to stop during such time. 
(e)	The chief of police shall have authority to establish and direct as a condition to the issuance of the permit the time when the house moving shall start and the time when it shall be completed, the routes over which houses of specified dimensions may be moved and such other regulations and conditions which he may deem necessary and deviation therefrom shall constitute an offense. 
(Code 1996, § 3.502)  
Sec. 10-126. - Notification of chief of police. 
The city secretary shall immediately upon issuance of the permit notify the chief of police stating the route, when moving will begin and end, and the number of days allowed. 
(Code 1996, § 3.503)  
Sec. 10-127. - Notice of completion. 
Whenever the holder of the permit has completed the work of moving a house, under a permit, he shall promptly notify the city secretary of such fact. The city secretary shall cause an inspection to be made of the route of moving and the installation of the house. If the holder of the permit has caused damage to the streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks or other public property, the holder of the permit shall be notified of such fact, specifying the damage by mailing to him a written notification by certified mail at either the business or home address listed in the application for the permit. The holder of the permit shall proceed within two days from the date of such notification to begin the work of repairing the damage and completing the same to the satisfaction of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 3.504)  
Sec. 10-128. - Utility lights, poles, etc. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for the holder of the permit to disconnect any electric light and power connection, gas connection, water connection or telephone connection from any house which he proposes to move without the consent of the public utility owning such connection. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for the holder of the permit to remove, tear down or destroy any pole or wire or other property belonging to the city or to any utility company furnishing gas, electric light and power, telephone or telegraph or to any railway company without the consent of such utility or other person owning the same. 
(Code 1996, § 3.505)  
Secs. 10-129—10-154. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - STREETS AND PARKING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 10-155. - Off-street parking regulations adopted. 
The off-street parking requirements on file in the office of the city secretary are adopted by reference as though copied herein fully and shall become a part of the building regulations of this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 3-8; Code 1996, art. 3.700) 
Editor's note— The above referenced off-street parking requirements are in the office of the city secretary.  
Secs. 10-156—10-178. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DRIVEWAYS 
 
Sec. 10-179. - Parking on front yard prohibited. 
No person shall park any vehicle, trailer, boat, recreational vehicle, personal water craft, all-terrain vehicle or any motor propelled vehicle anywhere on the front yard of a residential lot, except in the garage or driveway. Driveway shall be defined as a twenty-foot wide strip perpendicular to the street, running between the street and the house in a location on the lot aligned with the garage or the part of the house where the garage was originally located. 
(Code 1996, § 3.1501; Ord. No. 2007-05, § 1, 5-1-2007; Ord. No. 2016-04, § 1, 7-5-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2016-04, § 1, adopted July 5, 2016, changed the title of § 10-179 from "Parking prohibited" to read as herein set out.  
Sec. 10-180. - Driveway construction. 
Paved surfaces commonly used as driveways at the effective date of this article shall always be considered the driveway for purposes of this section. Driveways shall be paved with either concrete or asphalt and have received a permit for construction from the permit department. Circular driveways are permitted if they are in existence as of the effective date of this article. Circular driveways may be permitted after the effective date of this article if they are not more than 15 feet in width, extend from the street to the street or another driveway, and are surfaced with either concrete or asphalt. For purposes of this section, the front yard of any residential lot shall be considered the yard area between the residence and any adjacent public street. 
(Code 1996, § 3.1502; Ord. No. 2007-05, § 2, 5-1-2007)  
Secs. 10-181—10-198. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - ALARM SYSTEM INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal regulation of alarm systems, Texas Local Government Code § 214.191 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10-199. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm site means the specific property or area of the premises upon or within which an alarm system is or is to be installed. 
Alarm system means any device used to detect or prevent burglary, theft, shoplifting, pilferage or other such emergency situations which, when activated, caused notification to be made directly or indirectly to the police department, or any device or system designed primarily for the purpose of giving an audible or visual signal of an attempted burglary, theft, shoplifting, pilferage or other such emergency. An alarm system shall not include: 
(1)	An alarm installed on a motor vehicle. 
(2)	An alarm designed so that no notification is given to the police until after the occupants or an agent of the owner or lessee have checked the alarm site and determined that there is physical evidence at the site showing that the alarm was the result of criminal activity of the find for which the alarm system was designed to give notice if a person who is able to grant access to the alarm site remains at such site until police arrive whenever the police are notified after an alarm has been activated and such person renders access and such other assistance as he is able to give and that is needed by the police to properly investigate the situation. 
(3)	An alarm installed upon premises occupied by the United States Government, the state, the city, or any county governments situated within the corporate limits of the city. 
(4)	Any device or system designed solely to detect or give notice of fire or smoke. 
Alarm system business means any person who installs, services or responds to alarm systems for remuneration. 
Automatic dialing device means any device connected to an alarm system which automatically sends a prerecorded message or coded signal indicating the activation of the alarm system to a predetermined location. 
Burglar alarm means any device intended to prevent or detect an unauthorized entry or attempted unauthorized entry into the alarm site. 
Central station means that part of an alarm system business which intercepts signals indicating the activation of an alarm device and which relays this information by live voice to the police department. 
False alarm means any alarm which was not the result of an emergency or threat of emergency of the kind for which the alarm system was designed to give notice. 
Hold-up alarm means any device activated by human action as a result of robbery or attempted robbery at or of the alarm site. 
Local alarm means any alarm emitting audible and/or visual signals in, at, or on the alarm site when activated and which causes notification to be made directly or indirectly to the police department. 
Permit means a certificate, license, permit, or other form of permission that authorizes a person to engage in an action. 
Permit holder means the individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity to whom an alarm permit is issued. 
Person means any individual, partnership, corporation or other legal entity. 
Tax assessor and collector means the tax assessor and collector of the city or his authorized representative. 
Telephone answering service means any business, other than an alarm system business, which intercepts signals indicating the activation of an alarm system and which relays this information by live voice to the police department. 
Thirty minute shut-off means an automated device associated with a local alarm which automatically causes the alarm to shut off and discontinue the emission of an audible signal after a period of time not to exceed 30 minutes of continuous operation. 
(Code 1996, § 3.801; Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 1)  
Sec. 10-200. - Permit required; exceptions; number. 
(a)	No person shall operate, cause to be operated or permit the operation of an alarm system unless a current permit has been issued by the tax assessor and collector for such system; provided, however, this subsection shall not be applicable to an alarm system business which monitors, services, or monitors and services an alarm system installed and designed to protect property under the control of a person other than the alarm system business, but the person in control of the property which the alarm system is designed to protect shall be subject to prosecution if he permits the operation of such system without a valid permit. 
(b)	The person in control of the property may obtain a separate permit for each alarm system or may obtain a single permit for all alarm systems on so much of one premises that is under the control of the applicant for a permit, except that one permit shall not permit the operation of both hold-up and burglar alarms. If both hold-up alarms and burglar alarms are operated on one premises, a single permit may be obtained for all hold-up alarms on so much of the premises under the control of the applicant and a separate permit for all burglar alarms on the premises under the applicant's control. 
(c)	For purposes of the fees set out in section 10-218, an alarm system shall mean and include all alarms operated under one permit. 
(Code 1996, § 3.802; Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 2)  
Sec. 10-201. - Permit application; issuance of permit; confidentiality of information. 
(a)	Application for a permit for the operation of an alarm system shall be made by a person having control over the property on which the alarm system is to be installed and operated. Such applications shall be made in writing to the tax assessor and collector on a form designated by the city for that purpose. On such application, the applicant shall set forth: 
(1)	The name, address and telephone number of each person in control of the property. 
(2)	The street address of the property on which the alarm system is to be installed and operated. 
(3)	Any business name used for the premises on which the alarm system is to be installed and operated. 
(4)	Whether the alarm system is or is not a local alarm and whether the alarm system is designed to give notice of a burglary, hold-up or of other type of emergency. 
(5)	The name of the person or alarm system business who will install the alarm system. 
(6)	The names and telephone numbers of two persons or of an alarm system business which are able to and have agreed: 
a.	To receive notification at any time; 
b.	To come to the alarm site within one hour after receiving a request from a member of the city police department to do so; and 
c.	To grant access to the alarm site and to deactivate the alarm system if such becomes necessary; or 
d.	The name and telephone number of an alarm system business which is able and has agreed to receive calls at any time and to give the police department the names of persons listed with that company as set out in subsection (a)(6)d.1 of this section if: 
1.	The permit holder has given the alarm system business the names and telephone numbers of two persons who are able and have agreed to receive notification at any time; to come to the alarm site within one hour after receiving a request from a member of the city police department to do so; and to grant access to the alarm site and to deactivate the alarm system if necessary; 
2.	Whenever a person listed with the alarm company pursuant to subsection (a)(6)d.1 of this section is unwilling to unable to perform the duties set out, the permit holder must give the alarm system business the name and telephone number of another person who is able and is willing to perform the duties so that at least two persons who are able and willing to perform such duties are listed with the alarm system business at all times; and 
3.	The permit holder has authorized the alarm system business to provide the names listed with that business pursuant to subsections (a)(6)d.1 and 2 of this section to the police department whenever that department has requested that information in order to obtain assistance after an alarm has been activated. 
(7)	Whether all fees charged such applicant under section 10-218 have been paid. 
(b)	Such application shall be subscribed to by the person making application for the permit. 
(c)	The tax assessor and collector shall issue a permit to the individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity in control of the property upon submission of an application therefor in accordance with this article and payment of the permit fee, unless the tax assessor and collector finds that any statement made in the application was incomplete or false. 
(d)	Immediately after receipt of the application for a permit and payment of the permit fee, the tax assessor and collector shall forward the application to the police department. The police department shall protect all information on such application as confidential information; provided, however, nothing in this article shall prohibit the use of such information for legitimate law enforcement purposes and for enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1996, § 3.803; Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 3)  
Sec. 10-202. - Permit; amendments to application. 
Whenever a person listed on the application or listed on an amendment to the application is unable or unwilling to perform the duties set out in section 10-201(a), (b) and (c), the permit holder shall file an amendment to the permit application listing a person or company who is able and will perform those duties so that at all times the application on file with the police department designates at lease two persons or an alarm system business who are able and willing to perform such duties. 
(Code 1996, § 3.804; Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 4)  
Sec. 10-203. - Permit for existing alarm systems. 
No person shall operate or shall permit the operation of an alarm system which was installed on his property prior to the effective date of this article unless a permit for such alarm system is obtained within 90 days of the effective date of this article. To obtain such a permit, the person in control of the property shall file an application therefor pursuant to section 10-201 and pay the permit fee; provided, however, that this section shall not be applicable to an alarm system business which monitors, services, or monitors and services an alarm system installed and designed to protect property under the control of a person other than the alarm system business, both the person in control of the property which the alarm system is designed to protect shall be subject to prosecution if he permits the operation of such system without a valid permit. 
(Code 1996, § 3.805; Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 5)  
Sec. 10-204. - Permit term. 
Each permit issued in accordance with this article shall be valid for a term of one year. Upon such transfer of control of the property, a new permit shall be obtained. 
(Code 1996, § 3.806; Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 6)  
Sec. 10-205. - Permit fees. 
There is no fee for a permit issued pursuant to this article; provided, however, that the failure to obtain a permit shall be a violation of this article and any person who fails to obtain a permit shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1-6. 
(Code 1996, § 3.807; Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 7)  
Sec. 10-206. - Permit nontransferable. 
Each permit issued pursuant to this article shall be personal to the permit holder and is not transferable. 
(Code 1996, § 3.808; Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 8)  
Sec. 10-207. - Permit to be kept at alarm site. 
The permit holder for an alarm system shall keep such permit at the alarm site and shall produce such permit for inspection upon the request of any member of the city police department. 
(Code 1996, § 3.809; Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 9)  
Sec. 10-208. - Duties of property owner. 
The person in control of the property on which an alarm system is installed shall: 
(1)	Ensure that any person listed with the police department pursuant to sections 10-201 and 10-202 is able: 
a.	To receive notification at any time; 
b.	To come to the alarm site within one hour after receiving a request from a member of the city police department to do so; and 
c.	To grant access to the alarm site and to deactivate the alarm system if such become necessary. 
(2)	Train all persons who may activate the alarm system in the proper operation of the alarm system. 
(Code 1996, § 3.810; Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 10)  
Sec. 10-209. - Repair of system; deactivation. 
(a)	The person in control of the property shall ensure that the alarm system is repaired within 72 hours of the time notification that such system is malfunctioning is given in writing on a form designated by the police department to him or to his employee or his agent by a member of the police department designated by the chief of police to give such notices. 
(b)	The person in control of the property may cause such system to be deactivated rather than having such system repaired, if he so desires. If he does deactivate such system rather than ensuing it to be repaired, such system shall not be reactivated until is has been repaired. 
(Code 1996, § 3.811; Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 11)  
Sec. 10-210. - Duty of person notified by police department to provide access to premises, render assistance. 
Any person who is notified by any member of the police department of the activation of an alarm system and who is able to give access to the alarm site shall come to the alarm site within one hour of the time such person is notified of such activation and shall provide the police department any necessary access or assistance. 
(Code 1996, § 3.812; Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 12)  
Sec. 10-211. - Operation of alarm system. 
No person shall install, cause to be installed or permit to be installed any alarm system unless the requirements of this article are met. 
(1)	Any alarm system which may be activated as a result of different types of emergency situations shall give a unique signal to designate activation as a result of a hold-up, a burglary, a fire, or any other different type of emergency situation so that the proper notification and proper response can be made; 
(2)	Any local alarm system shall have a 30-minute shut-off and must not make a sound similar to that of a siren, or any emergency vehicle or similar to a civil defense warning system; 
(3)	No hold-up alarm shall include a money clip, pressure pad, or similar device which can cause activation inadvertently; and any hold-up alarm shall be designed so that it may be activated only be intentional and deliberate human action; 
(4)	No person shall use or permit the use of any telephone device or telephone attachment which automatically selects any telephone line lending into the communication center of the police department of any number leading into the offices of the city and then transmits any prerecorded message or signal; 
(5)	No person shall use or permit the use of any system which gives notification of the activation of an alarm system directly to the police department by any means other than live human voice; and 
(6)	The chief of police may set reasonable standards and procedures to be followed by any alarm system business or telephone answering service when given notice to the police department of activation of an alarm system. Such standards and procedures shall be set out in writing and made available to any alarm system business or telephone answering service requesting same. 
(Code 1996, § 3.813; Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 13)  
Sec. 10-212. - Registration of alarm system business with police department. 
(a)	New business. Prior to doing business within the city an alarm system business shall register with the police department on a form designated by the city for that purpose. On such form the business shall set forth: 
(1)	The full name and address of the alarm business. 
(2)	The full name, business address and home address of manager who is so licensed by the state. 
(3)	A telephone number at which the police department can notify personnel of the business of a need for assistance at any time. 
(b)	Existing business. An alarm system business doing business in this city at the time this article becomes effective shall have 30 days to register with the police department as required in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1996, § 3.814; Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 14)  
Sec. 10-213. - Notice of change of licensed manager. 
Each alarm system business shall notify the police department in writing of any change of the licensed manager for the business within 48 hours after such change and of change in telephone number by which personnel can be reached prior to such change. 
(Code 1996, § 3.815; Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 15)  
Sec. 10-214. - Duty of business; to furnish information about each alarm installation. 
(a)	Any alarm system business which installs an alarm system within the city shall provide the police department the following information on a form designated by the city: 
(1)	The address where such system is installed. 
(2)	The name and address of the person having control over the property. 
(3)	The type of alarm system. 
(b)	Such form shall be submitted to the police department not earlier than 20 days prior to the installation of such system and not later than 48 hours after such system is installed. The police department shall protect such information as confidential information and its use shall be restricted to legitimate law enforcement. 
(Code 1996, § 3.816; Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 16)  
Sec. 10-215. - To render efficient service; maintain alarm; keep records of maintenance. 
Whenever an alarm system business agrees with any person to maintain or service any alarm system, such business shall: 
(1)	Ensure that personnel of such business who are able to render effective assistance arrive at such alarm site within one hour of a request by a member of the police department for assistance if such alarm system business has agreed with any person to respond to such alarm system. 
(2)	Ensure that sufficient personnel of such business are available to provide service and to repair any alarm system such business has agreed to maintain or service within 72 hours after notification that such system is in need of repair is received from any person in control of the property or by a member of the police department designated by the chief of police to give such notice. 
(3)	Keep a written record of the date and time of repair and a description of the specific repair which was performed on any alarm system when such repair was made in response to notification by the person in control of the property or a member of the police department that such alarm system was in need of repair. Such written records shall be maintained for at least two years and shall be made available for inspection and duplication by any member of the police department designated by the chief of police to inspect such records when such a member of the police department makes demand at the office of the alarm system business during regular business hours. 
(Code 1996, § 3.817; Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 17)  
Sec. 10-216. - Operation of central station or answering service. 
Any alarm system business which operates a central station and any telephone answering service shall: 
(1)	Responding to alarm. Have sufficient personnel trained in the procedures to be followed in receiving and relaying notice of the activation of any alarm system on duty at all times to ensure that emergency messages or alarm signals received by such business can be relayed immediately to the police department. 
(2)	Notification of property owner. Notify the person in control of the property or his designated employee of the activation of the alarm system within 24 hours of the time the alarm was activated by telephone or by placing such notice in the mail, addressed the person in control of the property. 
(3)	Records. Keep a written record of the date and time each notification of the activation of an alarm system is received, and the date, time and method by which the person in control of the property or his designated employee was notified. Such records shall be retained for at least two years and shall be made available for inspection by any member of the police department designated by the chief of police to inspect such records when such a member of the police department makes demand at the office of the alarm system business or telephone answering service during regular business hours. 
(4)	Periodic testing; correction of defects. Test or cause to be tested all equipment used by the central station or telephone answering service relating to the receipt of notifications of the activation of any alarm system and the equipment used in relaying those notifications to the police department at least one time in every 12-month period and, when a test result is unsatisfactory, correct, or cause to be corrected within a reasonable period of time not to exceed seven days the cause of the unsatisfactory test result. 
(5)	Evidence of test results. Produce evidence of the results of test conducted pursuant to subsection (4) of this section upon request of a member of the police department designated by the chief of police to inspect such evidence. The requirements of this subsection shall be satisfied if such results are made available at the central station or telephone answering service on the next regular business day after demand is made. 
(6)	Providing service to licensed business only. Not provide answering services for any alarm system business which is not licensed by the state. 
(Code 1996, § 3.818; Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 18)  
Sec. 10-217. - False alarms prohibited; exceptions. 
No person shall intentionally activate an alarm system for any propose other than an emergency or threat of emergency of the kind for which the alarm system was designed to give notice; provided, however, it shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this article that the alarm system was sounded solely for the purpose of testing the alarm being made to the police department to respond to such alarm. This article shall not apply to conduct which is in violation of Texas Penal Code § 42.06. 
(Code 1996, § 3.819; Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 19)  
Sec. 10-218. - Charges for city response to alarm. 
(a)	The person in control of the property on which an alarm system is installed will be charged the full costs incurred by the city when he, his agent or his employee intentionally or knowingly activated the alarm system for any reason other than an emergency or threat of an emergency of the kind for which the alarm system was designed to give notice. The city commission finds that the minimum costs incurred by the city in responding to the activation of alarm system, as provided for in the fee schedule, shall be charged the person in control of the property whenever he, his employee or his agent intentionally or knowingly activates an alarm system for any reason other than an emergency or threat of an emergency of the kind for which the alarm system was designed to give notice and the city responded to such activation of the alarm system. Such charge shall be a minimum charge only, and shall not be applicable when a tabulation of costs including overhead, the cost of investigation, and all costs incident to the response to a particular alarm system show that the cost was greater. 
(b)	Unless full costs are chargeable under subsection (a) of this section, the fees, as provided for in the fee schedule, shall be charged the permit holder for each response by the city to notification of activation of an alarm system in excess of five alarms from the same alarm system within a 12-month period. 
(Code 1996, § 3.820; Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 20)  
Sec. 10-219. - Compliance with state law. 
All person subject to the provisions of the Private Investigators and Private Security Agencies Act of the state, Texas Occupations Code § 1702.101 et seq., are required to comply with all applicable provisions of that Act. 
(Code 1996, § 3.821; Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 21)  
Sec. 10-220. - Violations; penalties. 
Each permit holder and each person having control over property on which an alarm system is installed has an affirmative duty to comply with all provisions of this article, and it shall not be a defense to prosecution of such a person that he was acting without a culpable mental state. 
(Code 1996, § 3.822; Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 22)  
Sec. 10-221. - Revocation of permit; reasons. 
A permit for an alarm system may be revoked if mechanical malfunction or faulty equipment has caused five or more false alarms by such alarm system in the 12-month period immediately preceding the date of notice of a hearing. For the purposes of this article, the terms "mechanical malfunction" and "faulty equipment" shall not relate to be false alarms caused by human error or an act of God. A permit shall not be revoked if the permit holder shows that since the most recent false alarm from such alarm system, the system has been repaired and the police department has inspected such alarm system and found it to have been properly repaired. 
(Code 1996, § 3.823; Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 23)  
Sec. 10-222. - Revocation of permit; notice; hearing. 
(a)	Prior to revocation of a permit for an alarm system, written notice shall be given to the permit holder. Such notice shall set forth: 
(1)	The specific dates on which there have been false alarms from such alarm system which were caused by mechanical malfunction or faulty equipment. 
(2)	That a hearing will be held before the tax assessor and collector or his designated representative to determine whether the permit for such alarm system should be revoked. 
(3)	The date, time and place of such hearing. 
(4)	That the permit holder may appear in person and/or be represented by counsel, may present testimony and may cross examine all witnesses. 
(b)	All hearings shall be held by the tax assessor and collector or his designated representative. Such official shall be referred to as the hearing officer. The tax assessor and collector shall not designate any person to perform the duties of hearing officer under this article if it is shown that the person in question has participated in the investigation of false alarms from the alarm site in question, or has prior knowledge of the allegations or circumstances discovered in such investigation. Such person designated as hearing officer may, prior to the hearing, receive a copy of the notice given to the permit holder. 
(c)	A representative of the legal department shall be present at such hearing to advise the hearing officer as to procedural matters; however, such attorney shall not partake in any determination of the facts. 
(d)	All hearings shall be conducted under rules consistent with the nature of the proceedings; provided, however, the following rules shall apply to such hearings: 
(1)	All parties shall have the legal right to representation by a licensed attorney though an attorney is not required. 
(2)	Each party may present witnesses in his own behalf. 
(3)	Each party has the right to cross examine all witnesses. 
(4)	Only evidence presented before the hearing officer at such hearing may be considered in rendering the order. 
(e)	If the permit holder fails to appear at the hearing at the time, place and date specified, the city shall present sufficient evidence to establish a prima facie case showing that mechanical malfunction or faulty equipment has caused five or more false alarms in the 12-month period immediately preceding the date of the notice of hearing. 
(f)	If the hearing officer finds that grounds exist for revocation of the permit for the alarm system, he shall revoke such permit and shall give written notice to the permit holder of such revocation. Upon receipt of such notice, the permit holder shall disconnect such alarm system immediately and shall surrender his permit to the tax assessor and collector or his designee. 
(g)	If the hearing officer does not find that grounds exist for revocation of the permit for the alarm system, he shall give written notice of such finds to the permit holder. 
(Code 1996, § 3.824; Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 24)  
Sec. 10-223. - Revocation of permit; subsequent inspection; application for new permit. 
After a permit for an alarm system has been revoked, the person in control of the property on which the alarm system is located may request that an inspection be made pursuant to section 10-224 after the alarm system has been repaired. Such inspections shall be made by the city police department as soon as possible after receiving the request, but in any event not later than ten regular working days after the person making the request has complied with section 10-224. If upon such inspection it is found that the alarm system has been properly repaired, the person in control of the property may apply for a new permit for such alarm system. 
(Code 1996, § 3.825; Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 25)  
Sec. 10-224. - Request for inspection of alarm system. 
(a)	A person may request that the city make an inspection of the alarm system if: 
(1)	Mechanical malfunction or faulty equipment has caused five or more false alarms in the 12-month period immediately preceding such request; or 
(2)	The permit for such system has been revoked. 
(b)	To request an inspection, the person in control of the property shall submit to the tax assessor and collector. 
(Code 1996, § 3.826; Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 26)  
Sec. 10-225. - Provisions regarding city response to alarm. 
(Code 1996, App. A, § 6.600(b)(1); Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 20)  
Sec. 10-226. - Additional provisions regarding city response to alarm. 
Unless full costs are chargeable under section 10-225, a fee of $25.00 will be charged the person in control of the alarm site for the first response by the city to notification of activation of an alarm system when there is no valid permit for such system. A fee of $30.00 will be charged for any additional response by the city to notification of an activation of an alarm system on the same site within the same 12-month period when no valid permit has been obtained for such system. 
(Code 1996, App. A, § 6.600(b)(2); Ord. of 10-1-1996, § 20)  
Secs. 10-227—10-241. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - FENCES AND SCREENING OF REAL PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 10-242. - Scope. 
(a)	This article shall control the construction, alteration, replacement, repair, and location of fences and required screenings within the city limits. 
(b)	This article is hereby declared to be remedial and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interest and purpose thereof, which are public health, safety, and general welfare of the community. 
(c)	A permit shall be required prior to the construction of any fence or screen in the city. Application for a permit shall be filed with the city secretary on such form as approved by the building official of the city. A fee as provided for in the fee schedule shall be paid at the time the application is filed. The application must be approved by the building official prior to and after construction. 
(Code 1996, § 3.1201)  
Sec. 10-243. - Quality control. 
Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of this article except as it relates to the purposes stated within. 
(Code 1996, § 3.1202; Ord. No. 98-06, 6-16-1998)  
Sec. 10-244. - Material. 
Fences may be constructed of the following materials: Masonry, cedar, redwood, treated lumber, chainlink and decorative iron. Wooden fence material placed in contact with the earth shall be treated to protect the material from rot, decay, and/or termites. Those materials not specifically mentioned are hereby prohibited unless approved in writing by the building official upon application. Barbed wire fencing may be allowed or used on parcels upon which large farm animals are legally kept and maintained and on parcels zoned heavy commercial and industrial. Permits are not required for internal cross-sectioning of such land for the control of animals or to enforce rotational grazing. 
(Code 1996, § 3.1203; Ord. No. 2004-03, 4-20-2004)  
Sec. 10-245. - Placement. 
(a)	Fences shall be built on property lines to avoid conflicts between property owners. In the event that there is a dispute between property owners of the location of a property line, it shall be the responsibility of the property owners to resolve the conflict without intervention by the city. 
(b)	Any fence built in or across utility easements shall remain the responsibility of the property owner. In the event that the fence is constructed on an easement and the fence is subsequently damaged or destroyed through the exercise of the rights of the owner of the easement, the repair or replacement of the fence shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner. 
(c)	Fences and gates built in the front yard within the 25-foot building setback, where permitted, shall not exceed four feet in height. However, on lots consisting of five or more contiguous acres, one decorative arch or gate neither exceeding 20 feet in height nor 30 feet in width may be erected as a part of such a fence. 
(d)	Fences built on a side yard shall be place on the property line. 
(1)	Fences built on a side yard facing a public street may be placed on the property line. When the side yard is adjacent to the adjoining property's front yard, the side yard fences may not exceed four feet in height unless they are set back to the adjoining properties front yard setback line. 
(2)	Any fence in the rear yard of lots that contain a 25-foot building setback in the rear portion of the lot shall not exceed four feet in height. 
(Code 1996, § 3.1204)  
Sec. 10-246. - Zoning. 
Fences constructed in areas zoned A shall not exceed seven feet in height measured from finished grade. Fences constructed in all other zoned areas shall not exceed eight feet in height measured from finished grade. 
(Code 1996, § 3.1205)  
Sec. 10-247. - Screening. 
(a)	Where the side, rear, or service side of property zoned D, E, F, G or H is adjacent to property zoned A, B, or C, screening of not less than six feet in height shall be erected separating the use from A, B, or C property. Screening shall be erected as the property is developed for use. Screening shall meet the requirements of one of the listed alternates, A, B, or C, as set forth in section 10-248. No screening shall be required adjacent to a street. 
(b)	For all uses other than A, B, or C, refuse storage areas shall be visually screened by a six-foot high solid fence or wall on all sides except the side used for pick up service. Such side need not be screened. 
(Code 1996, § 3.1206)  
Sec. 10-248. - Standards for screening. 
Where screening is required, the following are the approved types of screening: 
(1)	Screening alternate A. Screening alternate A consists of a solid masonry or concrete wall, six feet in height measured from the average grade of the nearest property line to that on which the screening is required. 
(2)	Screening alternate B. Screening alternate B consists of a chainlink fence with redwood slats, six feet in height measured from the average grade of the nearest property line of the property adjacent to that on which the screening is required. 
(3)	Screening alternate C. Screening alternate C consists of a solid wood fence, six feet in height measured from the average grade of the nearest property line of the property adjacent to that on which screening is required. 
(Code 1996, § 3.1207)  
Sec. 10-249. - Maintenance. 
All required screening shall be kept in good repair and maintained in a neat and orderly manner at all times. The duty of maintenance shall be the responsibility of the person in charge and control of the property where screening is required. 
(Code 1996, § 3.1208)  
Sec. 10-250. - Additional screening or fencing. 
The planning and zoning commission may recommend and the city commission may require screening or fencing requirements in any zoning case, in addition to these requirements, when the nature and character of surrounding or adjacent property dictate a need to require such devices, in order to protect such property and to further provide protection for the general health, welfare, and morals of the community. 
(Code 1996, § 3.1209)  
Sec. 10-251. - Penalty. 
(a)	Any person who shall violate any provision of this article or fail to comply therewith or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, or repair, or who has erected, constructed, altered, or repaired a building or structure, in violation of a detailed statement or plan submitted and approved thereunder, or of a permit or certificate issued thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine as provided for in the general penalty provision found in section 1-6. 
(1)	The owner of a building, structure or premises, where anything in violation of this article shall be placed or shall exist, and an architect, builder, contractor, agent, person, or corporation employed in connection therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of such violation, shall each be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be fined as therein provided. 
(2)	The imposition of the penalties therein prescribed shall not preclude the corporation counsel from instituting an appropriate action or proceeding to prevent an unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or use, or to restrain, correct, or abate a violation or to prevent the occupancy of a building, structure, or premises, or to prevent an illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about any premises. 
(b)	Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, upon conviction thereof in the municipal court, shall be fined in any sum as provided for in the general penalty provision found in section 1-6, and each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1996, § 3.1210; Ord. No. 98-06, 6-16-1998)  
Secs. 10-252—10-280. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - CARPORTS 
 
Sec. 10-281. - Permits. 
(a)	As required for the construction, erection or installation of any building or structure or parts of a building or structure, there shall be required a permit issued by the building official of the city for the construction, erection, or installation of a carport. 
(b)	No permit for the construction, erection, or installation of a building or structure or parts of a building or structure shall be issued for the construction, erection, installation of a building or structure within the building setback lines, as designated by the city. 
(c)	Provided, however, that a carport may be erected in conjunction with a single or duplex residential dwelling, unless prohibited by a subdivision deed restriction. It is the duty of the applicant for the permit to determine if there exists any subdivision deed restrictions which prohibit the erection of the carport and by applying for the permit certifies to the city that such prohibition does not exist. 
(Code 1996, § 3.1301)  
Sec. 10-282. - Construction standards. 
Carports which are permitted under this article may be constructed of wood or metal, and shall be attached to the main structure, but not have a continuation of the main roof, with a flat roof and a pitch of one-fourth-inch on 12 inches towards the street. The carport shall not have any ceiling openings accessible for storage area and shall be supported at its outermost end by not more than two stanchions (poles) with braces anchored in a manner approved by the building official, and such shall not be placed nearer than five feet from any property line. The horizontal portion of the carport framework shall be less than eight feet or more than 12 feet above grade (natural ground elevation). The stanchions supporting the carport shall be separated by not more than 20 feet wide and 20 feet long, and the roof overhand shall not exceed two feet from the supporting stanchions on any side. No carport shall be erected or attached to any carport permitted under this section. 
(Code 1996, § 3.1302)  
Sec. 10-283. - Placement. 
No permit for the construction, erection, or installation of a single or duplex residential building or structure, or parts of such building or structure, shall be issued for the construction, erection, or installation of such building or structure, within five feet of any property line. 
(Code 1996, § 3.1303; Ord. No. 2007-07, 8-7-2007)  
Secs. 10-284—10-314. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - ANTENNA TOWERS 
 
Sec. 10-315. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alteration means any modification, replacement, or reconstruction that increases the height or materially increases the dimension of a tower structure. 
Building official means the official or his assistants duly appointed by the city commission. 
Calendar days means any day including Saturdays, Sundays, and scheduled holidays designated by the city commission. 
Grade means the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving or sidewalk within the area between the building or structure and a line five feet from the building or structure. 
Height of building means the vertical distance above a reference datum measured to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof. The reference datum shall be selected by either of the following, whichever yields a greater height of building: 
(1)	The elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface within a five-foot horizontal distance of the exterior wall of the building when such sidewalk or ground surface is not more than ten feet above the lowest grade. 
(2)	An elevation of ten feet higher than the lowest grade when the sidewalk or ground surface described in subsection (1) of this definition is more than ten feet above lowest grade. 
The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum height of any segment of the building. 
Height of tower means the vertical distance between the finished grade at the base of the tower or the lowest point of contact with the building, and the highest point of the tower structure, excluding the antenna. 
Manufacturing or heavy industrial district pertains to the use of land as defined in the zoning ordinance. 
Monopole means a single, slender and typically cylindrical, vertical structure to which antennas are affixed. 
Public utility. 
(1)	The term "public utility" means any person, company, corporation, cooperative corporation, partnership, or any combination thereof, that is subject to both a municipal franchise agreement and the comprehensive regulatory system established by and defined in the Texas Public Utility Regulatory Act, that owns or operates for compensation equipment or facilities for: 
a.	Producing, generating, transmitting, distributing, selling, or furnishing electricity; or 
b.	The conveyance, transmission, or reception of communications over a telephone system as a dominant carrier. 
(2)	The term "public utility" does not include, as is defined in the Public Utility Regulatory Act, telegraph services, television stations, radio stations, community antenna television services, general radio telephone services, or radiotelephone services authorized under the public mobile radio services rules of the Federal Communications Commission or private water companies. 
Residential pertains to the use of land for a residence as is defined in the zoning ordinance of the city. 
Residential lot means a lot or tract of land which is included within the residential or multiple family districts as defined in the zoning ordinance of the city. 
Tower or tower structure means a fixed, freestanding or guyed, uninhabitable structure, not designed as a shelter or to be occupied for any use. The term "tower" or "tower structure" includes, but is not limited to, any such structure supporting antennas that transmit or receive any portion of the electromagnetic spectrum of radio waves. The following are, by way of example but not limitation, towers or tower structures: guyed or freestanding monopole structures, lattice or open framed structures, antenna supports, water towers, and other similar self-supporting trussed, or open framed structures. 
(Code 1996, § 3.1401)  
Sec. 10-316. - Permit required. 
(a)	An application for a tower permit shall be submitted to the building official and approved in accordance with the provisions of this article prior to the construction, placement, or alteration of any tower or tower structure, as defined in this article and not specifically excluded herein, that is located within the boundaries of the municipality. 
(b)	A tower permit shall not be required for any tower repaired, replaced, or modified with no resulting increase in height or dimension and any tower repaired, replaced, or modified in order to comply with the requirements of any statute, regulation, order, or rule of the Federal Communications Commission, the Federal Aviation Administration, or any other federal, state, or other governmental agency or authority. 
(Code 1996, § 3.1402)  
Sec. 10-317. - Exemptions. 
This article does not apply to the following structures: 
(1)	Church bell towers and religious symbols associated with a place of worship. 
(2)	Tower structures less than 20 feet in height. 
(3)	Monopole tower structures less than 30 feet in height. 
(4)	Tower structures used primarily for the support of amateur and citizens' band radio antennas and meeting subsection (2) of this section. 
(5)	Tower structures that are attached to, placed upon, or constructed on top of a building provided that the height of the tower structure does not exceed ten feet or the height of the building upon which the tower is constructed, whichever is less. 
(6)	Tower structures on real property owned, leased, held or used, or dedicated for use by a public utility for rendering its service, such as tower structures being used primarily for the transmission of electrical power by a public utility or the conveyance of communications over a telephone wire-line system operated by a public utility. 
(7)	High mast monopole structures built, owned or maintained by the state department of transportation, the county, or the city. 
(8)	Tower structures constructed or placed on land or other structures owned, leased, held, or dedicated for use by the state department of public safety, the county, the city or other governmental entities or agencies, which land or other structures are used by such governmental agencies, which land or other structures are used by such governmental entity or agency primarily for rendering fire, police, or other public protection services notwithstanding that such tower structures may be used jointly by such governmental entity or agency and any other public or private person or entity for other and additional public or private purposes. 
(Code 1996, § 3.1403)  
Sec. 10-318. - Location of towers. 
(a)	No antenna tower permit shall be approved or a building permit issued in any residential, light commercial, heavy commercial, city or church property, multiple-family dwelling or mobile home districts. All antenna towers as described herein are limited to the city's manufacturing or heavy industrial districts. 
(b)	No tower permit shall be approved or a building permit issued in the manufacturing or heavy industrial district unless the proposed tower is in compliance with the applicable provisions governing distance requirements, which are as follows: 
(1)	The distance between the base of a single monopole tower constructed without guy wire attachments and all residential lots within a residential neighborhood must not be less than: 
a.	1½ times the height of the tower structure if the height of that tower structure is over 60 feet, but not over 90 feet; 
b.	Two times the height of the tower structure if the height of that tower structure is over 90 feet, but not over 105 feet; 
c.	2½ times the height of the tower structure if the height of that tower structure is over 105 feet, but not over 120 feet; or 
d.	Three times the height of the tower structure if the height of that tower structure is over 120 feet. 
(2)	The distance between the base of a lattice tower, a guyed monopole tower, or any other tower structure and all residential lots within a residential neighborhood must not be less than: 
a.	Three times the height of the tower structure if the height of that tower structure is over 45 feet, but not over 85 feet; 
b.	Three times the height of the tower structure if the height of that tower structure is over 85 feet, but not over 120 feet; 
c.	Four times the height of the tower structure if the height of that tower structure is over 120 feet, but not over 150 feet; or 
d.	The lesser of: 
1.	Three times the height of the tower structure; or 
2.	One thousand five hundred feet if the height of that tower structure is over 150 feet. 
(c)	All tower permit applications submitted to the city shall include a survey which meets the minimum standards as set forth by the state board of professional land surveyors. All properties within the required setback distance radius can use the distance of a straight horizontal line from the center of the base of the tower to the nearest outside wall of the residential structure on the lot for the setback distance measurement. All other distance measurements referred to in this section, except for those defined in subsection (d) of this section, shall be the distance of a straight horizontal line from the center of the base of the tower to the radial tangent of the residential lot. 
(d)	If the tower is constructed, attached to, or placed on a building or similar structure built or designed primarily for the purpose of supporting the tower, then subsection (b) of this section shall apply. The survey provided by the applicant shall be measured from the horizontal distance between the radial tangent of the residential lot and the point on finished grade where a vertical line from the center of the base of the tower strikes the grade. 
(e)	A tower which is properly permitted under this article or which was in existence on the date of final passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall not be required to be removed or relocated in order to meet the minimum distance requirements of this article due to subsequent platting of a residential lot nearer to the tower than the distance requirements of this section. However, any alteration to existing tower structures shall require compliance with the applicable provisions of this article. 
(f)	Property uses and distances referred to in this section shall be determined as of the date and time that the completed tower permit application is filed. 
(Code 1996, § 3.1404)  
Sec. 10-319. - Tower security fence. 
(a)	The base of a tower must be completely enclosed by a fence, wall, or barrier which limits climbing access to such tower and any supporting systems, lines, wires, buildings or other structures. Exemptions from compliance with this section are provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(b)	The fence, wall or barrier required by subsection (a) of this section shall not be less than eight feet in height with no openings, holes, or gaps larger than four inches measured in any direction. 
(c)	Gates and doors allowing direct access to the tower and enclosed by a fence, wall, or barrier, as required by this section, shall be equipped with a lock to keep and cable of keeping such doors or gates securely closed and locked at all times. 
(d)	The requirements of this section do not apply to: 
(1)	Any tower located on a building that is not designed or built primarily to support the tower, provided that the general public has no physical access to the tower; or 
(2)	Existing tower sites having security fences at least six feet in height. 
(Code 1996, § 3.1405)  
Sec. 10-320. - Application procedures for permit. 
(a)	An application for a tower permit shall be submitted to the building official in the manner prescribed herein. The applicant shall, with the filing of the completed tower permit application, submit payment of the appropriate tower permit fees established by the building official and approved by city commission that are calculated to reasonably cover the expenses of administering the provisions of this article. 
(b)	The application shall not be considered complete unless accompanied by such drawings, descriptive data, filing fees, ownership information, and other pertinent data as is required by the building official. Each application for a tower permit or for a waiver shall include envelopes addressed to the owners and a complete list of those owners, as is indicted by the most recently approved tax rolls, of all property within a distance of 300 feet from the proposed tower site. 
(c)	In the event that any of the required documentation, data, reports, or drawings contain any false or erroneous information known to the applicant, then any permit issued pursuant to that false or erroneous information shall be void with the same force and effect as if it had never been issued. 
(d)	The building official shall issue a permit for construction, placement, or alteration of a tower only if it: 
(1)	Conforms to all zoning and other restrictions relating to the use of the property described in the application; 
(2)	Complies with all local ordinances, rules, and regulations relating to commercial building permits; and 
(3)	Meets the requirements of 14 CFR 77, all other regulations of FAA and FCC, as well as any other regulatory authorities and within jurisdiction of this article. 
(e)	No later than the 30th calendar day following the filing of the required application, the building official shall issue to the applicant a written notice of approval or disapproval of the tower permit. Any notice of disapproval of a tower permit application must include a written report explaining in detail the reasons for such disapproval. The issuance of a written notice to the applicant shall be complete upon the deposit of such properly addressed notice in the United States mail, first class postage paid. 
(Code 1996, § 3.1406)  
Sec. 10-321. - Notice requirements for permit. 
(a)	The notice requirements of this section apply only to applications for tower permits for the construction, placement or alteration of towers subject to the requirements of this article. 
(b)	The applicant for a tower permit must post and use reasonable efforts to maintain a sign on the subject tower site for a minimum of 30 calendar days beginning no later than the sixth calendar day following the date of the filing of the required completed application with the building official. The sign shall be posted no less than 15 feet from the public right-of-way that is used as access to the tower site. The sign shall face and be legible from the public right-of-way. The sign shall contain at a minimum the following items of information: 
(1)	The name, address, and telephone number of the person or entity that will own the proposed tower structure. 
(2)	The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant if different from the owner of the proposed tower. 
(3)	The approximate proposed location of the tower structure including the street address. 
(4)	The proposed use of the tower structure and site. 
(5)	The proposed maximum height above grade of the proposed tower structure. 
(6)	That additional information may be obtained by writing or calling the office of the building official. 
(c)	Appeal of the building official's decision on an application for a tower permit by either an applicant or property owner within 200 feet of the tower site shall be made in accordance with the zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1996, § 3.1407)  
Sec. 10-322. - Appeal and hearing procedures. 
(a)	Persons who own property within 200 feet of a proposed tower site and who have reasonable grounds to believe that approval of an application for a tower permit, the granting of a waiver, or the proposed construction will violate any applicable restriction, rule, regulation, or ordinance may request a hearing before the zoning commission to protest and present evidence establishing their allegations. Such hearing request must state the specific grounds relied upon and be presented to the office of the building official no later than 2:00 p.m. on the 37th calendar day following the date of filing of the required completed application. Copies of all supporting documents, instruments, or other materials that are to be presented to the commission shall accompany such hearing request and shall be available for inspection and photocopying. 
(b)	An applicant for a tower permit or a waiver has until 2:00 p.m. on the seventh calendar day following the issuance of a notice of disapproval or refusal by the building official to file a written notice of appeal to the zoning commission. The notice of appeal and request for hearing must be filed in the manner prescribed. 
(c)	Notice of the time, place, and location of the public hearing at which the protest or appeal is to be presented must be given by the zoning commission before the tenth day before the date of the hearing by: 
(1)	Publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and county. 
(2)	Written notice delivered to the applicant, such written notice shall be served by depositing the same properly addressed and postage paid, in the United States mail, first class postage. 
(3)	Written notice delivered to the owners, as is indicted by the most recently approved tax rolls, of a property located within a distance of 300 feet from the property upon which the permit is requested. Such written notice shall be served by depositing the same, properly addressed and postage paid, in the United States mail, first class postage. 
(d)	All properly filed appeals and protests concerning the approval or disapproval of an application for a tower permit or the granting or refusal of an application for a waiver for a particular project shall be considered by the zoning commission in a single public hearing. The public hearing shall be scheduled by the building official at the next available zoning commission meeting, assuming that proper notice has been given. 
(e)	No action may be taken by the zoning commission unless approved by a majority vote of the members of the commission at which the application for a tower permit is considered. 
(f)	If the zoning commission rejects an application for a tower permit or a waiver, or otherwise refused to approve a tower permit or grant a waiver, the zoning commission shall issue a written report explaining in detail the reasons for such rejection, its approval, or refusal. Such written report shall be issued not later than 60 calendar days from the date the application was filed. 
(g)	The decision of the zoning commission concerning the issuance or denial of a tower permit shall be the final administrative determination of the issue presented. 
(Code 1996, § 3.1408)  
Sec. 10-323. - Building permit requirement and plan review. 
(a)	A tower permit obtained pursuant to the provisions of this article shall become invalid after the passage of 90 days from the date of final approval of the tower permit unless any required building permit for the construction or alteration of the tower has been obtained before the expiration of that 90-day period. 
(b)	The construction, placement, or alteration of a tower is subject to any plan review, permitting requirement, or hearing process applicable to commercial construction in general which is required by order by the rules promulgated; provided that such regulation or rules are consistent with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1996, § 3.1409)  
Sec. 10-324. - Maintenance and inspection. 
(a)	All buildings, structures, supporting structures, wires, fences or ground areas used in connection with a tower shall be maintained in a safe condition and in good working order. All equipment or machinery required by the building code, the fire code, or any other applicable regulation or ordinance for a building or structure or supporting structure or device shall be maintained in good working order. The owner or operator of a tower shall be responsible for the maintenance of the tower, supporting structures, buildings, fences, and ground areas. 
(b)	By applying for a tower permit under this article, the applicant specifically grants permission to the city, its duly authorized agents, officials, and employees, to enter upon the property for which a permit is sought, after first providing reasonable notice, for the purpose of making all inspections required or authorized to be made under this article, the fire code, the building code, the city health code or any other applicable regulation, rule, or ordinance. 
(Code 1996, § 3.1410)  
Sec. 10-325. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)	Failure of any person to comply with any provision of this article shall be punishable upon conviction by a fine of not less than $100.00 or more than $2,000.00. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. All authority granted to the city attorney, building official, zoning commission and their designees under this article shall be exercised uniformly on behalf of and against all citizens and property of the city. 
(b)	If the building official or one of his designees makes a determination that a violation exists, a notice to comply shall be served on the owner or operator of the tower structure. The notice to comply shall be served as provided in subsection (e) of this section. 
(c)	After the expiration of ten days from the date on which the notice to comply is served, the building official or his designee shall inspect the tower structure and site described in the notice. If the violation no longer exists, then the building official shall make a record of his findings, close the matter and take no further action. If the violation has not been abated, corrected, or in the process of being corrected, then he shall cause to be issued to the owner or operator of a tower structure a citation informing the violator of the specific provision of this article that is being violated, describing the condition causing the violation, and requiring the violator to appear before a magistrate. 
(d)	Each notice to comply must contain the following information: 
(1)	That the building official has made a determination that a violation exists. 
(2)	The specific condition that constitutes a violation of this article. 
(3)	The specific provision of this article that is being violated. 
(4)	The street address or general description of the property upon which the tower structure that is in violation of this article is constructed. 
(5)	That the owner or operator receiving this notice must abate, cease, or correct the violation not later than the tenth day after the date on which this notice is served. 
(e)	The notice to comply shall be served on the owner or operator of a tower structure in the following manner: 
(1)	In person or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested; or 
(2)	If the owner cannot be located or identified or otherwise refuses to accept service as provided in this subsection, by posting a copy on the property upon which the tower structure exists and by publishing the notice to comply in a newspaper of general circulation in the county, two times within seven consecutive days. In the event service is accomplished pursuant to this subsection, it shall be deemed that the notice to comply was served on the second day such notice is published in a newspaper of general circulation for purposes of calculating the passage of the ten-day period provided by this section for compliance. 
(Code 1996, § 3.1411)  
Sec. 10-326. - City attorney authorized to file suit to abate violation. 
The city attorney is hereby authorized to file suit on behalf of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin or abate a violation of this article. This penalty shall be cumulative and in addition to any other civil or criminal penalty provisions. 
(Code 1996, § 3.1412)  
Sec. 10-327. - Transitional provision. 
The provision of this article shall apply only to towers constructed, placed, or altered after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, except for the fencing requirements of section 10-319, which shall be applicable to all towers subject to this article. 
(Code 1996, § 3.1413; Ord. No. 2007-04, 4-3-2007)  
Chapter 14 - BUSINESS AND COMMERCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Licensing authority's power to deny, suspend, or revoke business license due to criminal background, Texas Occupations Code § 53.001 et seq.; home rule municipal authority to license any lawful business or occupation that is subject to its police powers, Texas Local Government Code § 215.075. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Emergency vehicle regulations. 
(a)	No person, firm or corporation shall operate or cause to be operated on the streets of the city, any emergency vehicle without first securing a permit therefor from the city health officer and the chief of police, stating in such application the name of the owner, or person to whom such permit is desired, his street address, the type of motor car to be used, the horsepower thereof, the factory number and/or motor number thereof and such other relevant information as may be deemed advisable and necessary by the city health officer and the chief of police of said city. Such application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful to operate on the streets of the city any emergency vehicle unless same shall be equipped with signal lamps or an illuminating device and a siren, whistle, or bell that emits audible sounds as required under state law. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful to operate or drive an emergency vehicle upon any street within the corporate limits of the city at a rate of speed in excess of ten miles per hour above the legal speed limits; provided, however, that any bona fide peace officer, when in actual pursuit of a traffic violator or other person who might otherwise escape apprehension from a criminal offense which would ordinarily warrant arrest and immediate pursuit may, in his discretion, exceed such speed limit. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful to drive or operate an emergency vehicle upon the streets of the city unless and until the operator of such vehicle shall procure and furnish public liability and property damage insurance on each vehicle to be operated with the minimum liability thereunder as follows: 
(1)	$10,000.00 for any one single personal injury to any one person. 
(2)	$20,000.00 for personal injuries in any one single accident. 
(3)	$5,000.00 property damage for any one single accident. 
Said insurance policy to be approved by the city attorney of the city and said insurance policy shall be one issued by a company of sufficient assets. Such insurance policy is for the protection of the public that might be injured by the operation of said vehicles. 
(e)	It shall be unlawful for the operator of an ambulance to make an emergency call in the city without first clearing said call with the police department of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 4-4; Code 1996, § 4.200) 
State Law reference— Operation of authorized emergency vehicles, Texas Transportation Code § 546.001 et seq.; audible or visual signals required, Texas Transportation Code § 546.003; passing stationary authorized emergency vehicle, Texas Transportation Code § 545.157; municipal regulation of speed limits for emergency vehicles, Texas Transportation Code § 545.365; additional equipment requirements for authorized emergency vehicles, Texas Transportation Code § 547.702.  
Sec. 14-2. - Business licenses required. 
There shall be levied and collected from every person, firm, corporation, or other business entity operating or conducting business within the city, an annual fee for such business as provided for in the fee schedule. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1001; Ord. of 2-7-1995, § 1)  
Sec. 14-3. - Application for business license. 
The city secretary shall provide an application for a business license to each and every business being operated in the city and shall require each new business to file an application for a business license to operate in the city. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1002; Ord. of 2-7-1995, § 2)  
Sec. 14-4. - Business license fees. 
For the first year of any new business, an annual business license fee shall be imposed and shall be paid upon application for such business license to the city secretary of the city prior to commencement of business. Such fee shall be prorated to October 1 of the year of the commencement of the business. 
(Code 1996, App. A, § 7.900(a)(2); Ord. of 2-7-1995, §§ 1, 3)  
Sec. 14-5. - Late penalty. 
There shall be a late penalty, as provided for in the fee schedule, charged and collected for any business license fee paid after October 31, of each year. All fees shall be collected by the city secretary. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1003; Ord. of 2-7-1995, § 3)  
Sec. 14-6. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person, firm, corporation or other business entity who operates a business in the city, without a business license or in violation of this chapter, shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1-6. Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1004; Ord. of 2-7-1995, § 4)  
Secs. 14-7—14-28. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ITINERANT MERCHANTS 
 
Sec. 14-29. - License required. 
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to go from house to house or from place to place in the city, soliciting, selling or taking orders for or offering to sell or take orders for any goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, books, periodicals, newspapers, magazines, or subscriptions to newspapers or magazines, without having first applied for and obtained a license to do so from the city secretary of said city. It shall also hereafter be unlawful to sell or solicit in said city as aforesaid without carrying such license while engaged in such soliciting or selling. 
(Code 1996, § 4.401)  
Sec. 14-30. - License application. 
Any person desiring to go from house to house or from place to place in the city, to sell or solicit orders for goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, books, periodicals, newspapers, magazines, or subscriptions to newspapers or magazines, shall make written application to the city secretary of said city for a license to do so, which application shall show the name and address of the applicant, the name and address of the person, firm or corporation, if any, that he represents and the kind of goods offered for sale, and whether such applicant upon any such sale or order shall demand, accept or receive payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery, and the period of time such applicant wishes to sell or solicit in said city. 
(Code 1996, § 4.402)  
Sec. 14-31. - Bond. 
The application mentioned in section 14-30 shall be accompanied by a bond in the penal sum of $1,000.00, signed by the applicant and signed, as surety, by some surety company authorized to do business in the state, conditioned for the final delivery of goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, books, periodicals, magazines and newspapers in accordance with the terms of any order obtained prior to delivery and also conditioned to indemnify any and all purchasers or customers for any and all defects in material or workmanship that may exist in the article sold by the principal of said bond, at the time of delivery, and that may be discovered by such purchaser or customer within 30 days after delivery, and which bond shall be for the use and benefit of all persons, firms or corporations that may make any purchase or give any order to the principal on said bond, or to an agent or employee of the principal. Provided that in case the applicant is a person, firm, company, partnership, corporation or association engaging in any activity mentioned in section 14-29 through one or more agents or employees, such persons, firm, company, partnership, corporation or association shall be required to enter into only one bond, in the sum of $1,000.00 as required in this section, which bond shall be made to cover the activities of all its agents or employees. 
(Code 1996, § 4.403)  
Sec. 14-32. - Persons covered by article. 
The term "itinerant merchant" or "itinerant vendor," as used in this article, shall be held to be any person, firm, company, partnership, corporation or association engaged in any activity mentioned in section 14-29. 
(Code 1975, § 4-6; Code 1996, § 4.404)  
Sec. 14-33. - License fee. 
The license fee for an itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor shall be as provided for in the fee schedule; provided, however, that when any person, firm, company, partnership, corporation or association engages in any activity mentioned in this article through one or more agents or employees, such person, firm, company, partnership, corporation or association shall, in addition to a fee, pay a license fee, as provided for in the fee schedule, for each agent or employee so engaged, all of which licenses shall be valid for one year from the date of their issuance. The fees herein provided for shall be used for the purpose of defraying expenses incident to the issuing of said licenses. 
(Code 1975, § 4-6; Code 1996, § 4.405; Ord. of 11-19-1991)  
Sec. 14-34. - Exemptions. 
(a)	The provisions of this article shall not apply to sales made to dealers by commercial travelers or sales agents in the usual course of business, nor to sales made under authority and by order of law, nor to vendors of farm or dairy products. 
(b)	Persons engaged in interstate commerce shall not be required to pay said fee but shall be subject to all other requirements herein. 
(Code 1975, § 4-6; Code 1996, § 4.406)  
Secs. 14-35—14-56. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SOLICITATION OF CONTRIBUTIONS 
 
Sec. 14-57. - Generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or association to solicit or obtain alms or gifts, in money or merchandise, directly or indirectly, in the city, by the misrepresentation of names, occupation, financial condition, social condition or residence. 
(Code 1975, § 4-7; Code 1996, § 4.408(a))  
Sec. 14-58. - Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to solicit or to accept alms or gifts, in money or in merchandise, directly or indirectly, in the city, for or in behalf of any person or charitable, patriotic, social or philanthropic organization; to promote or participate in any entertainment, benefit dance, fair or bazaar in the name of charity, patriotism, or philanthropy; or to solicit or accept gifts or any property for any evangelistic, religious, philanthropic or charitable purpose of any nature or kind whatever, except by such church or religious organization while acting under and in accordance with the authority of the proper church officials, without first obtaining a permit to solicit funds in the city, said permit to be issued under the terms and regulations herein stated. This article shall not be construed so as to prohibit any organization from soliciting funds from its own membership at any time or place that they may desire. 
(Code 1975, § 4-7; Code 1996, § 4.408(b))  
Sec. 14-59. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, organization, or association to hold a benefit dance, rummage sale, or to sell or offer for sale any property which has been given for sale or charity, philanthropy or patriotic purposes, without first obtaining a permit as provided in this article. 
(Code 1975, § 4-7; Code 1996, § 4.408(c))  
Sec. 14-60. - Application for permit. 
Each applicant for a permit to solicit funds in the city shall submit to the city secretary a statement sworn to and containing the following information: 
(1)	Name and address of the organization. 
(2)	Name and address of the officer of its governing board. 
(3)	The amount to be solicited. 
(4)	The percentage of collection to be paid solicitors. 
(5)	The net proceeds anticipated for the purpose solicited for. 
(6)	The officials of the organization for whose support the permit is asked. 
(Code 1975, § 4-7; Code 1996, § 4.408(d))  
Sec. 14-61. - Approval or denial of permit. 
The city secretary shall grant or refuse a permit to solicit funds being governed in his decisions by the terms of this article and any decision rendered by the city secretary in granting or refusing a permit to solicit funds shall be final, except that appeal may be taken to the city commission. 
(Code 1975, § 4-7; Code 1996, § 4.408(e))  
Sec. 14-62. - Record of application. 
The city secretary shall keep each application on file and record of his action thereon, subject to the inspection by any person at any reasonable time. 
(Code 1975, § 4-7; Code 1996, § 4.408(f))  
Sec. 14-63. - Expiration of permit. 
Said solicitation permits, when granted by the city secretary, shall be valid for the period specified and no longer and in no case shall they exceed a period of 30 days after the date thereof unless same shall be renewed in due course by the city secretary. 
(Code 1975, § 4-7; Code 1996, § 4.408(g))  
Sec. 14-64. - Credentials provided. 
All applicants receiving permits shall supply their solicitors with proper credentials, and the recipient of the permit shall be responsible for the overt acts of his, or its authorized representatives, in connection with this solicitation. 
(Code 1975, § 4-7; Code 1996, § 4.408(h))  
Sec. 14-65. - Nontransferability of permit. 
The solicitation permit prescribed in this article shall be nontransferable, and may be revoked at any time by the city secretary and shall never operate as a grand or privilege or mature into a right. 
(Code 1975, § 4-7; Code 1996, § 4.408(i))  
Sec. 14-66. - Accounting of funds received. 
The person, firm or association, receiving a permit to solicit funds in the city, at the close of the solicitation, shall file with the city secretary an audit made by a certified public accountant, or in lieu thereof, a sworn official statement containing an accounting of the funds received, and the disbursement thereof. 
(Code 1975, § 4-7; Code 1996, § 4.408(j))  
Sec. 14-67. - Permittees subject to investigation. 
In all cases where the city secretary is of the opinion that the funds of any institution or organization operating under a permit from the city have been, or are being, diverted from the purpose for which they are collected, or have been secured by misrepresentation, such person, institution or organization shall be subject to investigation by said city secretary and, if the city secretary deems it warranted, may require such person or organization to file an immediate account of its receipts and expenditures with the city secretary and shall summon such witnesses to appear before him as shall be necessary to ascertain the truth or falsity as to the facts of such representation, or of such diverting of funds from their proper purposes, and the city secretary upon hearing the witnesses and after investigating all the facts shall render his decision as to whether or not the solicitation permit shall then and there be canceled. 
(Code 1975, § 4-7; Code 1996, § 4.408(k))  
Sec. 14-68. - Permit to be acquired prior to solicitations or contributions. 
No solicitation or contribution as provided in this article shall be asked, demanded or received by any person, or the representatives of any person, firm, institution, organization or association, until the provisions in this article are fully complied with and until a permit therefor as provided in this article shall be issued by the city secretary authorizing such solicitation in the city. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to grant a right to solicit or beg upon the streets or in public places in the city, or operate a "Tag Day" without first securing from the city secretary a permit specifically for this purpose after due application for same in the manner prescribed in this article has been made to the city secretary and such application has been granted. 
(Code 1975, § 4-7; Code 1996, § 4.408(l))  
Secs. 14-69—14-94. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to regulate sexually oriented businesses, Texas Local Government Code § 243.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14-95. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the continued concentration of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. 
(Code 1996, § 4.701)  
Sec. 14-96. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein section, unless the context otherwise indicates: 
Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment which as one of its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(1)	Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)	Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
Adult cabaret means a nightclub bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features: 
(1)	Persons who appear in a state of nudity; 
(2)	Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or 
(3)	Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motel means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)	Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with close-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; 
(2)	Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
(3)	Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to bus-rent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult theater means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
Board of adjustment means the board of adjustment of the city, which shall act as the appeals board for all purposes of this article. 
Chief of police means the chief of police of the city or his designated agent. 
Escort means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or privately perform a striptease for another person. 
Escort agency means a person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to hire escorts as one of its primary business purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration. 
Establishment means and includes any of the following: 
(1)	The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)	The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; 
(3)	The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business; or 
(4)	The relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a license. 
Nude model studio means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. 
Nudity or a state of nudity means: 
(1)	The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, or female breast; or 
(2)	A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or areola of the female breast. 
Operates or causes to be operated means to cause to function or to put or keep in operation. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business. 
Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
Residential district means a single-family, duplex, townhouse, multiple-family or mobile home zoning district, as defined in the city zoning ordinances, as amended. 
Residential use means a single-family, duplex, multiple-family, townhouse, or mobile home park use, as defined in the city zoning ordinances, as amended. 
Semi-nude means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
Sexual encounter center means a business or commercial enterprise that as one of its primary business purposes offers for any form of consideration: 
(1)	Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or 
(2)	Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or is semi-nude. 
Sexually oriented business means an adult arcade, adult bookstore, or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center. 
Specified anatomical areas means human genitals in a state of sexual arousal. 
Specified sexual activates means and includes any of the following: 
(1)	The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; 
(2)	Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
(3)	Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(4)	Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition. 
Substantial enlargement , as it pertains to a sexually oriented business, means the increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than 25 percent, as the floor area exists as of the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
Transfer of ownership or control, as it pertains to a sexually oriented business, means and includes any of the following: 
(1)	The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)	The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)	The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Code 1996, § 4.702)  
Sec. 14-97. - Classification. 
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows: 
(1)	Adult arcades; 
(2)	Adult bookstores or adult video stores; 
(3)	Adult cabarets; 
(4)	Adult motels; 
(5)	Adult motion picture theaters; 
(6)	Adult theaters; 
(7)	Escort agencies; 
(8)	Nude model studios; and 
(9)	Sexual encounter centers. 
(Code 1996, § 4.703)  
Sec. 14-98. - License required. 
(a)	A person commits an offense if he operates a sexually oriented business without a valid license, issued by the city for the particular type of business. 
(b)	An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the chief of police. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to the accuracy of plus or minus six inches. Applicants who must comply with section 14-113 shall submit a diagram meeting the requirements of section 14-113. 
(c)	The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this article. 
(d)	If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, he must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a 20 percent or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under section 14-99 and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(e)	The fact that a person possesses a valid license for any other type of business does not exempt him from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business license. 
(Code 1996, § 4.704)  
Sec. 14-99. - Issuance of license. 
(a)	The chief of police shall approve and issue any license required hereunder to an applicant within 30 days after receipt of an application unless the chief of police finds one or more of the following to be true: 
(1)	An applicant is under 18 years of age. 
(2)	An applicant or an applicants spouse is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the applicant or the applicant's spouse in relation to a sexually oriented business. 
(3)	An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(4)	An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this article, other than the offense of operating a sexually oriented business without a license, within two years immediately preceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect. 
(5)	The license fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(6)	An applicant has been employed in a sexually oriented business in a managerial capacity within the preceding 12 months and has demonstrated an inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business premises in a peaceful and law-abiding manner, thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(7)	An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in compliance with sections 14-101, 14-106, 14-107, 14-109, 14-110, 14-111, 14-112, 14-113, or 14-114. 
(8)	An applicant or an applicant's spouse has been convicted of a crime: 
a.	Involving: 
1.	Any of the following offenses as described in Texas Penal Code ch. 43: 
(i)	Prostitution; 
(ii)	Promotion of prostitution; 
(iii)	Aggravated promotion of prostitution; 
(iv)	Compelling prostitution; 
(v)	Obscenity; 
(vi)	Sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to a minor; 
(vii)	Sexual performance by a child; or 
(viii)	Possession of child pornography. 
2.	Any of the following offenses as described in Texas Penal Code ch. 21: 
(i)	Public lewdness; 
(ii)	Indecent exposure; 
(iii)	Indecency with a child; 
(iv)	Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault as described in Texas Penal Code ch. 22; 
(v)	Incest, solicitation of a child, or harboring a runaway child described in Texas Penal Code ch. 25; or 
(vi)	Criminal attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses. 
b.	For which: 
1.	Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is a misdemeanor offense; 
2.	Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
3.	Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period. 
(b)	The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant or applicant's spouse. 
(c)	An applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has been convicted of an offense listed in subsection(a)(8)a of this section may qualify for a sexually oriented business license only when the time period required by subsection (a)(8)b of this section has elapsed. 
(d)	The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the sexually oriented business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time. 
(Code 1996, § 4.705)  
Sec. 14-100. - Fees. 
The annual fee for a sexually oriented business license shall be as provided for in the fee schedule. 
(Code 1996, § 4.706)  
Sec. 14-101. - Inspection. 
(a)	An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police department, health department, fire department, planning department, code services department, and building inspection department to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(b)	A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or employee commits an offense if he refuses to permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the city at any time it is occupied or open for business. 
(c)	The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation. 
(Code 1996, § 4.707)  
Sec. 14-102. - Expiration of license. 
Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 14-98. Application for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the expiration date, and when made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected. 
(Code 1996, § 4.708)  
Sec. 14-103. - Suspension. 
The chief of police shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if he determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has: 
(1)	Violated or is not in compliance with sections 14-101, 14-106, 14-107, 14-109, 14-110, 14-111, 14-112, 14-113, or 14-114; 
(2)	Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually oriented business premises; 
(3)	Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as authorized by this article; 
(4)	Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented business premises; or 
(5)	Demonstrated inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner thus necessitating action by law enforcement officers. 
(Code 1996, § 4.709)  
Sec. 14-104. - Revocation. 
(a)	The chief of police shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in section 14-103 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12 months. 
(b)	The chief of police shall revoke a license if he determines that: 
(1)	A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the chief of police during the application process; 
(2)	A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(3)	A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(4)	A licensee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended; 
(5)	A licensee has been convicted of an offense listed in section 14-99(a)(8)a for which the time period required in section 14-99(a)(8)b has not elapsed; 
(6)	On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a person committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed premises of a crime listed in section 14-99(a), for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person was an employee of the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed; 
(7)	A licensee or an employee has knowingly allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in or on the licensed premises. The term "sexual contact" shall have the same meaning as it is defined in Texas Penal Code § 21.01; or 
(8)	A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for taxes related to the sexually oriented business. 
(c)	The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license. 
(d)	Subsection (b)(7) of this section does not apply to adult motels as a ground for revoking the license unless the licensee or employee knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public view. 
(e)	When the chief of police revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the chief of police finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least 90 days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the license was revoked under subsection (b)(5) of this section, an applicant may not be granted another license until the appropriate number of years required under section 14-99(a)(8)b has elapsed. 
(Code 1996, § 4.710)  
Sec. 14-105. - Appeal. 
If the chief of police denies the issuance of a license or suspends or revokes a license, the chief of police shall send to the applicant, or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the action and the right to an appeal. In the case of suspension or revocation of an existing license, written notice shall also be posted upon the business premises. Upon receipt of written notice of the denial, suspension, or revocation, the licensee whose application for a license has been denied or whose license has been suspended or revoked shall have the right to appeal to the board of adjustment of the city. The filing of an appeal stays the action of the chief of police in suspending, denying or revoking a license until the board of adjustment makes a final decision. The decision of the board of adjustment shall be final and any appeal shall he made directly to the state district court. On appeal to the state district court must be filed within 30 days after the receipt of notice of the decision of the board of adjustment. The licensee shall bear the burden of proof in court. 
(Code 1996, § 4.711)  
Sec. 14-106. - Transfer of license. 
A licensee shall not transfer his license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the application. 
(Code 1996, § 4.712)  
Sec. 14-107. - Location of sexually oriented businesses. 
(a)	A person commits an offense if he operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,500 feet of: 
(1)	A church, rectory, or church-related structure; 
(2)	A public, private or parochial elementary or secondary school, or a school zone in which the speed of traffic is regulated by posted signs during certain school hours; 
(3)	A boundary of a residential district or historical district; 
(4)	A public park, playground or recreation facility, library, daycare center, nursery school or kindergarten; 
(5)	The property line of a lot devoted to a residential use; or 
(6)	Any public transportation facility (DART Park & Ride). 
The location restrictions of this subsection apply whether or not the church, rectory, church-related structure, public school, private school, parochial school, elementary school, secondary school, school zone, residential district boundary, public park, playground, recreational facility, library, daycare center, nursery school, kindergarten or property line devoted to residential use is located within or outside the city. 
(b)	A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of another sexually oriented business. 
(c)	A person commits an offense if he causes or permits the operation, establishment, or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure, or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business. 
(d)	For the purposes of subsection (a) of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of a church, rectory, public or private elementary or secondary school, daycare center, nursery school, kindergarten, or to the nearest boundary of an affected public park, playground, library, recreational facility, residential district, or residential lot. 
(e)	For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall wean in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located. 
(f)	Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of this article that is in violation of subsection (a), (b), or (c) of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed three years, unless sooner terminated for any reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30 days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 1,000 feet of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later established business is nonconforming. 
(g)	A sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of this article as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business license, of a church, rectory, or church-related structure, a public, private or parochial elementary or secondary school, or a school zone in which the speed of traffic is regulated by posted signs during certain school hours; a boundary of a residential district or historical district within 1,500 feet of the sexually oriented business; a public park, playground or recreation facility, library, daycare center, nursery school or kindergarten; or the property line of a lot devoted to a residential use. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid license, and does not apply when an application for a license is submitted after a license has expired or has been revoked. 
(Code 1996, § 4.713)  
Sec. 14-108. - Appeal from locational restrictions. 
(a)	If the chief of police denies the issuance of a license to an applicant because the location of the sexually oriented business establishment is in violation of section 14-107, then the applicant may, not later than ten calendar days after receiving notice of the denial, file with the chief of police a written request for an exemption from the locational restrictions of section 14-107. 
(b)	If the written request is filed with the chief of police within the ten day limit, the board of adjustment shall consider the request. The board shall set a date for the hearing within 60 days from the date the written request is received. 
(c)	A hearing by the board may only proceed if all the board members are present. The board shall hear and consider evidence offered by any interested person. The formal rules of evidence do not apply. 
(d)	The board may, in its discretion, grant an exemption from the locational restrictions of section 14-107 if it makes the following findings: 
(1)	That the location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not have a detrimental effect on nearby properties or be contrary to the public safety or welfare; 
(2)	That the granting of the exemption will not violate the spirit and intent of this article; 
(3)	That the location of the proposed sexually oriented business will not downgrade the property values or quality of life in the adjacent areas or encourage the development of urban blight; 
(4)	That the location of an additional sexually oriented business in the area will not be contrary to any program of neighborhood conservation nor will it interfere with any efforts of urban renewal or restoration; and 
(5)	That all other applicable provisions of this article will be observed. 
(e)	The board shall grant or deny the exemption by a majority vote. Failure to reach a majority of the members shall be necessary to affirm, modify or reverse any decision. Disputes of fact shall be decided on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence. The decision of the board is final. 
(f)	If the board grants the exemption, the exemption is valid for one year from the date of the board's action. Upon the expiration of an exemption, the sexually oriented business is in violation of the locational restrictions of section 14-107 until the applicant applies for and receives another exemption. 
(g)	If the board denies the exemption, the applicant may not re-apply for an exemption until at least 12 months have elapsed since the date of the board's action. 
(h)	The grant of an exemption does not exempt the applicant from any other provisions of this article other than the locational restrictions of section 14-107. 
(Code 1996, § 4.714)  
Sec. 14-109. - Additional regulations for escort agencies. 
(a)	An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)	A person commits an offense if he acts as an escort or agrees to act as an escort for any person under the age of 18 years. 
(Code 1996, § 4.715)  
Sec. 14-110. - Additional regulations for nude model studios. 
(a)	A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years. 
(b)	A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex. 
(c)	A person commits an offense if he appears in a state of nudity or knowingly allows another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way. 
(d)	A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way. 
(Code 1996, § 4.716)  
Sec. 14-111. - Additional regulations for adult theaters and adult motion picture theaters. 
(a)	The requirements and provisions of this article remain applicable to adult theaters and adult motion picture theaters. 
(b)	A person commits an offense if he knowingly allows a person under the age of 18 years to appear in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(c)	A person under the age of 18 years commits an offense if he knowingly appears in a state of nudity in or on the premises of an adult theater or adult motion picture theater. 
(d)	It is a defense to prosecution under subsections (b) and (c) of this section if the person under 18 years was in a restroom not open to public view or persons of the opposite sex. 
(Code 1996, § 4.717)  
Sec. 14-112. - Additional regulations for adult motels. 
(a)	Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel. 
(b)	A person commits an offense if, as the person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have a sexually oriented business license, he rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and within ten hours from the time the room is rented, he rents or subrents the same sleeping room again. 
(c)	For purposes of subsection (b) of this section, the terms "rent" or "subrent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(Code 1996, § 4.718)  
Sec. 14-113. - Regulations pertaining to the exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos. 
(a)	A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises, in a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, videocassette, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)	Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed 32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to same designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The chief of police may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)	The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(3)	No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior approval of the chief of police or his designee. 
(4)	It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises. 
(5)	The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(6)	It shall be the duty of the owners and operation and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (a)(5) of this section remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(7)	The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle as measured at the floor level. 
(8)	It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to ensure that the illumination described in subsection (a)(7) of this section is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
(b)	A person having a duty under subsections (a)(1) through (8) of this section commits an offense if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. 
(Code 1996, § 4.719)  
Sec. 14-114. - Display of sexually explicit material to minors. 
(a)	A person commits an offense if, in a business establishment open to persons under the age of 17 years, he displays a book, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, film, or videocassette, the cover of which depicts, in a manner calculated to arouse sexual lust or perversion for commercial gain, any of the following: 
(1)	Human sexual intercourse, masturbation, or sodomy; 
(2)	Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts; 
(3)	Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, buttocks, or that portion of the female breast below the top of the areola; or 
(4)	Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, whether covered or uncovered. 
(b)	As used in this section, the term "display" means to locate an item in such a manner that, without obtaining assistance from an employee of the business establishment: 
(1)	It is available to the general public for handling and inspection; or 
(2)	The cover or outside packaging on the item is visible to members of the general public. 
(Code 1996, § 4.720)  
Sec. 14-115. - Enforcement. 
(a)	Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, any person violating section 14-107, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1-6. 
(b)	If the sexually oriented business involved is a nude model studio or sexual encounter center, then violation of section 14-107 is punishable as a Class A misdemeanor. 
(c)	Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, any person violating a provision of this article other than section 14-107, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine as provided for in the general penalty provision found in section 1-6. 
(d)	It is a defense to prosecution under sections 14-98(a), 14-107, and 14-110(d) that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)	By a proprietary school licensed by the state; a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)	By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(3)	In a structure: 
a.	Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; 
b.	Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
c.	Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
(e)	It is a defense to prosecution under section 14-98(a) or 14-107 that each item of descriptive, printed, film, or video material offered for sale or rental, taken as a whole, contains serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. 
(Code 1996, § 4.721)  
Sec. 14-116. - Injunction. 
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a valid license or in violation of section 14-107 is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. 
(Code 1996, § 4.722)  
Secs. 14-117—14-145. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SALVAGE YARDS AND DEALERS 
 
Sec. 14-146. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Salvage dealer, owner, or operator means any person, partnership, or corporation who, irregularly or continually, either at wholesale or retail, buys, sells, or deals in salvage whether as an itinerant or at a fixed place of business. 
Salvage yard also means automobile storage yard and includes any lot or tract of land whereon any iron, chain, brass, copper, tin, lead, or other base metals, old rope, bags, rags, old lumber and building materials, plastic, waste paper, paper clippings, clips, bagging, rubber, glass, empty bottles, bones, motor vehicles or old parts of motor vehicles, or any other articles which have been discarded or are no longer used for the purpose for which they were manufactured. 
(Code 1996, § 4.801)  
Sec. 14-147. - License required. 
(a)	No person shall exercise, carry on or engage in the business of operating a salvage yard unless such person first obtains a license to do so from the city. 
(b)	A separate license shall be required for operators of salvage yards for each place of business. 
(Code 1996, § 4.802)  
Sec. 14-148. - Application for issuance or refusal of license. 
Any person desiring a license required herein shall make application therefor in writing to the city secretary stating where the business is to be located and the residential address of the owner and the manager. Upon receipt of such application, the city secretary shall investigate the application and shall determine whether or not the license shall be issued or refused. If the city secretary shall refuse the issuance of the license, he shall do so in writing stating the reasons for such refusal. The applicant may, within ten days of the receipt of the written refusal, appeal the decision of the city secretary to the city commission provided he does so in writing. The city commission shall then decide the matter and their decision shall be final. 
(Code 1996, § 4.803)  
Sec. 14-149. - License fees. 
The license fee for each salvage yard shall be as provided for in the fee schedule. The license fee shall be charged per annum, payable on December 31 of each year. 
(Code 1975, ch. 4, § 10; Code 1996, § 4.804, App. A, § 7.700)  
Sec. 14-150. - Regulations. 
(a)	Surface requirements. All portion of lots or tracts of land used in the operation of any automotive wrecking, salvage or automobile yard must have an all-weather surface of concrete, asphalt, blacktop, stone, macadam, limestone, iron ore, gravel, or shell and appropriate drainage. 
(b)	Watershed. No salvage or automobile yard shall be located where rainfall in that area would be tributary to any stream. 
(c)	Use of premises outside enclosure. It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, his agents or employees to display, store or work on any junk or wrecked automotive vehicle, or the parts, accessories, or materials thereon or any other new or used scrap materials outside of or above the fence or wall required by this section. 
(d)	Prohibited conditions designated. 
(1)	Stagnant water. It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator engaged in the operation of a salvage or automobile yard to permit or allow the accumulation of stagnant water on the premises of the salvage or automobile yard, or to permit stagnant water to remain thereon. It shall likewise be unlawful for any owner or operator of a salvage or automobile yard to permit or allow holes or places where water may accumulate and become stagnant or to permit the same to remain thereon. 
(2)	Tires and other objects. It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of a salvage or automobile yard to maintain or stack tires or other objects capable of maintaining or holding water in such a fashion as to allow water to accumulate and become stagnant or to permit the same to remain thereon. 
(e)	Removal of flammable liquids from vehicle. All oil, gasoline, and other flammable liquids shall be completely drained and removed from any junked, wrecked or abandoned automotive vehicle before said vehicle is placed in any salvage yard in the city. 
(f)	Fencing; wall requirements. Every salvage yard within the city shall be completely surrounded and enclosed by a solid fence or wall on all sides of any salvage yard at least eight feet in height, provided that existing six-foot fences will comply until replaced. 
(g)	Construction, maintenance of fence or wall. Every fence or wall herein required shall be constructed and maintained as follows: 
(1)	All fences shall be constructed of wood, masonry, corrugated sheet metal, chainlink, or any combination thereof; provided, however, that any one side of a salvage or automobile yard shall be bounded by a fence or wall constructed of only one of the above materials. 
(2)	Chainlink fences shall be constructed of galvanized chainlink fencing with wood or metal slats or strips run through all links of the chainlink fence. 
(3)	All fences or walls shall extend downward to the ground and shall prevent any material from passing through or under said fence. 
(4)	All fences or walls shall be plumb and square at all times. 
(h)	Use of wall; door of building as part of fence or wall . Any part of the fence or wall required by this article hereof may consist in whole or in part of a solid wall and door, or walls and doors of any completely enclosed building on said premises, if such wall or door meets all construction requirements hereinabove set forth. 
(i)	Gates at openings in enclosure. Openings in the prescribed enclosure which are necessary to permit reasonable access to said salvage or automobile yards shall be equipped with solid gates, constructed and maintained in accordance with the requirements for a fence or wall hereinabove set forth. Such gates shall be closed and securely locked at all times except during normal daytime business hours. 
(j)	Use of premises outside enclosure. It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, his agents or employees to display, store or work on any salvage material therefrom outside of or above the fence or wall required by this section. 
(k)	Arrangement of vehicles, parts and materials . All automotive vehicles, parts or other materials located in or on the premises of any salvage or automobile yard in the city shall be so arranged to allow reasonable access to, and inspection of, the premises by authorized fire, health, police and building officials in the city. 
(Code 1996, § 4.805)  
Sec. 14-151. - Violations and penalties. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article shall be grounds for revocation of or the refusal to issue or renew any license required by the owner or operator of a salvage or automobile yard under this article, or any other section of this Code. Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1-6. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1975, § 4-10; Code 1996, § 4.806)  
Secs. 14-152—14-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - GARAGE SALES AND SIGNS 
 
Sec. 14-171. - Definitions. 
The term "garage sale," as used in this article, means a private sale conducted by a resident citizen of the city at such citizen's residence only on an occasional basis and limited to a period of three days. No commercial business shall be permitted to have a garage sale as defined herein and no resident citizen shall be permitted to have a continuous garage sale. 
(Code 1996, § 4.901)  
Sec. 14-172. - Regulations and fees. 
(a)	Unlawful unless in conformity. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to conduct a garage sale except in conformity with this section. 
(b)	Permit and fee. Application for a permit to conduct a garage sale shall be made in writing to the city secretary on a form to be provided by the city secretary prior to such garage sale. The city secretary shall collect a fee, as provided for in the fee schedule, for each permit issued. The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous location at the place of such garage sale. 
(c)	Restrictions. No resident citizen shall be permitted to have more than one garage sale each quarter. Further, such garage sale shall not be permitted for more than once each quarter and then only for a period of three consecutive days. 
(d)	Commercial businesses prohibited. No person or resident citizen shall be allowed to conduct a permanent or continuous garage sale. It is the intent of this subsection to allow only private resident citizens of the city to conduct such sales on an occasional basis and not as a commercial business or enterprise. 
(e)	Posting and removal of signs. 
(1)	No garage sale signs shall be permitted on any utility poles nor shall any such signs be posted in any manner which might constitute a traffic hazard or posted in such a manner as to become litter. All such signs must be anchored or affixed so as not to be blown away or become unsightly litter within the city. 
(2)	All signs posted by such resident citizens shall be removed within 24 hours after the final day of such garage sale and the failure to remove and clean up all signs posted by such person advertising such garage sale is unlawful and shall constitute littering and shall be punishable by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1-6. 
(3)	All signs must bear the permit stickers issued by the city secretary. 
(f)	Multifamily and apartment regulations. 
(1)	Definitions. The term "multifamily dwellings" means two or more residences or dwellings located in one or more buildings and for the purposes of this article shall include duplex and apartment dwellings as well as trailer park dwellings or residences. 
(2)	Restrictions. No multifamily dwelling shall be permitted to have more than one garage sale at said multifamily dwelling, trailer park or apartment complex each quarter. Further, such garage sale shall not be permitted for more than once each quarter for the entire multifamily dwelling, trailer park or apartment complex and then only for a period of three consecutive days. 
(3)	Permit and fee. The owner, manager, or operator of each multifamily dwelling, trailer park or apartment complex shall be required to file an application each year with the city secretary designating the dates it desires to authorize garage sales for its residences for the entire year. At least three days prior to the garage sale date designated for the multifamily dwelling, the owner, manager or operator of such multifamily dwelling, trailer park or apartment complex shall advise the city secretary as to how many of their residents desire to have such garage sale and each resident shall file an application as provided in this article with the city secretary in addition to the application filed by the owner, manager or operator of the multifamily dwelling and each such resident shall pay to the city secretary a fee, as provided in the fee schedule, for each permit issued to such resident. 
(Code 1996, § 4.902; Ord. of 8-18-1992; Ord. No. 99-03, 5-18-1999)  
Sec. 14-173. - Nonresident and commercial garage sale signs. 
(a)	Any person who is not a resident citizen of the city and who desires to post a garage sale sign within the city shall make an application to post such sign in writing to the city secretary on a form to be provided by the city secretary prior to posting such garage sale sign. 
(b)	Nonresidents shall not be permitted to post garage sale signs within the city more than four times each year. Further, such garage sale signs shall not be posted by nonresidents more than once each three months and then only for a period of three consecutive days. 
(c)	Commercial businesses shall not be permitted to post garage sale signs within the city. Further, no person shall be permitted to post garage sale signs within the city advertising a continuous garage sale. 
(d)	All garage sale signs posted by such nonresident shall be removed within 24 hours after the final day of such garage sale and the failure to remove and clean up all signs posted by such person advertising such garage sale is unlawful and shall constitute littering and shall be punishable by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1-6. 
(Code 1996, § 4.903; Ord. of 8-18-1992)  
Secs. 14-174—14-199. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PIPELINE TRANSPORTATION 
 
Sec. 14-200. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commodity means any substance capable of being transmitted through a pipeline which is, or may become, flammable, toxic or otherwise hazardous to human, animal or plant health and/or life. 
Pipeline means a line of pipe with pumps, valves and control devices for conveying a commodity or commodities. 
Shut-off valve means any device installed in a pipeline and used to stop the conveyance of commodities through a pipeline. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1101; Ord. of 8-1-1995, § 1)  
Sec. 14-201. - Permit required. 
No person, firm or corporation shall lay any pipeline, nor shall an existing pipeline be entirely replaced, across, or along and under the public streets, highways, sidewalks, parks, public squares, and/or public places within the city, unless and until a permit has been obtained for such pipeline under the terms of this article. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1101; Ord. of 8-1-1995, § 2; Ord. No. 2013-08, § 3, 8-6-2013)  
Sec. 14-202. - Trunk line permit; to be granted by ordinance; depth of pipes. 
A permit to lay or construct a trunk pipeline across or along and under any street in the city shall only be granted by ordinance which shall state the streets across or along and under which the pipeline is to be laid and shall state with particularity the point at which the pipeline will cross or run along and under any such street. No such permit will be granted nor any such ordinance passed unless so much of the entire pipeline as is proposed to be laid through or under any undeveloped or unplatted area within the limits of the city is to be buried and laid to a depth of at least four feet measured between the top of the line and the natural surface of the ground, provided that at any point where such line is to cross or run along and under an existing street and/or any proposed street which has been designated on the master plan for the city or the official city map of the city, said line must be buried to a depth of at least six feet measured between the top of the line and the natural surface of the ground. Provided, further, if at any particular point the city's director of public works recommends that a greater or lesser depth be required, if known and reasonable facts presented show that the recommendation is prudent and reasonable, such permit will not be granted except upon agreement by the permittee to comply with such required depth. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1103; Ord. of 8-1-1995, § 3; Ord. No. 2013-08, § 4, 7-16-2013)  
Sec. 14-203. - Application for permit; submitting plans, report to city commission. 
Any person desiring to construct any trunk pipeline across or along and under any street within the limits of the city shall first submit to the city's director of public works a plan accurately showing the proposed location, course and alignment of the proposed pipeline, accompanied by a written application for the passage of an ordinance as hereinabove provided, which application shall show (unless the same are sufficiently shown on the plan) the time, manner, means and methods of the proposed construction, the particular commodity proposed to be transported through such line and the maximum pressure and maximum temperature under which the same may be pumped or otherwise caused or permitted to flow through any and all of the particular portions of the line. Such plan, which shall consist not only of the plan but also of a suitable alignment, may as drawn for the applicant for its own records, shall accurately show the location of all existing streets, all proposed streets designated on master plan for the city or on the official map of the city or along and under which the pipeline is intended to be laid. Two copies thereof and of the application shall be presented to the city's director of public works. The director of public works shall report to the city commission upon his examination of such application and plans (including such changes in the plans as the applicant may have made upon his suggestion) with his recommendations as to the granting or denying of the application. He shall, in his report and recommendation, state whether the depth at which it is proposed to be laid through undeveloped or unplatted areas is, to the extent economically feasible, consistent with the probable future development of such areas and with the probable location of and opening of future streets and the probable laying of water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer lines incident to such probable future development. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1104; Ord. of 8-1-1995, § 4; Ord. No. 2013-08, § 5, 7-16-2013)  
Sec. 14-204. - Permit fees. 
Every such ordinance granted for the carrying of trunk pipelines under city streets shall provide that the permittee pay to the city an initial permit fee as provided for in the fee schedule, payable annually on September 1, in advance, each year that said pipeline is in operation, on or before the anniversary date of the final passage of the ordinance granting such permit 
(Code 1996, § 4.1105; Ord. of 8-1-1995, § 5; Ord. No. 2013-08, § 6, 7-16-2013)  
Sec. 14-205. - Conditions imposed by ordinances; saving city harmless, refilling depressions, repairing streets. 
The ordinance granting any permit shall require the permittee to save the city harmless from liability for injury or damage to any person or property caused by the construction, maintenance, operation, repair or removal of any part or all of such pipeline within the right-of-way of any street of the city, whether existing at the time such ordinance is passed or thereafter dedicated or otherwise coming into existence; and shall require the permittee to pay to the city all damages caused to the city or any of its agencies by the construction, maintenance, operation, repair or removal of such pipeline or any part thereof. Such ordinance shall further require the permittee to refill all excavations made by it within the right-of-way of any unimproved (unpaved) street, whether existing at the time such ordinance is passed or thereafter dedicated or otherwise coming into existence, in the construction, operating, maintaining or removing of such pipeline or any part thereof; and if after once refilling such excavation the earth within the excavated area settles so as to leave a depression, the permittee shall be required to make further necessary fills from time to time as ordered by the city director of public works or by the city commission. The permittee will be required by such ordinance to repair all portions of any street across or along and under which such line is laid and place the same in as good a state of repair and condition as they were in at the time the construction, repair or removal was commenced, such repairs to be to the satisfaction of the city commission. Such ordinance shall further require that all such work of repairing or refilling shall be done under plans and specifications approved by the director of public works and subject to his approval of the completed work; provided, however, no open cuts of paved streets and alleys shall be permitted, and the permittee shall tunnel and bore under said paved streets and alleys; and provided, further, all pipelines laid in public rights-of-way shall be installed in casing. Except in an emergency, the permittee shall notify the city's director of public works before commencing at any time excavation in any portion of any said unpaved or unimproved street, and shall not wholly close any street, but shall at all times maintain a route of travel along and within such roadway area which shall include any sidewalk area, except in the event of an emergency, it being evident that immediate action is necessary for protection of the public and to minimize property damage and loss of investment, the permittee may, at its own responsibility and risk, make necessary emergency repairs, notifying the city's director of public works and the mayor or the city commission of this action in writing, as soon as practical. Such ordinance shall also provide that in the event the permittee fails to commence or thereafter to diligently prosecute any repair, refilling or other work required to be done by it within a reasonable time after being notified to do so by the city's director of public works, the city may cause such work to be done at the expense of the permittee and may recover all such expense from the permittee, together with all costs and reasonable attorney's fees. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1106; Ord. of 8-1-1995, § 6; Ord. No. 2013-08, § 7, 7-16-2013)  
Sec. 14-206. - Effect of article. 
This article shall not apply to or affect any corporation now or hereafter providing natural gas service to the inhabitants of the city pursuant to a franchise granted to such corporation under the authority of the Charter as a gas distribution utility. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1107; Ord. of 8-1-1995, § 7; Ord. No. 2013-08, § 8, 7-16-2013)  
Sec. 14-207. - Registration of pipelines. 
The owner of any pipeline may transfer and/or assign the ownership or operation to another person or entity, provided advance written notice of the intent to transfer is delivered to the city secretary at least 30 days prior to such transfer or assignment. The new owner or assignee must comply with all of the terms and conditions of the ordinances of the city and provide such information as required of the original owner of the pipeline by this article. In addition, the new owner or assignee must pay a transfer or assignment fee to the city, in an amount as established by the city commission from time to time, prior to such transfer or assignment. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1108; Ord. of 8-1-1995, § 8; Ord. No. 2013-08, § 9, 7-16-2013)  
Sec. 14-208. - Pipeline signs. 
Every pipeline, new or existing, within the corporate limits of the city shall bear at all times, in plain, inedible lettering, signs denoting the ownership of said pipeline, permanently affixed in the pipeline right-of-way. No person, except the owner, or his or its duly authorized agent, shall tamper with or remove any such sign. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1109; Ord. of 8-1-1995, § 9; Ord. No. 2013-08, § 10, 7-16-2013)  
Sec. 14-209. - Exceptions. 
Those lands within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, which have been heretofore, or which may hereafter be, declared industrial districts by the city commission under Texas Local Government Code § 43.001 et seq. (Municipal Annexation) are wholly occupied by and subject to industrial development and, therefore, pipelines within said lands are excepted from the operation and effect of this article. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1110; Ord. of 8-1-1995, § 10; Ord. No. 2013-08, § 11, 7-16-2013)  
Sec. 14-210. - Shut-off valve operation; excavation and construction on or across pipelines. 
No person shall turn off, on, or otherwise operate or tamper with any pipeline shut-off valve within the city's corporate limits unless such person is an employee of the owner or operator of said pipeline or a duly authorized agent of such owner or operator. No person, other than the owner of the pipeline or his or its duly authorized agent, shall excavate over or change the grade of, operate on or construct anything on or across the right-of-way of any pipeline without first notifying the director of public works and the owner of the pipeline and giving them reasonable opportunity to have an observer present during such activity. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1111; Ord. of 8-1-1995, § 11; Ord. No. 2013-08, § 12, 7-16-2013)  
Secs. 14-211—14-228. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - CABLE TELEVISION CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Customer protection for telecommunications utilities generally, Texas Utilities Code § 64.001 et seq.; rights of utility customers generally, Texas Utilities Code § 182.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14-229. - Purpose. 
The city, by virtue of granting cable television franchises, recognized its responsibility to implement all measures considered necessary to ensure satisfactory and efficient customer service in the delivery of such cable services. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1201)  
Sec. 14-230. - Policy statement. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to ensure that the citizens of the city receive a satisfactory level of service from cable television franchisees. It is the express intent of the city commission to establish a minimum level of acceptable customer service which promotes the use, value, and quality of cable television service. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1202)  
Sec. 14-231. - Telephone responsiveness. 
(a)	Franchisees shall maintain toll-free telephone service on a 24-hour basis, with customer service representatives (CSR) available at least during normal business hours. 
(b)	Under normal conditions, telephones must be answered within 30 seconds; subscribers calling should reach a CSR within two minutes in all cases. 
(c)	Telephone calls to the franchisee shall not exceed a ten percent abandonment rate (callers that give up on hold, or receive busy signals). 
(d)	Less than three percent of callers should ever encounter a busy signal. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1203)  
Sec. 14-232. - Business office. 
(a)	Franchisees shall maintain a customer service office within ten miles of the city that is capable of accepting payments, adjusting bills, responding to repair, installation, or other service calls. 
(b)	The Galena Park area office shall be open at least a minimum of 40 hours per week. Of that time, there shall be a minimum of four hours on Saturday between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. and at least one day per week in which the office is open from 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. and one day per week in which the office is open between 5:00 p.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1204)  
Sec. 14-233. - Service and repair calls. 
(a)	Once a system is in place, all normal service installations must be made within seven business days. 
(b)	Repair or other service requests must be acknowledged within 24 hours. Repair or any other normal service must be completed within 72 hours under normal operating conditions, and within seven days in unusual circumstances. 
(c)	Franchisees must respond to reports of major service outages (any time two or more subscribers experience loss of reception on one or more channels) within 24 hours. 
(d)	One day's credit shall be given for each period of four or more consecutive hours occurring in a period of 24 consecutive hours in which a service interruption occurs, computed from the time the franchisee receives notice from the subscriber of the service interruption. Credit shall be provided for the specific services affected by the service interruption. For example, if the service interruption extends over a period of eight consecutive hours following notice from the subscriber and affects all services, one day's credit shall be given for the subscriber's total monthly service charges. If, however, the service interruption extends over a period of 26 consecutive hours following notice from the subscriber and is limited to a premium service, one day's credit shall be given only for the service charge related to that premium service. No credit shall be given for any service interruption caused by the subscriber or his equipment. 
(e)	Subscribers shall be provided, upon request, with either a time-specific appointment or a predesignated block of time (not to exceed four hours) for a service call. 
(f)	Technical service calls will be available starting at 8:00 a.m. until 7:00 p.m. on weekdays between May 1 and August 31, and between 8:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m. on weekdays between September 1 and April 30, and 9:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m. on Saturdays. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1205)  
Sec. 14-234. - Billing practices. 
(a)	Each subscriber bill must itemize each category of service, or other fees, and clearly state the charge for each. 
(b)	Each bill shall clearly state: 
(1)	The due date for payment; 
(2)	The amount of late payment fee; 
(3)	The date of assessment prior to its application; and 
(4)	A telephone number for billing inquiries. 
(c)	Upon initial installation, and at least once annually, and at such times as there is a change in the information, each subscriber shall receive written notice of: 
(1)	All equipment and services available and the rates/charges for each; 
(2)	Disconnect policies; 
(3)	Procedures for handling billing disputes; 
(4)	Notice that complaints not satisfactorily handled by the franchisee may be referred to the mayor's office (telephone number must be provided); and 
(5)	Availability of parental lock-out devices. 
(d)	Subscribers are to be notified of rate changes or channel changes at least 30 days in advance. 
(e)	The city is to be notified of rate changes or channel changes at least 45 days in advance. 
(f)	Involuntary disconnects must be given ten days advance written notice, and cannot be less than 45 days after the bill's due date. 
(g)	Subscribers may request disconnection at any time without charge. Disconnection and removal of franchisee equipment must be done within 30 days. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1206; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 14-235. - Enforcement. 
The mayor, or his duly authorized representative, shall administer and enforce this article. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1207; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Secs. 14-236—14-263. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - RIGHT-OF-WAY USE BY TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Municipalities have historical right to control and receive reasonable compensation for telecommunication utility access to the municipality's public streets, alleys, or rights-of-way or to other public property, Texas Utilities Code § 54.205; municipal authority regarding state-issued cable and video franchise, Texas Utilities Code §§ 64.011 and 64.013. 
 
Sec. 14-264. - Findings and purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)	Assist in the management of the rights-of-way in order to minimize the congestion, inconvenience, visual impact and other adverse effects, and the costs to the citizens resulting from the placement of telecommunications facilities within the public rights-of-way; 
(2)	Govern the carrier's use and occupancy of the rights-of-way; 
(3)	Compensate the city for the private commercial use and occupancy of the rights-of-way by telecommunications carriers in a non-discriminatory and competitively neutral manner; 
(4)	Assist the city in its efforts to protect the public health, safety and welfare; 
(5)	Facilitate competition among telecommunications service providers and encourage the universal availability of advanced telecommunications services to all residents and businesses of the city; 
(6)	Conserve the limited physical capacity of the rights-of-way held in public trust by the city. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1301)  
Sec. 14-265. - Authority; scope. 
(a)	This article applies to all telecommunications service providers under Title 47, Chapter 5 of the United States Code, as amended (47 USC 201 et seq.), (the "Act"), excluding services provided solely by means of a wireless transmission. No permit granted under this article authorizes the provision of any services not covered by the Act. Cable service and open video systems as defined in the Act and any other content service are expressly excluded. 
(b)	The grant of a city permit under this article does not grant attachment rights or authorize the use of utility infrastructure. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1302)  
Sec. 14-266. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Access line means the transmission media within the rights-of-way extended to the end-user customer's premises network interface within the city that allows delivery of telecommunications service within the city; and each termination point of a non-switched telephone circuit consisting of transmission media connecting specific locations identified by, and provided to, the end user for the delivery of non-switched telecommunications service within the city. Interoffice transport and other transmission media that do not terminate at an end-user customer's network interface device are not access lines that would be separately identified and counted for the purposes of assessing the monthly line fee. 
Affiliate means a person who controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with a carrier. The term "affiliate" does not include a person who serves end-user customers by means of a wireless transmission. There is a rebut table presumption of control if a carrier owns at least 25 percent of the affiliate's stock or assets. 
Cable service means the same as defined in the "Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984", as amended, 47 USC 532 et seq. 
Carrier means a person who owns telecommunications facilities located within the rights-of-way. 
City means the City of Galena Park, Texas. As used throughout, the term "city" also includes the designated agent of the city. 
City permit means the license granted by the city to individual local carriers under this article governing the local carrier's use of the rights-of-way and the payment of compensation as specified in this article. 
Direction of the city means all ordinances, laws, rules, and regulations of the city that are not inconsistent with this article and that are now in force or may hereafter be passed and adopted. 
Facilities means duct spaces, manholes, poles, conduits, underground and overhead passageways and other telecommunication equipment, structures, plant and appurtenances and all associated transmission media. 
Line fee means a monthly fee that is assessed on each access line owned by the local carrier and that is paid by the local carrier to the city as compensation for the use and occupancy of the rights-of-way. 
Local carrier means a carrier whose facilities are used to provide telecommunications services within the city. 
Mayor means the administrator of the city or the mayor's designee. 
Non-local carrier means a carrier whose facilities are not used to provide telecommunications services within the city. 
Permit holder means any telecommunications service provider issued a permit pursuant to the terms of this article. 
Person means a natural person (an individual), corporation, company, association, partnership, firm, limited liability company, joint venture, joint stock company or association, and other such entity. 
Private line termination point means a non-switched telephone circuit consisting of transmission media dedicated for use between specific locations identified by an end-user customer. 
Provider means a person that is not a local carrier, but is providing telecommunications services within the city. 
Rights-of-way means all present and future public streets, highways, lanes, paths, alleys, sidewalks, boulevards, drives, bridges, tunnels, easements or similar property in the city limits in which the city holds a property interest or exercises rights of management or control. 
Telecommunications network or network means all facilities placed in the rights-of-way and used in whole or in part to provide telecommunications services to the public. 
Telecommunications services means the provision of any transmission of information of the user's choosing, including voice, video or data, if the transmissions are accomplished through transmission media in the rights-of-way. Telecommunications services include ancillary or adjunct switching services and signal conversions rendered as a function of underlying transmission services, but excludes long distance transmissions (inter-LATA (Local Access Transport Area) and intra-LATA toll transmissions). Telecommunications services includes all communications services capable of being provided over a telephone system and permitted to telecommunications providers under the Public Utility Regulatory Act of 1995, Texas Rev. Civ. St. Ann. Art. 1446c-0, as amended, and Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, expressly excluding cable services or open video systems as defined in Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended. Also excluded are wireless services, as defied by law. 
Telecommunications utility means the same as used in the Public Utility Regulatory Act of 199S, Texas Utilities Code § 51.002(11). 
Transmission media means any and all of the local carrier's cables, fibers, wires or other physical devices used to transmit and/or receive communication signals, whether analog, digital or of other characteristic, and whether for voice, data or other purposes. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1303; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 14-267. - City permit required. 
(a)	Persons seeking to provide telecommunications services by means of a network, whether such network is owned by the person seeking to provide the services or by some other person, must obtain a city permit pursuant to the terms of this article. 
(b)	The use of rights-of-way for the delivery of any service not covered by this article is subject to all other applicable city requirements. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1304)  
Sec. 14-268. - Application for city permit. 
(a)	A person must submit an application to the mayor with a duplicate copy to the city attorney to grant, renew, extend, amend, or transfer a city permit. 
(b)	The application must be on a form prescribed by the mayor, and it must include the following: 
(1)	The identity of the applicant, including all affiliates of the applicant, and the identity of any other local carrier which may use in any manner the telecommunications network, to the extent known at the time of the application; 
(2)	A description of the services to be provided; 
(3)	With respect to post-application construction, an outline of the applicant's proposed network, if any; 
(4)	With respect to the post-application construction, a description of the effect on the rights-of-way, if any, including: 
a.	The location and route required for the applicant's proposed telecommunications network; 
b.	The location of all overhead and underground public utility, telecommunication, cable, water, sewer drainage and other facilities in the public rights-of-way along the proposed route; 
c.	The location, if any, for interconnection with other telecommunications facilities or networks of other telecommunications providers; and 
d.	The specific trees, structures, improvements, facilities and obstructions, if any, that the applicant proposes to temporarily or permanently remove or relocate; 
(5)	Information to establish that the applicant has obtained or will obtain all other governmental approvals and permits prior to construction and operation of the telecommunications network and prior to offering or providing the telecommunications services; and 
(6)	Such other and further information as may be reasonably requested by the mayor. 
(c)	Each applicant shall submit a nonrefundable application fee as provided for in the fee schedule. 
(d)	The mayor shall review an application submitted under this article and shall recommend to the city commission that it grant or deny the application. The mayor shall make recommendation to the city commission no later than the 120th day after an application is filed. Upon mutual written agreement between the city and the local carrier, action may be postponed for periods not exceeding 30 days each. 
(e)	Except for delay by the applicant, the city commission must act on the mayor's recommendation within 60 days after receipt by the commission of the mayor's recommendation or the mayor's recommendation to grant an application shall be deemed approved. No city commission action is needed on a denial recommendation, except acknowledgment of receipt of the recommendation. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1305; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 14-269. - Term of city permit. 
The initial term of each permit issued under this article shall be three years from the date of issuance, unless terminated earlier by mutual written agreement of the city and the permit holder or pursuant to law. At the expiration of the initial permit period, the permit shall be automatically extended for successive periods of one year, unless written notice of intent to terminate the permit is given not less than 90 days prior to the termination of the then current period by the city to the permit holder. When such notice is given, the permit shall terminate at the expiration of the then current period. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1306)  
Sec. 14-270. - Petition for reconsideration. 
The act of granting, amending, denying or terminating a city permit is a legislative function within the discretion of the city commission. A person whose application for a city permit is denied, or whose application is not considered by the city commission on or before the 45th day after the city administrator submits his recommendation for approval or denial or whose city permit is terminated must petition the city commission for reconsideration before seeking regulatory or judicial remedies. A petition for reconsideration is considered denied if the city commission does not act within 45 days after the petition is filed with the city secretary. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1307)  
Sec. 14-271. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)	The mayor shall administer this article and enforce compliance with a city permit granted under this article. 
(b)	A local carrier shall report information that the mayor requires in the form and manner prescribed by the mayor relating to the use of rights-of-way for the telecommunications services authorized by a city permit granted under this article. 
(c)	The mayor shall report to the city commission the mayor's determination that a local carrier has failed to comply with this article. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1308; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 14-272. - Applicability and general terms of this article. 
(a)	Sections 14-279, 14-280 and 14-281 apply only to a local carrier. 
(b)	Section 14-282 applies to any holder of a permit that has a property interest in a network. 
(c)	No rights agreed to in this article by the city shall be exclusive and the city reserves the right to grant franchises, licenses, easements or permissions to use the rights-of-way within the city to any person as the city, in its sole discretion, may determine to be in the public interest. 
(d)	A permit holder is not authorized to provide cable service as a cable operator in the city under this article, but must first obtain a franchise from the city for that purpose, under such terms and conditions as may be required by law. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1309)  
Sec. 14-273. - Compensation to city. 
(a)	Line fee. To compensate the city for the use and occupancy of the rights-of-way, a local carrier shall pay the city a monthly line fee as calculated as of month-end for each access line that is activated for use by an end-user customer of the local carrier or for use by a provider and that provides telecommunications services over the local carrier's facilities. 
(1)	Line fee. 
a.	Following the effective date of this article, a local carrier holding a municipal license shall submit to the mayor on a quarterly basis a certified statement with the line fee payment under section 14-274 indicating the number of access lines for the customer classes identified herein used to provide telecommunications services at month end, for each month of the quarter. The statement shall be provided on a form prescribed by the mayor. 
b.	For each month of the quarter for the first year following the effective date of the permit, a local carrier shall pay a city permit fee based on its number of access lines calculated for the customer classes as follows: 
Access Line 	Monthly Amount per Access Line 
Residential 	$1.05 
Nonresidential and Private Line Termination Points 	$2.65 
 
(For purposes of this section only, access lines for customers with "Lifeline", "Tel-Assistance" or other service that is required to be similarly discounted pursuant to state or federal law or regulation for the purpose of advancing universal service to the economically disadvantaged shall not be included in the lines upon which the fee is calculated.) 
(2)	Pursuant to Texas Utilities Code § 54.206, a local carrier shall collect the line fee imposed by the city pursuant to this article through a pro rata charge to its customers in the boundaries of the city, including any providers who are leasing, reselling or otherwise using the local carrier's access lines to provide telecommunications services. With respect to a provider's leasing, reselling, or otherwise using a local carrier's access line, if a local carrier believes it does not have sufficient information to determine the appropriate rate to apply, then the higher line fee shall apply until such time as the provider certifies in writing to the local carrier sufficient information to determine the correct line fee. If a provider certifies in writing information for the application of a line fee, the local carrier may bill the provider on the basis of the information provided. Local carrier shall provide to the city any information regarding the locations to which it is providing service or facilities for use by a provider, so long as the city first obtains written permission of the provider for the local carrier to provide such information to the city; however, any other provision of this article notwithstanding, a local carrier shall not be liable for underpayment of line fees resulting from the local carrier's reliance upon the written certification provided by a provider. 
(3)	Annual recalculation of line fees. The city may adjust the line fee annually on the anniversary of the effective date herein provided that such adjustment does not exceed the amount of the increase in the Consumer Price Index from the last preceding anniversary of the effective date herein and provided that such adjustment is effected by ordinance and the provider is delivered a copy of said article at least 30 days before the anniversary date. 
(b)	Number of access lines. Subject to the city's agreement not to disclose this information unless required by law, the local carrier agrees to provide annually or as requested by the city, within a reasonable time after receipt of the city's written request, a report showing the number of access lines being maintained or operated by the local carrier that are serving premises within the city. To the extent known, such report shall specifically identify lines maintained or operated by the local carrier that are leased and/or used by providers. The city agrees that the report shall be used solely for the purposes of verifying the number of the local carrier's access lines serving premises within the city. Upon written request, the local carrier shall verify the information in the report and, upon reasonable advance notice, all non-customer specific records and other documents required for such verification shall be subject to inspection by the city expressly excluding any records, documents or other writings the disclosure of which is prohibited by state or federal law, including the Electronic Communications Privacy Act, 18 USC 2701 et seq. 
(c)	Confidential records. If a local carrier notifies the city of the confidential nature of any information (including, but not limited to, the information in subsection (b) of this section), reports, documents, or writings, the city agrees to maintain the confidentiality of the information, reports, documents, and writings to the extent permitted by law. Upon receipt by the city of requests for the local carrier's confidential information, reports, documents, or writings, the city shall notify the local carrier of the request in writing by facsimile transmission. The city shall furnish the local carrier with copies of attorney general opinion requests it makes pertaining to the local carrier's confidential information, reports, documents or writings. 
(d)	No other fees. Unless otherwise provided in this article, the payments due hereunder shall be in lieu of fees charged for the use of rights-of-way, including any permit, license, approval, inspection, or other similar fees or charges or general business license fees customarily assessed by the city against a person operating a business similar to that conducted by the local carrier. 
(e)	Uncollectibles. The city and the local carrier understand and agree that the local carrier has a statutory right to pass through to its customers on a pro rata basis any compensation paid to the city for access to the rights-of-way. Any other provision of this agreement notwithstanding, the local carrier shall not be obligated to pay the city for any access lines or private line termination points the revenues for which remain uncollectibles, nor shall the local carrier have any liability for any underpayment caused by the failure to report or any under-reporting by a provider. 
(f)	Other telecommunications carriers and local carriers. Other provisions of this section notwithstanding, the local carrier shall not include in its monthly count of access lines, and shall not remit a line fee to the city on such lines and points, those access lines that are leased or otherwise provided to another local carrier or provider for consideration if the other local carrier or provider that holds a city permit and declares its intent to the city to both include the leased or otherwise used access lines in its own monthly count of such facilities to the city and remit to the city a line fee on those lines and points and provide the city with all applicable payments and reports as required herein of a local carrier. A provider or local carrier that demonstrates to the mayor that the lines it utilizes for resale of services from local carriers are included in the other local carrier's fee calculations is not required to comply with the payment requirements of this article. A provider excluded from payment requirements pursuant to this section shall report to the mayor changes in operation that might affect the availability of this payment option before the end of the quarter in which payment would otherwise be required and the local carrier that leases or otherwise provides the lines to a provider excluded under this section shall report the existence of those lines to the city, such lines to include, but not be limited to, lines leased or otherwise provided to holders of operating certificates issued by the public utility commission of the state. 
(g)	Public street crossing fee. 
(1)	A non-local carrier shall pay the city an annual public street crossing fee of: 
a.	$2.50 per linear foot for each diameter inch or less of underground conduit or wire and for each .250 diameter inch or less of aerial wire that is in the public rights-of-way per annum; and 
b.	$1,000.00 for the first street crossing and $250.00 for every street crossing thereafter. 
(2)	The public street crossing fee shall be due on October 1 or every year, pro rated as applicable. A report as required by the mayor shall be provided with each annual payment showing the calculation of the payment, including the length of the network and whether it is overhead or underground, as applicable, and number and name of each street crossing. 
(3)	This fee is to compensate the city for the reasonable rental value of the public rights-of-way used by the non-local carrier, and to recover the administrative cost in monitoring and enforcing the provisions of this article. Each city permit ordinance requiring payment under this section shall provide that such fee may be adjusted once every two years to properly reflect compensation for the use of the public rights-of-way and administrative cost to the city. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1310; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 14-274. - Fee payments. 
A local carrier shall remit the line fee on a quarterly basis, together with the certified statement required in section 14-273(a)(1)a. Payment shall be made on or before the 45th day following the close of each calendar quarter for which the payment is calculated and shall be paid by wire transfer to an account designated by the mayor. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1311; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 14-275. - Audits. 
(a)	On 30 days notice to a carrier the city may audit a carrier at any time. An audit pursuant to this section shall be limited to not more than the current year plus three years preceding the date the audit is commenced. The carrier shall furnish all relevant information to demonstrate its compliance with the permit and/or other provisions of this article, provided that auditors ensure the privacy of customer specific records and proprietary or market sensitive data. 
(b)	A carrier shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts and records of business and operations in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles for a period of five years. If the Federal Communications Commission requires, a carrier shall use the system of accounts and the forms of books, accounts, records, and memoranda prescribed in 47 CFR 32 or its successor. The mayor may require the keeping of additional records or accounts that are reasonably necessary for purposes of identifying, accounting for, and reporting the number of lines used to deliver telecommunication services. The city may examine the carrier's books and records, expressly excluding any records, documents or other writings the disclosure of which is prohibited by state or federal law, including the Electronic Communications Privacy Act, 18 USC 2701 et seq. 
(c)	A carrier shall make available to the city or the city's designated agent (hereinafter "agent"), for the city or its agent to examine, audit, review and copy, in the city on the mayor's written request, its books and records including papers, books, accounts, documents, maps, plans and other carrier records pertaining to a city permit granted under this article. A carrier shall fully cooperate in making records available and otherwise assist the city examiner. The city examiner shall not inspect or copy or otherwise demand production of customer specific information or any records, documents or other writings the disclosure of which is prohibited by state or federal law, including the Electronic Communications Privacy Act, 18 USC 2701 et seq. 
(d)	The mayor may, at any time, make inquiries pertaining to local carrier's or non-local carrier's performance of the terms and conditions of a permit granted under this article. The carrier shall respond to such inquiries on a timely basis. 
(e)	The provisions of this section shall be continuing and shall survive the termination of the permit granted under this article and shall extend beyond the term of the permit granted to the carrier and the city shall have all the rights described in this section for so long as the carrier is providing any telecommunications services within the city. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1312; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 14-276. - Transfer. 
(a)	No permit granted under this article, the assets held by local carriers for use under such permit which are in the public rights-of-way, any rights or privileges of local carriers under a permit, either separately or collectively, shall be sold, resold, assigned, transferred or granted by local carriers to any other person, without the prior written approval of the city. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. Should the local carrier sell, assign, transfer, convey or otherwise dispose of any of its rights or interests under this permit, including such local carrier's telecommunication network, or attempt to do so, without the city's prior approval, the city may revoke the approval for default. 
(b)	Any transfer in violation of this section shall be null and void and unenforceable. Any change of control of a local carrier shall constitute a transfer under this section. 
(c)	There shall be a rebut table presumption of a change of control of a local carrier upon a change of 15 percent or greater in the ownership of such local carrier. Such a change in control shall be deemed a transfer which requires review by the city. 
(d)	A mortgage or other pledge of assets to a bank or lending institution in a bona fide lending transaction shall not be considered an assignment or transfer. 
(e)	Every permit granted under this article shall specify that any transfer or other disposition of rights which has the effect of circumventing payment of required fees and/or evasion of payment of such fees by a local carrier is prohibited. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1313)  
Sec. 14-277. - Notices to the city. 
(a)	A local carrier shall provide to the mayor a copy of any petition, application, or report submitted by the local carrier to the Federal Communications Commission and the public utility commission, or their successor agencies, upon specific written request from the mayor for such document. 
(b)	If a local carrier notifies the city of the confidential nature of information, the mayor shall maintain the confidentiality of the information to the extent permitted by law. Upon receipt of requests for confidential information, the city shall notify the affected local carriers of the request by facsimile transmission. The city shall furnish local carriers with copies of attorney general opinion requests it makes pertaining to the confidential information 
(c)	A local carrier shall give written notice to the city not later than 15 days before a transfer or change in operations that may affect the applicability of sections 14-279, 14-280, 14-282 and 14-283, to the local carrier. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1314; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 14-278. - Circumvention of fee prohibited. 
A person may not circumvent payment of line fees or evade payment of fees by bartering, transfer of rights, or by any other means that result in undercounting a local carrier's number of lines. Capacity or services may be bartered if the imputed lines are reported in accordance with section 14-273. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1315)  
Sec. 14-279. - Construction obligations. 
(a)	A local carrier is subject to the police powers of the city, other governmental powers and the city's rights as a custodian of public property under state and federal laws. A local carrier is subject to city requirements and federal and state rules in connection with the construction, expansion, reconstruction, maintenance or repair of facilities in the rights-of-way. 
(b)	At the city's request, a local carrier shall furnish the city accurate and complete information relating to the construction, reconstruction, removal, maintenance, operation and repair of facilities performed by the local carrier in the rights-of-way. 
(c)	The construction, expansion, reconstruction, excavation, use, maintenance and operation of a local carrier's facilities within the rights-of-way are subject to applicable city requirements. 
(1)	A local carrier shall place certain facilities within the rights-of-way underground according to applicable city requirements absent a compelling demonstration by the local carrier that, in any specific instance, this requirement is not reasonable or feasible nor is it equally applicable to other similar users of the rights-of-way. 
(2)	A local carrier shall perform excavations and other construction in the public rights-of-way in accordance with all applicable city requirements, including the obligation to use trenchless technology whenever practical and consistent with obligations on other similar users of the rights-of-way. The city shall waive the requirement of trenchless technology if it determines that the field conditions warrant the waiver. A local carrier shall minimize interference with the use of public and private property and shall follow the construction directions given by the city. 
(3)	When a local carrier completes construction work, it shall promptly restore the rights-of-way in accordance with applicable city requirements. A local carrier may excavate only for the construction, installation, expansion, repair, removal, and maintenance of its facilities. 
(4)	The city recognizes that state and federal statutes control the conditions under which one local carrier may be required to allow another local carrier access to its poles and conduits; however, all of the facilities attached to the poles and conduits of any local carrier are subject to the same obligations hereunder as the facilities of that local carrier. 
(5)	A local carrier shall furnish the city with construction plans and maps showing the routing of new construction at least 45 days before beginning construction that involves an alteration to the surface or subsurface of the public rights-of-way. A local carrier may not begin construction until the plans and drawings have been approved in writing by the mayor of public works. 
(6)	For construction that involves a minor alteration to the surface or subsurface of the rights-of-way, and does not involve the routing of new facilities, the city shall implement a streamlined permitting process of less than five days. 
(7)	If the mayor declares that an emergency situation exists due to an urgent public necessity, an immediate or imminent threat to public health or safety, or a reasonably foreseeable situation requiring immediate action, and requests the removal or abatement of facilities by written notice, a local carrier shall remove or abate its facilities by the deadline provided in the mayor's request. A local carrier and the city shall cooperate to the extent possible to ensure continuity of service. If a local carrier, after notice, fails or refuses to act, the city may remove or abate the facility, at the sole cost and expense of the local carrier, without paying compensation to the local carrier and without the city incurring liability for damages. 
(8)	Except in an emergency, a local carrier may not excavate the pavement of a street or public rights-of-way without first complying with city requirements. 
(9)	Within 120 days of completion of each new segment of its facilities, a local carrier shall supply the city with a complete set of as built drawings for the segment in a format prescribed by the city. A local carrier must obtain the city's approval before relocating its facilities in the rights-of-way. The city may not unreasonably withhold approval. 
(d)	Factors to be considered in determining whether any requirement under this section is unreasonable or unfeasible are, among other things, whether the requirement would subject the local carrier to an unreasonably increased risk of service interruption, or to an unreasonably increased liability for accidents, or to an unreasonable delay in construction or in availability of its services, or to any other unreasonable technical or economic burden. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1316; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 14-280. - Conditions of rights-of-way occupancy. 
(a)	In the exercise of governmental functions, the city has first priority over all other uses of the rights-of-way. The city reserves the right to lay sewer, gas, water, and other pipe lines or cables and conduits, and to do underground and overhead work, and attachment, restructuring or changes in aerial facilities in, across, along, over or under a public street, alley or rights-of-way occupied by a local carrier, and to change the curb, sidewalks or the grade of streets. 
(b)	The city shall assign priorities among competing uses of the rights-of-way according to the order of completed permit applications. 
(c)	If during the term of a city permit, the city authorizes abutting landowners to occupy space under the surface of any public street, alley, or rights-of-way, the grant to an abutting landowner shall be subject to the rights of the local carrier. If the city closes or abandons a right-of-way that contains a portion of a local carrier's facilities, the city shall convey the land in the closed or abandoned rights-of-way subject to the rights granted in the city permit. 
(d)	A local carrier shall, for the purpose of construction, reconstruction, extension, widening or other public improvement project, and at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the position of its facilities that are in the rights-of-way within 120 days of receipt of written notice by the city. For projects expected to last beyond 120 days, the city will confer with the local carrier before determining the alterations to be required and the timing thereof. The city shall give notice whenever the city has determined that removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for the construction, operation, repair, maintenance or installation of a city public improvement in the rights-of-way. This section shall not be construed to prevent a local carrier's recovery of the cost of relocation or removal from private third parties who initiate the request for relocation or removal, nor shall the local carrier be required to construct improvements which are solely for esthetic or beautification purposes without prior joint deliberation and agreement with local carrier. 
(e)	During the term of its city permit, a local carrier may trim trees in or over the rights-of-way for the safe and reliable operation, use and maintenance of its network. All tree trimming shall be performed in accordance with standards promulgated by the city. When ordered by the city, tree trimming shall be done under the supervision of the city. 
(f)	The local carrier shall temporarily remove, raise or lower its aerial facilities to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures, if the city gives written notice of no less than 48 hours. The expense of this temporary rearrangements shall be paid by the party requesting and benefitting from the temporary rearrangements. The local carrier may require prepayment or prior posting of a bond from the party requesting temporary move. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1317)  
Sec. 14-281. - Insurance requirements. 
(a)	A local carrier shall furnish the city with proof of insurance at the time of filing the acceptance of a city permit. For purposes of this section, the city will accept certificates of self-insurance issued by the state providing the same coverage. 
(b)	The city may, on request and at no cost to the city, receive copies of certificates of insurance evidencing the coverage required by this section. 
(c)	An insurance certificate shall contain the following required provisions: 
(1)	Name the city and its officers, employees, board members and elected representatives as additional insureds for all applicable coverage; 
(2)	Provide for 30 days notice to the city for cancellation, non-renewal, or material change; 
(3)	Provide that notice of claims shall be provided to the mayor by certified mail; and 
(4)	Provide that the terms of the city permit which impose obligations on the local carrier concerning liability, duty, and standard of care, including the indemnity section, are included in the policy and that the risks are insured within the policy terms and conditions. 
(d)	A local carrier shall file and maintain proof of insurance with the mayor during the term of a city permit or an extension or renewal. An insurance certificate obtained in compliance with this section is subject to city approval. A local carrier shall immediately advise the city attorney of actual or potential litigation that may develop that may affect an existing carrier's obligation to defend and indemnify. 
(e)	An insurer has no right of recovery against the city. The required insurance policies shall protect the local carrier and the city. The insurance shall be primary coverage for losses covered by the policies. 
(f)	The policy clause "Other insurance shall not apply to the city" of the city is an insured under the policy. 
(g)	The local carrier shall pay premiums and assessments. A company which issues an insurance policy has no recourse against the city for payment of a premium or assessment. Insurance policies obtained by a local carrier must provide that the issuing company waives all right of recovery by way of subrogation against the city in connection with damage covered by the policy. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1318; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 14-282. - Indemnity. 
The carrier shall indemnify and hold the city harmless from all costs, expenses, and damages to persons or property arising directly or indirectly from the construction, maintenance, repair, or operation of the carrier's facilities located within the rights-of-way found to be caused solely by the negligence of the carrier. Expenses shall include any reasonable and necessary attorney's fees and court costs. The city shall give the carrier prompt written notice of any claim for which the city seeks indemnification. The carrier shall have the right to investigate and compromise any such claim. The carrier may, at the city's option, provide a defense on behalf of the city to any such claim. This provision is not intended to create a cause of action or liability for the benefit of third parties, but rather this provision is solely for the benefit of the carrier and the city. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1319)  
Sec. 14-283. - Annexation; disannexation. 
Within 30 days following the date of the passage of any action effecting the annexation of any property to or the disannexation of any property from the city's corporate boundaries, the city agrees to furnish the local carrier written notice of the action and an accurate map of the city's corporate boundaries showing, if available, street names and number details. The local carrier shall have 180 days from the date on which the city provides all necessary notice of the annexation in which to start including access lines within the affected area in the local carrier's count of access lines for the purpose of calculating the monthly line fee. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1320)  
Sec. 14-284. - Severability. 
The provisions of this article are severable. However, in the event this article or any tariff that authorizes the local carrier to recover the fee provided for this article or any procedure provided in this article or any compensation due the city under this article becomes unlawful, or is declared or determined by a judicial, administrative or legislative authority exercising its jurisdiction to be excessive, unrecoverable, unenforceable, void, illegal or otherwise inapplicable, in whole or in part, or is exchanged for another means of compensation under higher authority, the local carrier and the city shall meet and negotiate a new agreement that is in compliance with the authority's decision or enactment. Unless explicitly prohibited, the new agreement shall provide the city with a level of compensation comparable to that set forth in this article as long as the agreed to compensation is recoverable by the local carrier in a manner permitted by law for the unexpired portion of the term of this article. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1321)  
Sec. 14-285. - Governing law. 
This article shall be construed in accordance with the city codes in effect on the date of passage of this article to the extent that such codes are not in conflict with or in violation of the Constitution and laws of the United States or the state. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1322)  
Sec. 14-286. - Termination. 
(a)	The city shall reserve the right to terminate any permit and any rights or privileges granted under this article in the event of a material breach of the terms and conditions of the permit or of this article, subject to a 30-day written notice and the opportunity to cure the breach during that 30-day period. 
(b)	Material breaches of a permit specifically include, but are not limited to, continuing violations of sections 14-273, 14-279 and/or 14-280, and the furnishing of service of any kind not authorized by the permit. 
(c)	A material breach shall not be deemed to have occurred if the violation occurs without the fault of a local carrier or occurs as a result of circumstances beyond its control. Local carriers shall not be excused from performance of any of their obligations under this article by economic hardship, nor misfeasance or malfeasance of their mayors, officers or employees. 
(d)	A termination shall be declared only by a written decision of the city commission after an appropriate public proceeding before the city commission, which shall accord the local carrier due process and full opportunity to be heard and to respond to any notice of grounds to terminate. All notice requirements shall be met by giving the local carrier at least 15 days prior written notice of any public hearing concerning the proposed termination of its permit. Such notice shall state the grounds for termination alleged by the city. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1323; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 14-287. - Unauthorized use of public rights-of-way. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly excavate or occupy the public rights-of-way that has not been authorized by the city in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to place any facilities on, in or over the public rights-of-way, city property, city structures or utility infrastructure unless expressly allowed under this article or other applicable terms of a city ordinance. 
(c)	Such unlawful excavation, occupation or placement as described herein may be challenged by the city in a court of appropriate jurisdiction and appropriate compensation including attorney fees may be sought. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1324)  
Sec. 14-288. - Preemption. 
No provision of this article or a city permit shall be deemed void or unenforceable as a result of state or federal preemption unless and until so determined by a final, non-appealable order of a state or federal agency or court. 
(Code 1996, 4.1325; Ord. No. 98-12, 10-20-1998)  
Secs. 14-289—14-309. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - CONTAINER AND CHASSIS YARDS 
 
Sec. 14-310. - Purpose. 
The following development standards shall apply to container and chassis yards. The standards of this article are intended to ensure container and chassis yards operate in a manner that protects the public health, safety and general welfare, minimizes development impacts and does not produce adverse effects on nearby properties or the community at large. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1501; Ord. No. 2007-12, § 1, 12-18-2007)  
Sec. 14-311. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Chassis refers to skeletal equipment, flatbed or other vehicle furnished by ocean carrier for transport of its containers. 
Chassis storage is the service of providing open storage space for vessel-owned or -controlled chassis in idle status. 
Chassis yard means an area used for chassis storage, staging or assembly. 
Container means a portable compartment or item of equipment used for the repeated carriage of cargo in bulk or package form. Containers shall meet the standards, regulations, specifications and guidelines of the following organizations: International Maritime Organizations (IMO), U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT), Transport Canada (TC), Association of American Railroads (AAR), Interna-tional Standards Organization (ISO), and the Convention for Safe Containers (CSC). The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) defines a container as having the following characteristics: 
(1)	Of a permanent character and accordingly strong enough for repeated use; 
(2)	Specially designed to facilitate the carriage of goods by one or more modes of transport with or without intermediate reloading; 
(3)	Fitted with devices permitting its ready handling, particularly its transfer from one mode of transport to another; and 
(4)	So designed as to be easy to fill and empty. 
The term "shipping, storage or intermodal container" includes all types involved in the maritime, railroad, and trucking industries and may be ten feet, 20 feet, 30 feet, 40 feet, 45 feet, 48 feet or 53 feet in length, eight feet or eight feet six inches in width, and eight feet six inches or nine feet six inches in height, typically, but may be of any length, width or height, including, but not limited to, general purpose (dry cargo), freight, tank, flatrack or platform, vehicle rack, portable liquid rack, open top, canvas top, refrigerated (reefer), ventilated, insulated or thermal, half-height, high-cube, roll-off, bulk, intermediate bulk (IBC), pallet, super sack, tote and similar named containers. The term "containers" applies to new, used, certificated, documented, licensed, repaired or surplus containers constructed of any material. Features common to containers include collapsible, covers, EMI/RF I shielding, handles, hazardous materials storage, locking or restricted access, stackable and wheels. 
Container yard means the specific location or materials handling/storage facility where containers are assembled, held or stored and where containers loaded with goods are received or delivered. A container yard may accommodate, in whole or in part, the storage, holding, handling, assembly, staging, cleaning and repair of containers. 
Natural area means a site having valuable or vulnerable natural resources, ecological processes or rare, threatened or endangered species of vegetation or wildlife. 
Nature reserve means a protected area of importance for wildlife, flora, fauna or features of geological or other special interest, which is reserved and managed for conservation and to provide special opportunities for study or research. Nature reserves may be designated by government institutions or by private landowners, such as charities and research institutions, regardless of nationality. This includes all other natural areas dedicated to remain open space areas. 
Open space area means a land or water area for human use and enjoyment that is relatively free of manmade structures. 
Parks means land or water parks owned by the city, county, state or political subdivision. 
School means an educational institution or facility where instruction is given. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1502; Ord. No. 2007-12, § 2, 12-18-2007)  
Sec. 14-312. - Standards. 
The following standards and requirements shall apply to all container or chassis storage yards or any combination thereof: 
(1)	The minimum acreage required for the development of a container and/or chassis yard shall be 25 acres. 
(2)	Container and/or chassis yards shall be a minimum of 1,000 feet from the closest property line of a residential or commercial land use, schools, parks and nature reserves. 
(3)	Container and/or chassis yards shall be no closer than 300 feet from the banks of any watercourse, FEMA one percent floodplain, or edge of the wetlands in a riparian corridor. 
(4)	The front setback for structures is 50 feet. 
(5)	The rear setback for structures is 50 feet. 
(6)	The side setback for structures is 30 feet. 
(7)	The minimum setback for container and/or chassis yards shall be 20 feet from the front lot line. All front fencing shall be a minimum of 20 feet from the front lot line and a buffer area shall be planted. 
(8)	No buildings, parking areas, loading docks, outside storage, or refuse containers will be allowed in such setback areas. These areas are to be landscaped with trees, shrubs and ground cover, with a planting plan required to be submitted and approved by the planning department. 
(9)	Side and rear yard setbacks may be reduced to zero if adjacent to railroad right-of-way or rail service spurs. 
(10)	A minimum seven-foot high perimeter fence or wall shall completely enclose and secure the container and/or chassis yard. 
(11)	No object, including, but not limited to, landscaping, fences, buildings, vehicles or signs, shall be located in such manner as to obstruct traffic visibility at a level between three feet and six feet as measured above adjacent road grade. 
(12)	The maximum stacking height for containers and chassis is 36 feet. 
(13)	Containers shall not be stacked higher than four containers in height. 
(14)	Containers will be stacked in a pyramid appearance along the front of the site. Corner lots shall be treated as having two front property lines. The initial row shall not exceed two containers in height, with each successive interior row gaining one container in height to a maximum of four containers in height. For the sides beyond the front area, the pyramid appearance shall not be required. 
(15)	Container and/or chassis yards shall have improved, paved surfaces with internal drainage collection, including, but not limited to, wastewater, stormwater or any other substance or liquid, and minimum 20-foot wide drive aisles, with all overhead obstructions being a minimum height of 14 feet six inches. On-site buried storm sewer piping may be required and the site shall be sloped to drain away from all property lines toward center of the site. 
(16)	Commercial truck and trailer parking and access shall have the following minimum requirements: 
a.	Commercial truck and trailer parking and access shall have a minimum improved surface constructed of six inches of 3,000 PSI concrete reinforced with No. 4 rebar at 18 inches on center on an eight-inch compacted limestone or crushed concrete base on a subbase compacted to 95 percent standard proctor density. 
b.	Driveways and approaches shall be constructed to a minimum design of eight inches of 3,000 PSI concrete reinforced with No. 4 rebar at 18 inches on center on an eight-inch compacted limestone or crushed concrete base on a subbase compacted to 95 percent standard proctor density. Driveway width and radii shall be such that a tractor-trailer combination can enter and exit the facility without running over curbs. Turns into or departing the facility must be made from and to a single lane. 
c.	The standard 18 inches square saw cut into the street will be required with a monolithic 12-inch deep by 24-inch beam extending under the existing street by a minimum of six inches with a minimum of four horizontal No. 4 rebar and No. 3 rebar stirrups spaced at a minimum distance 18 inches on center. 
d.	Certain streets, roads or highways may require driveway/approach permits with the county, TxDOT and/or the county toll road authority. 
e.	On-site stormwater detention may be required as determined by the city public works department and/or the county flood control district. 
(17)	Maintenance, cleaning and repair facilities shall meet all current federal, state, and local codes and regulations. All containers to be stored in empty condition must be cleaned of any residue which may pose any kind of physical or health risk. 
(18)	The city shall require recovery systems, fixed fire protection, gas detection, a safety management system to be in place, including risk assessments, segregation planning for dangerous goods, emergency response planning, competency based employee training, contractor orientation and on-site safety briefing. 
(19)	No person, firm or corporation may operate a container yard without first obtaining a license to do so from the city. The license shall be renewed on an annual basis and the city shall conduct an annual site inspection prior to license renewal. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1503; Ord. No. 2007-12, § 3, 12-18-2007)  
Sec. 14-313. - Landscaping and screening. 
(a)	The following landscape and screening requirements shall apply to container and/or chassis yard facilities or any combination thereof. The landscape buffer requirements are intended to: 
(1)	Reduce incompatibility of uses by requiring a screening buffer to minimize harmful impact of wind, erosion, flooding, noise, dust, odor, glare or artificial light intrusion, and other impacts; 
(2)	Allow the surrounding lands to act as a natural drainage system and ameliorate stormwater drainage problems, reduce harmful effects to underground water reservoirs, permit the return of precipitation to the groundwater strata; and 
(3)	Enhance the appearance of industrial uses, parking lots and storage yards and enhance the property value in the area. 
(b)	The property owner or tenant shall provide a 20-foot wide natural screen along the length of the front property line. This will be accomplished in one of three ways: 
(1)	Leave in place existing trees, vegetation, underbrush, etc., to provide a thorough, continuous and effective opaque visual screening of the shipping container development. 
(2)	Construct earthen berms with a combination of trees, shrubs, and ground cover that after three years will be at least 20 feet in height and creates a continuous visual screen. 
(3)	Develop a screening plan that would be approved by the city that includes a combination of trees, shrubs, and ground cover that after three years will be at least 20 feet in height and creates a continuous visual screen. 
(c)	The property owner or tenant will provide screening along the frontage of the site and along the side yards for a distance of 50 feet. 
(d)	All required screening shall be adjusted away from overhead power lines to allow for full maturity of the trees without unnecessary trimming or topping of the trees. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1504; Ord. No. 2007-12, § 4, 12-18-2007)  
Sec. 14-314. - Special use performance standards. 
(a)	Traffic control. 
(1)	A traffic impact analysis (TIA) shall be submitted. Improvements to the existing road facility or container yard by the developer will be required such that the TIA shall show no impact to occur as a result of the container and chassis yard development. 
(2)	No impact is defined as any degradation of the "level of service," as defined and calculated by the state highway capacity manual. Examples of required improvements include, but are not limited to, construction of dedicated left and right turn lanes, construction of acceleration and/or deceleration lanes, and traffic signal installation or modernization. The traffic generated shall be channeled and controlled in a manner that will mitigate any congestion on public streets, increased safety hazard or cause additional traffic through residential areas. Vehicular access points shall be limited, shall create a minimum of conflict with traffic movements, and shall be subject to the approval of the departments of traffic and transportation, public works and engineering and planning. Vehicular ingress lanes shall be large enough to accommodate peak use on the same lot without requiring the stopping or waiting of vehicles on public rights-of-way. 
(b)	Required licenses obtained. All necessary government permits and licenses shall be secured with evidence of such placed on record with the city. Any person, firm or corporation seeking to exercise, carry on or engage in the business or operation of a container yard or chassis yard or any combination thereof shall file a written application with the city park permit department. The fee for a city license shall be in an amount as established by the city commission from time to time. Such fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of the initial license and upon renewal of license each year thereafter. The license shall be valid for one year following issuance, unless sooner revoked or suspended. Such license shall be renewed by filing an application for renewal at least 30 days prior to expiration of the current license. Prior to the renewal of the license, the city shall conduct an annual inspection to determine whether or not the licensee is meeting the requirements of this article and any other applicable ordinance of this city or law of the state. Upon decision of the licensee to expand the operation of said business onto property not originally covered in the application for license, an application for license shall be filed covering the proposed expansion. The city retains the right to revoke the license should the licensee violate the provisions of this article. 
(c)	Availability and adequacy of public service. Public services, including, but not limited to, sewer, water, gas, police and fire protection, must be available as evidenced by letters of availability from the department of public works and engineering at an adequate level and capable to service the proposed land use. The city commission may impose any necessary conditions and restrictions to ensure than an overloading of the city system does not occur and that inordinate demand on public services does not jeopardize or limit existing and protected services demands. 
(d)	Loading berths. Loading berths located on the front or at the side of buildings on a corner lot shall be required to meet the following conditions: 
(1)	Loading berths shall not conflict with pedestrian movement. 
(2)	Loading berths shall not obstruct the view of the public right-of-way from off-street parking access. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1505; Ord. No. 2007-12, § 5, 12-18-2007)  
Sec. 14-315. - Operational performance standards. 
Container or chassis storage or any combination thereof shall each meet the following minimum performance standards. No person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity shall operate or permit to be operated a container and/or chassis yard in violation of any of the following performance standards contained in this section. All applications for building permits and subsequent annual renewal applications shall include a certification from a licensed engineer that verifies compliance with these performance standards. Where applicable, land uses shall meet and be in compliance with the appropriate federal, state and local regulations. 
(1)	Lighting and glare. Any lighting used shall be arranged so as to deflect light away from any adjoining residential use or from public streets. Direct or sky-reflected glare, where from floodlights or from high temperature processes such as combustion or welding, shall not be directed onto any adjoining property. The source of lights shall be hooded or controlled in some manner so as not to light adjacent property. Bare incandescent light bulbs shall not be permitted in view of adjacent property or public right-of-way. Any light or combination of lights which cast light on a public street shall not exceed one footcandle (meter reading) as measured from the centerline of such street. Any light or combination of lights which casts light on residential property shall not exceed 0.4 footcandles (meter reading) as measured from such property. 
(2)	Radiation and electrical emissions. No activities shall be permitted that emit dangerous radioactivity beyond enclosed areas. There shall be no electrical disturbance adversely affecting the operation at any point of any equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbance. 
(3)	Smoke. The emission of smoke by any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the appropriate federal, state or local agency. 
(4)	Dust or other particulate matter. The emission of dust, fly ash or other particulate matter by any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the appropriate federal, state or local agency. 
(5)	Odors. The emission of odor by any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the appropriate federal, state or local agency. 
(6)	Fire and explosive hazards. Hazardous materials/explosives shall meet all current federal, state, and local codes and regulations. 
(7)	Vibration. All uses shall be operated so that ground vibration is not perceptible outside the lot lines of the site on which the use is located. 
(8)	Noise. All noise shall be muffled so as not to be objectionable due to intermittence, beat frequency or shrillness and as measured at any property line. 
(9)	On-site containment of materials and waste. No material or waste shall be deposited on a property in such a form or manner that it may be transferred off the property by natural causes or forces such as wind or rain. 
(10)	Hours of operation. Hours of operation for container and chassis yards are limited. Facilities shall only operate during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. and no overnight facilities shall be allowed on the premises. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1506; Ord. No. 2007-12, § 6, 12-18-2007)  
Sec. 14-316. - Revocation of license. 
(a)	Upon verified written complaint filed by any person with the city secretary setting out facts alleging that any licensee under this article has violated the provisions of this article, or any other applicable ordinance of the city, state or federal law, the building official of the city or the designated representative shall investigate the allegations. 
(b)	Based on this investigation, the building official shall determine whether just cause exists for a hearing on revocation. 
(c)	If just cause exists for a hearing on revocation of a license herein, the building official shall notify the licensee in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, that a revocation hearing will be conducted at a specified time and place within reference to such complaint. A copy of the verified complaint shall be included, notifying the licensee of the allegations against him. 
(d)	At the hearing conducted by the building official, all parties may present evidence and may be represented by licensed attorneys. All parties may question opposing witnesses. 
(e)	Based on a preponderance of the evidence, the building official shall determine whether the license should be revoked. A written copy of the decision shall be sent to all parties by certified mail, return receipt requested, as soon after the conclusion of the hearing as practical, but in no event more than 30 days. 
(f)	In the event that the licensee's license is revoked, such licensee may appeal the revocation to the city commission by notifying the city secretary in writing within 14 days after the revocation. A hearing before the city commission shall be set as soon as practical. Failure to appeal within 14 days shall render the building official's decision final. 
(g)	At the hearing conducted by the city commission, all parties shall have the right to be represented by a licensed attorney and shall have the right to cross examine opposing witnesses. After hearing the evidence presented by both sides, the city commission shall, based on a preponderance of the evidence, render its decision, and notify the applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested, as soon after the conclusion of the hearing as practical, but in no event more than 30 days. Failure of the city commission to act within 30 days shall constitute a rejection of the application. This shall conclude the licensee's administrative remedies and the city commission's action or inaction shall be final. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1507; Ord. No. 2007-12, § 7, 12-18-2007)  
Chapter 18 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The Emergency Management Program for the city will be administered and enforced in compliance with the state law requirements. 
State Law reference— Texas Disaster Act of 1975, Texas Government Code § 418.001 et seq.; local emergency management, Texas Government Code § 418.101 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Organization. 
There exists the office of emergency management director of the city which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with state law. 
(1)	An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director. 
(2)	The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management with the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this chapter. He may delegate authority for execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the director. 
(3)	The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. 
(Code 1996, § 1.1801)  
Sec. 18-2. - Emergency management director; powers and duties. 
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following: 
(1)	Surveying actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the city and identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur. 
(2)	Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city, and shall recommend for adoption by the city commission all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of such plan. 
(3)	Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in excess of seven days except by or with the consent of the city commission. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filled promptly with the city secretary. 
(4)	Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations, or directives which are necessary for carrying out the purposes of this chapter. Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring its contents to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city secretary. 
(5)	Direction and control of the operations of the city emergency management organization as well as the training of emergency management personnel. 
(6)	Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city. 
(7)	Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal emergency management organizations. 
(8)	Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment, or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan. 
(9)	Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which said city is located, and with other municipalities within the county, for the countywide coordination of emergency management efforts. 
(10)	Supervision of and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city. 
(11)	Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes. 
(12)	Surveying the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies, and services which could be used during a disaster, as provided for herein. 
(13)	Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act (Texas Government Code § 418.001 et seq.). 
(Code 1996, § 1.1802)  
Sec. 18-3. - Emergency management plan. 
A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan shall set forth the form of the organization; establish and designate divisions and functions; assign responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers; and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this chapter. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state division of emergency management. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles, and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall be the duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered supplementary to this chapter and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster. 
(Code 1996, § 1.1803)  
Sec. 18-4. - Interjurisdictional program. 
The mayor is hereby authorized to join the county judge and the mayors of the other cities in said county in the formation of an interjurisdictional emergency management program for the county and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of an interjurisdictional emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a countywide program of emergency management insofar as said program may affect the city. 
(Code 1996, § 1.1804)  
Sec. 18-5. - Override. 
At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall superseded and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Code 1996, § 1.1805)  
Sec. 18-6. - Liability. 
This chapter is an exercise by the city of governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety and neither the city, the agents and representative of said city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate, and use the whole or any part of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impeding, or practice enemy attack or natural or manmade disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Code 1996, § 1.1806)  
Sec. 18-7. - Commitment of funds. 
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this chapter without prior approval by the city commission, nor shall any personal have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement, or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city commission unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life, or property. 
(Code 1996, § 1.1807)  
Sec. 18-8. - Offenses, penalties. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)	It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry, or display any emblem, insignia, or any other means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to do so has been granted to such persons by the proper officials. 
(c)	Convictions for violations of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by fine in accordance with the general penalty found in section 1-6. 
(Code 1996, § 1.1808; Ord. No. 2003-03, 4-1-2003)  
Sec. 18-9. - National Incident Management System (NIMS). 
The city commission hereby adopts the National Incident Management System (NIMS) dated March 1, 2004. 
(Code 1996, § 1.1831; Ord. No. 2006-06, 11-7-2006)  
Secs. 18-10—18-36. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LIABILITY IN EMERGENCIES 
 
Sec. 18-37. - Governmental immunity. 
This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental function for the protection of the public peace, health and safety; and neither the city nor agents and representatives of said city (or any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, trustee or any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this article) shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons or property as the result of actions taken by an employee while responding to an emergency call or reacting to an emergency situation if the action is in compliance with the laws and ordinances applicable to emergency action, or in the absence of such a law or ordinance, if the action is not taken with conscious indifference or reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
(Code 1996, § 8.1101)  
Sec. 18-38. - Property owner immunity. 
Any person owning or controlling real estate, fixtures or other premises who is compelled by reason of authority exercised pursuant to law to grant the city the right to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part of such real estate, fixtures or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice disaster, shall not be civilly liable for the death of or injury to any persons on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission, or for loss of or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Code 1996, § 8.1102)  
Sec. 18-39. - Standard of care for emergency action. 
Every officer, agent or employee of the city, and every officer, agent or employee of an authorized provider of emergency services, including, but not limited to, every unit of government or subdivision hereof, while responding to emergency calls or reacting to emergency situations, regardless of whether any declaration of emergency has been declared or proclaimed by a unit of government or subdivision thereof, is hereby authorized to act or not to act in such a manner to effectively deal with the emergency. An action or inaction is effective if it in any way contributes or can reasonably be thought by the provider of such emergency service to contribute to preserving any lives or property. This section shall prevail over every other ordinance of the city and, to the extent to which the city has the authority to so authorize, over any other law establishing a standard of care in conflict with this section. Neither the city nor the employee, agent, or officer thereof, or other unit of government or subdivision thereof or its employees, agents or officers shall be liable for failure to use ordinary care in such emergency. It is the intent of the city commission by passing this article, to ensure effective action in emergency situations by those entrusted with the responsibility of saving lives and property by protecting such governmental units from liability, and their employees, agents, and officers from non-intentional tort liability to the fullest extent permitted by statutory and constitutional law. This section shall be liberally construed to carry out the intent of the city commission. 
(Code 1996, § 8.1103; Ord. No. 99-04, 8-3-1999)  
Chapter 22 - FIRE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Fire safety generally, Texas Health and Safety Code § 791.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Bonfires. 
All outdoor burning shall be done only in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, which are set forth in Title 30, Texas Administrative Code § 111. 
(Code 1996, § 5.701)  
Sec. 22-2. - Hot ashes and other dangerous materials. 
Ashes, smoldering coals or embers, greasy or oily substances and other matter liable to spontaneous ignition shall not be deposited or allowed to remain within ten feet of any combustible materials or construction made up of combustible materials, except in receptacles. Such receptacles shall be placed on a noncombustible floor or on the ground outside the building, and shall be kept at least two feet away from any combustible wall or partition. 
(Code 1996, § 5.702)  
Sec. 22-3. - Accumulations of combustible materials. 
(a)	No person shall permit to remain upon any roof or in any court, yard, vacant lot or open space, any accumulation of waste paper, hay, grass, straw, weeds, litter or combustible or flammable waste or rubbish of any kind. 
(b)	Every person making, using, storing or having charge or control of any shavings, excelsior, rubbish, sacks, bags, litter, hay, straw or combustible trash, waste or fragments shall, at the close of each day, cause all such material which is not compactly baled and stacked in an orderly manner to be removed from the premises or stored in suitable vaults or in metal or metal-lined and covered receptacles or bins. Suitable presses shall be installed in stores, apartment buildings, factories and similar places where accumulations of paper and waste materials are not removed at least every second day. 
(Code 1996, § 5.703)  
Sec. 22-4. - Flammable decorations. 
(a)	Cotton batting, straw, dry vines, leaves, trees, celluloid or other highly flammable materials shall not be used for decorative purposes in show windows or in stores without a permit from the chief of the fire department. 
(b)	Paper or other readily flammable materials shall not be used for decorative purposes in any place of public assembly, unless such materials have first been treated to render them flameproof to the satisfaction of the chief of the fire department. 
(Code 1996, § 5.704)  
Sec. 22-5. - Maintenance of protective and extinguishing systems. 
Sprinkler systems, standpipe systems, alarm systems, and other protective or extinguishing systems which have been installed in compliance with any permit or order, or because of any law or ordinance, shall be maintained in operative condition at all times, and it shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant to reduce the effectiveness of the protection furnished, provided this shall not prohibit the owner or occupant from temporarily reducing or discontinuing the protection where necessary to make tests, repairs, alterations or additions. The chief of the fire department shall be notified before such tests, repairs, alterations, or additions are started, unless the work is to be continuous until completion. 
(Code 1975, § 6-7; Code 1996, § 5.705)  
Sec. 22-6. - Fire marshal. 
(a)	The office of fire marshal is hereby created. Such office shall be independent of other city departments, the fire marshal reporting directly to the mayor and city commission. Such office shall be filled by appointment by the mayor, and with the consent of the city commission. The said fire marshal shall be properly qualified for the duties of his office, and shall be removed at the will of the city commission. He shall receive an annual salary payable in monthly installments, as full compensation for his services. The salary shall be in an amount as established by the city commission from time to time. 
(b)	The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within this city by which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall be begun within 24 hours, not including Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire. The fire marshal shall keep in his office a record of all fires, together with all facts, statistics and circumstances, including the origin of the fire and the amount of the loss, which may be determined by this investigation required by this chapter. 
(c)	The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing; and if he shall be of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or with the attempt to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal conduct in connection with such fire, he shall cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such offense, or either of them, and shall furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of the witnesses and all the information obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case. 
(d)	The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which is by the provisions of this chapter a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any book, paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. The said fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirmations to any persons appearing as witnesses before him. 
(e)	Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of said fire marshal, or who fails or refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the fire marshal in the matter of said investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under investigation as aforesaid, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; and it shall be the duty of the fire marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. Any person being convicted of any such misdemeanor shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1-6. Provided, however, that any person so convicted shall have the right of appeal. 
(f)	All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in his discretion, be private, and persons other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held, and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other until they have been examined. 
(g)	The fire marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary, in the performance of the duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this chapter, to enter upon and examine any building or premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall be exercised only with reason and good discretion. 
(h)	The fire marshal, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent and without any complaint, shall have a right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter into and upon all buildings and premises within the city, and it shall be his duty, monthly or more often, to enter upon and make or cause to be entered and made, a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing and public buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto. Whenever he shall find any building or other structure which, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger other buildings or property, or so occupied that fire would endanger persons or property therein, and whenever he shall find an improper or dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges, furnaces or other heating appliances of any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues, and pipes with which the same may be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of lighting devices or systems, or a dangerous or unlawful storage of explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustible, inflammable and refuse materials, or other conditions which may be dangerous in character or liable to cause or promote fire or create conditions dangerous to the firefighters or occupants, he shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant of said building or premises. Provided, however, that if said owner or occupant deems himself aggrieved by such order, he may, within five days, appeal to the mayor, who shall investigate the cause of complaint and unless by his authority the order is revoked, such order shall remain in force and be forthwith complied with by said owner or occupant. At the end of each month the fire marshal shall report to the state fire marshal all existing hazardous conditions, together with separate report on each fire in the city during the month. 
(i)	Any owner or occupant of a building or other structure or premises, who shall keep or maintain the same when, for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, it is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger buildings or property of others, or is especially liable to fire and which is so occupied that fire would endanger other persons or their property therein, shall be punished by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1-6. 
(j)	Any owner or occupant of a building or other structure, or premises, who shall keep or maintain the same with an improper arrangement of a stove, range, furnaces, or other heating appliances of any kind whatever, including chimneys, flues, and pipes with which the same may be connected, so as to be dangerous in the matter of fire, or health, or safety of persons or property of others; or who shall keep or maintain any building, other structure or premises with an improper arrangement of a lighting device or system, or with a storage of explosives, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, chemicals, vegetable products, ashes, combustibles, inflammable materials, refuse or with any other condition which shall be dangerous in character to the persons, health, or property of others; or which shall be dangerous in the matter of promoting, augmenting or causing fires; or which shall create conditions dangerous to firefighters, or occupants of such buildings, structure or premises other than the maintainer thereof, shall be punished by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1-6. 
(k)	No prosecution shall be brought under subsections (i) and (j) of this section until the order provided for in subsection (h) of this section is given, and the party notified shall fail or refuse to comply with the same. 
(l)	In addition to other duties as specified herein, the fire marshal shall serve as the code enforcement officer for the city. 
(Code 1975, § 6-10; Code 1996, § 5.900)  
Sec. 22-7. - Dispensing of volatile liquids; supervision required. 
(a)	The city commissioners find that the term "volatile or flammable liquids," as used in this section, means and includes gasoline commonly and generally used in the operation of motor vehicles. 
(b)	It shall be and is unlawful for the owner or operator of any garage, service station or other dispensary of volatile or flammable liquids, selling or disposing of same to the public, to permit delivery or dispensing of any volatile or flammable liquids into the fuel tank of a motor vehicle or into any other container except under the supervision of the owner or operator of such service station, garage or other dispensary, or under the supervision of a regularly authorized employee of such owner or operator. The term "under the supervision" is defined as having a competent person on duty at all times when such garage, service station or other dispensary of volatile or flammable liquids is open for business with the public. 
(c)	Each sale or delivery of volatile or flammable liquids, except by the owner or operator of a service station, garage or other dispensary, or by a regularly authorized employee of such owner or operator, shall constitute a separate and independent offense under this section. 
(d)	Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation who violates any provision of this section or falls to comply with any such provision shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1-6. 
(Code 1975, § 6-11; Code 1996, art. 5.1000)  
Sec. 22-8. - Arson reward. 
(a)	A reward as set by city commission is hereby offered for information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person found guilty of committing the crime of arson within the corporate limits of the city. This reward is a standing offer, and shall be paid out of the general fund of the city. 
(b)	The city commission shall be the sole and exclusive judge in determining eligibility for the reward offered herein. 
(Code 1975, § 6-13; Code 1996, art. 5.1100) 
State Law reference— Arson generally, Texas Penal Code § 28.01 et seq.  
Secs. 22-9—22-34. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - INSPECTIONS AND PERMITS 
 
Sec. 22-35. - Authority to enter premises. 
The chief of the fire department or any member of the fire department designated by him as an inspector may, at all reasonable hours, enter any building or premises for the purpose of making any inspection, which under the provisions of this article he or they deem necessary to be made. 
(Code 1996, § 5.101)  
Sec. 22-36. - Inspection of premises. 
(a)	It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to inspect or cause to be inspected by a fire department officer or member, as often as may be necessary, but not less than twice a year in outlying districts and four times a year in the closely built portions of the city, all buildings, premises and public thoroughfares, except the interiors of private dwellings, for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any condition liable to cause fire, or any violations of the provisions or intent of any chapter affecting the fire hazard. 
(b)	Whenever any such officer or member shall find in any building or upon any premises or other place, combustible or explosive matter or dangerous accumulation of rubbish or unnecessary accumulation of waste paper, boxes, shavings, or any highly flammable materials, and so situated as to endanger property, or shall find obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or windows, liable to interfere with the operation of the fire department, or egress of occupants, in case of fire, he shall order the same to be removed or remedied. 
(c)	Such order shall forthwith be complied with by the owner or occupant of such premises or buildings, subject to appeal within 24 hours to the mayor, who shall within ten days review such order and file his decision thereon, and unless the order is revoked or modified it shall remain in full force and be obeyed by such owner or occupant. Any owner or occupant failing to comply with such order within ten days after said appeal shall have been determined, or if no appeal is taken, then within ten days after the service of said order, shall be liable to a penalty as hereinafter stated. 
(d)	Service of any such order shall be made upon the occupant of the premises to whom it is directed by either delivering a true copy of same to such occupant personally or by delivering the same to and leaving it with any person in charge of the premises, or in thereof in a conspicuous place on the door to the entrance of the said premises. Whenever it may be necessary to serve such an order upon the owner of a premises, such order may be served either by delivering to and leaving with the said person a true copy of said order, or, if such owner is absent from the jurisdiction of the officer making the order, by mailing such a copy to the owner's last known post office address. 
(Code 1996, § 5.102)  
Sec. 22-37. - Schools. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of the fire department to require teachers of public, private and parochial schools and educational institutions to have one fire drill each month and to keep all doors and exits unlocked during school hours. 
(Code 1996, § 5.103)  
Sec. 22-38. - Permits. 
(a)	Permits required by the provisions of this article shall be obtained in writing from the chief of the fire department. Permits shall be for such period as the chief of the fire department may specify but not exceeding one year. They shall be kept on the premises designated therein and shall be subject to inspection by any officer of the fire or police department. 
(b)	In addition to the permits elsewhere required in this article, a permit shall be obtained from the chief of the fire department for: 
(1)	Storage of calcium carbide in excess of 100 pounds. 
(2)	Storage of hay, straw, excelsior and other combustible fibers in excess of one ton, provided that no permit will be required for storage on farm property. 
(3)	Storage of corrosive acids in excess of ten gallons of each kind. 
(4)	Storage of chlorates or other oxidizing chemicals in excess of ten pounds. 
(5)	Storage or handling of pyroxyline plastic in excess of 20 pounds unless wrapped or packed for sale. 
(6)	Use of stationary acetylene generators. 
(7)	Use of compressed gas from cylinders in excess of 400 cubic feet aggregate capacity. 
(8)	The application of paint, varnish or lacquer by spray method or with dip tanks and ovens. 
(9)	Use of refrigeration systems containing 20 pounds or more of refrigerant other than air or water. 
(10)	The cleaning or drying of clothes or other material with a Class I or II flammable liquid. 
(c)	Such permits shall be based upon compliance with the standards of the National Fire Protection Association and the technical codes adopted by reference in this Code, where applicable. 
(d)	Before permits are issued the chief of the fire department shall make or cause to be made such inspections or tests as are necessary to ensure that the provisions of this article are complied with. 
(e)	The chief of the fire department is hereby authorized to revoke any permit whenever in his judgment any violation of this article warrants such revocation, but only after a fair and impartial hearing shall have been accorded the holder of the permit. 
(Code 1996, § 5.104)  
Sec. 22-39. - Appeals. 
Appeal from any decision of the chief of the fire department in refusing to grant or in revoking any permit may be made to the mayor. 
(Code 1996, § 5.105)  
Sec. 22-40. - Modifications. 
The chief of the fire department shall have power to modify any of the provisions of this article upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this article, provided that the spirit of this article shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the chief of the fire department thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Code 1996, § 5.106)  
Sec. 22-41. - Approved devices and materials. 
As used in this article, the term "approved," as applied to devices or materials, means acceptable to the chief of the fire department by reason of having been tested and examined by him or by some recognized testing laboratory and found to be proper. 
(Code 1975, § 6-1; Code 1996, § 5.107)  
Secs. 22-42—22-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - GARAGES 
 
Sec. 22-71. - Permit required. 
No person shall use any building, shed or enclosure for the purpose of servicing or repairing any motor vehicle therein, nor use any room or space having a floor area exceeding 1,200 square feet in any building, shed or enclosure for storing, housing or keeping any motor vehicles containing flammable liquid in the fuel tanks thereof, without a permit. 
(Code 1996, § 5.201)  
Sec. 22-72. - Repair work. 
No repairs of any kind shall be made in any basement or sub-basement garage. 
(Code 1996, § 5.202)  
Sec. 22-73. - Cleaning with flammable liquids. 
No flammable liquid with a flashpoint below 100 degrees Fahrenheit shall be used in any garage for washing parts or removing grease or dirt. 
(Code 1996, § 5.203)  
Sec. 22-74. - Handling of gasoline and oils. 
The reservoirs of motor vehicles shall be filled only through hose from pumps attached to approved portable tanks or drawing from underground storage tanks. There shall be no facilities for gasoline handling or filling in any basement or sub-basement garage. No garage floor drain shall connect to any sewer unless provided with an oil separator or trap. 
(Code 1975, § 6-2; Code 1996, § 5.204)  
Secs. 22-75—22-91. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Flammable liquids generally, Texas Health and Safety Code § 753.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 22-92. - Application. 
This article applies to all liquids having a flashpoint below 140 degrees Fahrenheit and having a vapor pressure of not more than 40 pounds per square inch (absolute) at 100 degrees Fahrenheit. The flashpoint shall be as determined by the Tagliabue closed cup tester. 
(Code 1996, § 5.301)  
Sec. 22-93. - Classification. 
For the purpose of this article, flammable liquids are classified as follows: 
(1)	Class I. Liquids having a flashpoint of 25 degrees Fahrenheit closed cup tester. Examples: ether, gasoline, naptha, and benzoly. 
(2)	Class II. Liquids having a flashpoint above that for Class I and below 70 degrees Fahrenheit closed cup tester. Examples: alcohol and amyl acetate. 
(3)	Class III. Liquids having a flashpoint above that for Class II and below 200 degrees Fahrenheit closed cup tester. Examples: kerosene and fuel oil. 
(Code 1996, § 5.302)  
Sec. 22-94. - Permits. 
A permit shall be obtained from the chief of the fire department for the dispensing of flammable liquids by mobile service units, storage or handling of flammable liquids in excess of one gallon where such storage or handling is for the purpose of sale, or for use in some business or industry; or for the storage of flammable liquids in a manner contrary to the provisions of Texas Health and Safety Code §§ 753.003 (Flammable Liquid at Retail Service Stations), 753.004 (Storage Tanks), or the rules and regulations of the state commission on fire protection. 
(Code 1996, § 5.303)  
Sec. 22-95. - Approvals. 
(a)	Before any flammable liquid tank or piping is covered from sight, the installation shall be inspected and approved by the chief of the fire department. 
(b)	The chief of the fire department may prohibit the sale or use of any heating or lighting appliance using flammable liquids, which has not been tested by Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., or some other competent authority, and found to be properly safeguarded against fire hazard. 
(Code 1996, § 5.304)  
Sec. 22-96. - Class I and II liquids. 
(a)	Class I and II liquids shall not be kept or stored in any building used as a place of public assembly, except in laboratories for experiment purposes. 
(b)	In establishments where Class I or II liquids are used in manufacturing, cleaning or other process, the chief of the fire department shall require such preventative and protective measures as will reasonably safeguard life and property. 
(Code 1996, § 5.305)  
Sec. 22-97. - Storage and handling of Class I liquids in buildings. 
(a)	Class I liquids shall not be kept inside of buildings except in sealed containers or approved safety cans of not more than one gallon capacity each. Safety cans up to ten gallons in size may be used, and in garage and manufacturing plants, the chief of the fire department may permit the use of approved portable wheeled tanks where the nature of the business requires such storage. 
(b)	Storage systems with arrangements for discharging Class I liquids inside of buildings shall have discharge outlets vented only in rooms conforming to section 22-99. 
(Code 1996, § 5.306)  
Sec. 22-98. - Storage and handling of Class II liquids in buildings. 
Class II liquids shall not be kept inside of buildings except in sealed containers or approved safety cans of not over five gallons capacity each or in closed drums, barrels or tanks. Containers of Class II liquids of over five gallons capacity shall not be used to fill other containers, inside of buildings, unless in a room conforming to section 22-99. 
(Code 1996, § 5.307)  
Sec. 22-99. - Storage rooms. 
Rooms for the storage and handling of flammable liquids shall be constructed with walls, floors and ceilings having a fire resistance rating of not less than one hour, provided that where in the opinion of the chief of the fire department the hazard is more than moderate, based upon a consideration of the quantity and nature of the liquids involved and the extent of mixing operations together with the construction of the building and its exposures, construction having a fire resistance rating of not less than two hours shall be required. Door openings to the room shall be equipped with approved automatic or self-closing fire doors and shall have sills raised at least six inches above the room floor. 
(Code 1996, § 5.308)  
Sec. 22-100. - Storage of fuel oil in buildings. 
(a)	The storage of Class III liquids in buildings, in connection with oil burning equipments, shall be in accordance with the following: tanks of not over 275 gallons capacity not in excess of 550 gallons may be installed without enclosures; other tanks shall be completely enclosed with reinforced concrete not less than eight inches in thickness, with at least a six-inch space on sides between tank and concrete insulation filled with sand or well-tampered earth, and with 12 inches of sand on top of tank, either between tank and concrete slab or above concrete slab. 
(b)	Instead of an enclosure as described in subsection (a) of this section, the tank may be encased in reinforced concrete not less than six inches in thickness, applied directly to the tank so as to completely eliminate any air space. 
(Code 1996, § 5.309)  
Sec. 22-101. - Drawing liquids from containers. 
(a)	Flammable liquids shall not be drawn or handled in the presence of any open flame or fire. Except as permitted in this section, flammable liquids shall be drawn from tanks at points inside buildings only by pumps or other method approved by the chief of the fire department. Draw-off pipes terminating inside buildings shall have a valve at the discharge end; when delivery is by gravity, the shut-off valve should preferably be of the automatically closing type and in addition an emergency valve shall be provided. Draw-off devices for Class I and II liquids shall not be located on floor below grade. 
(b)	An approved domestic type oil burner may be supplied by gravity from a tank of 275 gallons maximum capacity. A second tank may be provided and connected by an approved three-way valve so that not more than 275 gallons can be discharged at any one time. Range burners and room heaters may have barometric-gravity supply, with the tank not exceeding six gallons, if of an approved type. 
(c)	The chief of the fire department may permit gravity flow of flammable liquids in manufacturing and jobbing plants where the nature of the business requires it. 
(Code 1996, § 5.310)  
Sec. 22-102. - Smoking prohibited. 
Smoking or the carrying of matches or other smoking material in rooms where flammable liquids are handled is prohibited. Suitable "No Smoking" signs shall be displayed. 
(Code 1996, § 5.311)  
Sec. 22-103. - Aboveground storage limited. 
The storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is hereafter prohibited within the city limits. 
(Code 1996, § 5.312)  
Sec. 22-104. - Capacity and location of aboveground tanks. 
(a)	Outside aboveground tanks shall be so located that the distance between the shell of the tank and the property line or nearest building is not less than 1½ times the greatest dimension of the tank (diameter, length or height), provided that, for tanks equipped with either an approved permanently attached extinguishing system or an approved floating roof, such distance may be reduced to not less than the greatest dimension of the tank. 
(b)	The minimum distance between shells of any two tanks shall be not less than one-half the greatest dimension (diameter, length or height) of the smaller tank, except that such distance shall not be less than three feet and for tanks of 18,000 gallons or less the distance need not exceed three feet. 
(Code 1996, § 5.313)  
Sec. 22-105. - Underground storage limited. 
(a)	Underground tanks shall have the top of the tank not less than two feet below the surface of the ground, except that, in lieu of the two-foot cover, tanks may be buried under 12 inches in thickness provided, which shall extend at least one foot beyond the outline of the tank in all directions; concrete cover to be placed on a firm, well tamped earth foundation. Where necessary to prevent floating, tanks shall be securely anchored or weighted. 
(b)	Where a tank cannot be entirely buried, it shall be covered over with earth to a depth of at least two feet with a slope on all sides not steeper than 1½ tanks feet horizontal to one foot vertical. 
(c)	For liquids with a flash point below 100 degrees Fahrenheit, underground tanks having a capacity in excess of 550 gallons shall be at least ten feet, and tanks having a capacity in excess of 2,000 gallons shall be at least 20 feet, from every building the lowest floor, basement, cellar or pit of which is below the top of the tank. 
(Code 1996, § 5.314)  
Sec. 22-106. - Construction of tanks. 
The design and construction of tanks shall conform to generally accepted good practice and shall be approved by the chief of the fire department. Tanks labeled by Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., and tanks conforming to the standards of the National Board of Fire Underwriters or of the American Petroleum Institute shall be deemed to conform to generally accepted good practice. 
(Code 1996, § 5.315)  
Sec. 22-107. - Setting of tanks. 
(a)	Tanks shall be set on firm foundations. Tanks located inside buildings and exceeding 2,500 gallons capacity shall be supported independently of the floor construction. Outside aboveground tanks more than one foot above the ground shall have foundations and supports of masonry or protected steel, except that wooden cushions may be used. 
(b)	No combustible material shall be permitted under or within ten feet of any outside aboveground storage tank. Electric motors, unless of approved explosion-proof type, and internal combustion engines shall not be placed beneath tanks or elsewhere within the line of vapor travel. 
(Code 1996, § 5.316)  
Sec. 22-108. - Venting of tanks. 
(a)	An open galvanized iron vent pipe arranged for proper draining, or an automatically operated vent, shall be provided for every tank which may contain flammable vapor. The lower end of the vent pipe shall not extend through the top into the tank for a distance of more than one inch. 
(b)	Vent openings, except those on underground tanks for Class III liquids, shall be provided with approved flame arresters. Vent openings and vent pipes shall be of sufficient size to prevent abnormal pressure in the tank during filling and, except automatically operated vents, shall be not smaller than 1¼-inch pipe size. Arresters shall be accessible for examination and repair. Vent pipes shall be provided with weatherproof hoods and terminate outside of buildings not less than two feet, measured horizontally and vertically, from any window or other building's opening. For Class I liquids, if tight connection is made in filling line and filling is by gravity, the vent pipe shall extend to a point at least one foot above the level of the top of the highest reservoir from which the tank may be filled, otherwise it shall be not less than 12 feet above the top of the fill pipe. For other than Class I liquids the vent pipe shall extend sufficiently above ground to prevent obstruction by snow or ice. 
(c)	Where a power pump is used in filling storage tanks and a tight connection is made to the fill pipe, the vent pipe shall be not smaller than the fill pipe. 
(Code 1996, § 5.317)  
Sec. 22-109. - Emergency pressure reliefs. 
With the exception of vertical, cone roof tanks having a roof slope less than 2½ inches in 12 inches and in which the strength of the joint between roof and shell is no greater than that of the weakest vertical joint in the shell, all aboveground tanks shall have some form of relief for preventing the development of excessive internal pressure in case of exposure fire surrounding the tank. The method of relief shall be acceptable to the chief of the fire department. 
(Code 1996, § 5.318)  
Sec. 22-110. - Dikes. 
(a)	Tanks containing crude oil or other liquids which have a tendency to boil over, and tanks exceeding 50,000 gallons capacity, shall be surrounded with a dike having a capacity of not less than that of the tank or tanks surrounded; minimum height of earth dikes shall be three feet and of masonry dikes 30 inches. 
(b)	Tanks of less than 50,000 gallons capacity shall, when deemed necessary by the chief of the fire department on account of proximity to streams, character of topography or nearness to buildings of high value, be diked or the entire yard provided with a curb or retaining wall or other suitable means taken to prevent the discharge of liquids on to other property in case of a rupture in tank or piping. 
(c)	Dikes or walls required by subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be of earth or masonry so constructed as to afford adequate protection. Where dikes surround tanks containing crude oil, they shall have a suitable coping or deflector projecting inward properly constructed to minimize the effect of a "boll over" wave. Dikes surrounding crude oil tanks shall be not less than 50 feet from the shell of the tanks surrounded. 
(Code 1996, § 5.319)  
Sec. 22-111. - Distinctive markings. 
Portable containers for Class I and II liquids shall be painted red (entire container or conspicuous band or stripe) and be conspicuously lettered in black "Dangerous - Keep Lights and Fire Away." 
(Code 1996, § 5.320)  
Sec. 22-112. - Piping. 
(a)	Piping used for flammable liquids shall be standard full weight wrought iron, steel or brass pipe or approved brass or copper tubing; for working pressures in excess of 100 pounds per square inch extra heavy fittings shall be used. No pipe or tubing less than one-quarter-inch internal diameter shall be used. Outside piping shall be protected against mechanical injury. 
(b)	Piping carrying Class I and II liquids, unless without joints or connections, shall not extend through any room which contains any open light or fire. 
(Code 1996, § 5.321)  
Sec. 22-113. - Valves at tanks and pumps. 
(a)	Where tanks are aboveground there shall be a valve at each pipe. In case two or more tanks are cross-connected there shall be a valve near each tank in each cross-connection. 
(b)	Pumps delivering to or taking supply from aboveground storage tanks shall be provided with valves on both suction and discharge of pump, and in delivering to tanks a check valve to prevent flow of liquid from tank to pump. 
(c)	In systems using pumps to supply auxiliary tanks or headers, which feed internal combustion engines or fuel oil burners, provision shall be made to return surplus oil to the supply tank; any valve installed in the line shall be of pressure relief type. 
(Code 1996, § 5.322)  
Sec. 22-114. - Tank filling, and filling connections. 
(a)	Deliveries of flammable liquids of Class I and II shall be made directly to the storage tank through the filling pipe by means of a hose or pipe between the filling pipe and barrel, tank wagon or tank car from which such liquid is being drawn. 
(b)	The end of the filling pipe for underground storage tanks for Class I and II liquids shall be carried to a location outside of any building, but not within five feet of any entrance door, or cellar opening; this filling pipe shall be closed by a screw cap. 
(Code 1996, § 5.323)  
Sec. 22-115. - Fire extinguishers. 
Where flammable liquids are kept, used or handled, a quantity of loose noncombustible absorbents, such as dry sand or ashes, together with pails or scoops, and chemical extinguishers or other extinguishing devices or materials, shall be provided in such quantities as may be directed by the chief of the fire department. 
(Code 1996, § 5.324)  
Sec. 22-116. - Liquefied petroleum gas containers. 
(a)	Nonprofitable containers for the storage of liquefied petroleum gases (propane and butane are the principal constituents) shall be constructed in accordance with the Unfired Pressure Vessel Code of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers. 
(b)	Storage containers shall be located with respect to nearest buildings, or line of adjoining property which may be built upon, in accordance with the following table, except that the chief of the fire department may exempt minor outbuildings and buildings devoted exclusively to gas manufacturing and distributing operations from this requirement: 
Water Capacity Per 
Container 	Minimum Distance
Underground 	Minimum Distance Aboveground 
Less than 125 gallons 	10 feet 	None 
125 to 500 gallons 	10 feet 	10 feet 
500 to 1,200 gallons 	25 feet 	25 feet 
Over 1,200 gallons 	50 feet 	50 feet 
 
(Code 1975, § 6-3; Code 1996, § 5.325)  
Secs. 22-117—22-145. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - NITROCELLULOSE MOTION PICTURE FILMS 
 
Sec. 22-146. - Application. 
This section applies to motion picture films having a cellulose nitrate base. The term "vellum," wherever used in this article, refers to such vellum. Cellulose acetate vellum, marked safety film, is exempt from these provisions. 
(Code 1996, § 5.401)  
Sec. 22-147. - Permits. 
No person shall store, keep or have on hand more than 25 pounds (about 5,000 feet of 35-millimeter film) of nitrocellulose motion picture vellum without a permit from the chief of the fire department. No person shall sell any toy or miniature motion picture machine containing nitrocellulose motion picture film, or sell, lease or otherwise dispose of any nitrocellulose motion picture film to any person not having a permit to handle, use or display such film. 
(Code 1996, § 5.402)  
Sec. 22-148. - Enclosures for picture projectors. 
(a)	Motion picture projectors using nitrocellulose film shall be operated or set up for operation only within an approved enclosure, not less than 48 square feet in size and seven feet high. If more than one machine is to be operated, an additional 24 square feet shall be provided for each additional machine. 
(b)	The enclosure shall be built of brick, tile, or plaster blocks, plastered on both sides, or of concrete, or of a rigid metal frame, properly braced, and sheathed and roofed with one-quarter-inch hard asbestos board, securely riveted or bolted to the frame, or two inches of solid metal lath and cement or gypsum plaster. All joints shall be sufficiently tight to prevent the discharge of smoke. 
(c)	The entrance door to the enclosure shall be at least two feet by five feet, of construction equivalent to the sheathing permitted above for rigid frame construction, and shall be so arranged as to close automatically, and shall be kept closed at all times when not used for egress or ingress. 
(d)	Two orifices or openings for each picture machine may be provided; one for the operator's view shall not be larger than 200 square inches, and the other through which the picture is projected shall be not larger than 120 square inches. Where separate stereopticon, spot or flood light machines are installed in the same enclosure with the picture machines, not more than one opening for each such machine shall be provided for both the operator's view and for the projection of the light, but two or more machines may be operated through the same opening; such openings shall be as small as practicable and shall be capable of being protected by approved automatic shutters. 
(e)	Each opening shall be provided with a gravity shutter of approved fireproof material. Shutters shall be suspended, arranged and interconnected so that all openings will close upon the operation of some suitable fusible or mechanical releasing device, designed to operate automatically in case of fire or other contingency requiring the immediate and complete isolation of the contents of the enclosure from other portions of the building. There shall also be provided suitable means for manually closing all shutters simultaneously from a point near the door. Shutters on openings not in use shall be kept closed. 
(f)	All shelves, furniture and fixtures within the enclosure shall be constructed of incombustible material, and no combustible material of any sort whatever shall be permitted or allowed to be within such enclosure, except the films used in the operation of the machine, and vellum cement. 
(g)	Ventilation shall be provided by one or more mechanical exhaust systems which shall draw air from each arc lamp housing and from one or more points near the ceiling. Systems shall exhaust to outdoors either directly or through a noncombustible flue used for no other purpose. Exhaust capacity shall not be less than 15 cubic feet nor more than 50 cubic feet per minute for each arc lamp plus 200 cubic feet per minute for the room itself. Exhaust ducts shall be of noncombustible material, and shall either be kept one inch from combustible material or covered with one-half-inch of noncombustible heat insulating material. 
(h)	An approved film cabinet shall be provided in enclosures where the amount of vellum exceeds 40 pounds (8,000 feet of 35-millimeter vellum). All films not being used shall be kept in the cabinet or in Interstate Commerce Commission shipping containers, but not over 40 pounds of film shall be permitted to remain in the shipping containers. Cabinets having a capacity of over 50 pounds of vellum shall be provided with a vent from each compartment to the outside of the building. The vent shall have a minimum effective sectional area of 14 square inches per 100 pounds of film capacity. 
(Code 1996, § 5.403)  
Sec. 22-149. - Smoking. 
Smoking or the carrying of a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette or other form of smoking material in rooms where film is stored or handled is prohibited. 
(Code 1975, § 6-4; Code 1996, § 5.404)  
Secs. 22-150—22-166. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - EXPLOSIVES 
 
Sec. 22-167. - Application. 
This article applies to all explosives except small arms ammunition and pyrotechnic devices covered by article VII of this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 5.501)  
Sec. 22-168. - Permits. 
The manufacture of explosives is prohibited. A permit shall be obtained from the chief of the fire department to have, keep, use, store or transport any explosives. 
(Code 1996, § 5.502)  
Sec. 22-169. - Transportation. 
(a)	Explosives shall not be transported or carried on or in any conveyance carrying passengers for hire. 
(b)	Every vehicle, while carrying explosives, shall display upon an erect pole at the front end of such vehicle and at such height that it shall be visible from all directions, a red flag with the word "Danger" printed, stamped or sewed thereon in white letters at least six inches in height, or in lieu of such flag the word "Explosives" must be painted on or attached to the rear end and each side of such vehicle in letters at least four inches in height. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of a vehicle containing explosives to smoke in, upon or near such vehicle, to drive, load or unload the vehicle while intoxicated, to drive the vehicle in a careless or reckless manner, or to load or unload such vehicle in a careless or reckless manner. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful for any person to place or carry, or cause to be placed or carried, in the bed or body of a vehicle containing explosives, any metal tool or other piece of metal, or any matches. 
(e)	It shall be unlawful for any person to place or carry, or cause to be placed or carried, in the bed or body of a vehicle containing explosives, any exploders, detonators, blasting caps, or other similar explosive material. 
(Code 1996, § 5.503)  
Sec. 22-170. - Storage. 
(a)	Explosives shall be stored only in magazines made of fireproof material or of wood covered with sheet iron and conspicuously marked "Magazines-Explosives-Dangerous." 
(b)	Magazines containing explosives shall be located at distances from neighboring buildings, highways and railroads in conformity with the American quantity and distance table; provided that one portable magazine containing not more than 50 pounds of explosives may be allowed in a building not occupied as a dwelling or place of public assembly if placed on wheels and located not more than ten feet from, on the same floor with and directly opposite to the entrance on the floor nearest the street level, and one magazine containing not more than 5,000 blasting caps may be allowed if placed on wheels and located on the floor nearest the street level. 
(c)	Blasting caps or detonators of any kind shall not be placed or kept in the same magazine with other explosives. 
(d)	Magazines shall be kept locked except when being inspected or when explosives are being placed therein or being removed therefrom. 
(e)	Magazines shall be kept clean and free from grit, rubbish and empty packages. 
(Code 1975, § 6-5; Code 1996, § 6.504)  
Secs. 22-171—22-193. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - FIREWORKS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— State law does not preempt municipal authority to prohibit or regulate use of fireworks, Texas Occupations Code § 2154.004; regulation of fireworks and fireworks displays, Texas Occupations Code § 2154.001 et seq.; fireworks use, displays and regulations, 28 Tex. Admin. Code § 34.800 et seq. 
 
Sec. 22-194. - Definition. 
The term "fireworks," as used in this article, means a composition or device: 
(1)	Designed for entertainment to produce a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation; and 
(2)	Defined by 49 CFR 173.56(j)(1996). 
(Code 1996, § 5.601)  
Sec. 22-195. - Manufacture and sale. 
The manufacture of fireworks and the possession or display of fireworks for sale is prohibited. 
(Code 1996, § 5.602)  
Sec. 22-196. - Discharge. 
The use or discharge of fireworks is prohibited except that pyrotechnical displays may be authorized by resolution of the city commission when under the control of qualified individuals and the time, place and manner of such display is approved by the chief of the fire department. 
(Code 1975, § 6-6; Code 1996, § 5.603)  
Secs. 22-197—22-215. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - PROVIDING FOR SAFETY TO LIFE IN TENTS WHEN USED FOR ASSEMBLY AND OTHER PURPOSES 
 
Sec. 22-216. - Application. 
No tent exceeding 120 square feet in area shall be erected, maintained, operated or used except under a license from the chief of the fire department. Such license shall not be issued for a period exceeding 30 days and shall be revoked for cause. Application shall be made on proper form and, when deemed necessary by the chief of the fire department, shall include plans drawn to scale, showing exits, aisles and seating arrangements and details of structural support of tent, seats, platforms, etc. No license shall be issued until the provisions of this article have been complied with, and approval has been obtained from the building department, the fire department, and, when tents are to be used for 200 or more persons, from the city secretary or their designee places of assembly. 
(Code 1996, § 5.801)  
Sec. 22-217. - Location, construction and material. 
(a)	Tents exceeding 120 square feet in area shall not be erected in the fire limits nor within 20 feet of other buildings. All tents shall be constructed and erected to withstand a wind pressure of ten pounds per square foot. All canvas, curtains, cloth, rope, netting and decorative materials shall be rendered flameproof, a test being made of the tent by the fire department prior to each erection and of the decorative and other materials before they are attached to or placed therein. In lieu of such tests, the fire department may accept a certificate from the manufacturers that the material has been tested by Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., or some other recognized laboratory, and found to be permanently flameproof, provided the material has proper identification markings and is not more than three years old or has not been waterproofed subsequently by a process which increases its flammability. 
(b)	Where tents are used as places of assembly with a capacity of 200 or more persons, the seats, chairs, jacks and other appurtenances, if of wood, must be suitably treated to reduce the fire hazard by a suitable application of a surface treatment or by impregnation. 
(c)	No tier or seats shall rise to a height exceeding 12 feet. 
(d)	All lighting shall be by electricity, with lamps properly guarded to prevent ignition by radiation. In places of assembly, emergency lighting facilities must be as provided in the building and electrical codes for theaters. 
(e)	All wiring conductors shall be of a type approved for the class of service and be protected against over-current. Loads for feeder and branch lines shall be limited in accordance with the carrying capacities as specified in the National Electrical Code. When deemed necessary by the electrical inspector, conductors shall be trenched and covered. 
(f)	Tents in which persons sleep, and mess tents, shall not be used for any exhibition purpose. 
(Code 1996, § 5.802)  
Sec. 22-218. - Exits, aisles and seats. 
(a)	A minimum of two exits shall be provided where a tent is used as a place of assembly with a capacity of 100 or more persons, in any tent where ten or more persons sleep and in any tent involving conditions hazardous to life. When tents are used as a place of assembly with a capacity in excess of 500 people, each exit shall be not less than nine feet wide; and the number of exits shall be based upon the ratio of one exit to each 500 persons or major fraction thereof which the tent is designed to seat or hold. Such exits shall be placed not over 75 feet apart and exitways servicing such exits shall be not less than nine feet in clear width. 
(b)	Aisles not less than 44 inches in width shall be provided so that there are not more than ten seats between any seat and an aisle. Where individual seats are not provided, a distance of 18 inches along any bench or platform shall constitute one seat in computing required aisles and exits. Every aisle shall lead directly to an exitway, or to a cross aisle running parallel with the seat rows and leading to an exitway. Such aisles shall not be less in width than the combined width of aisles that they connect. In tents having a capacity of 1,000 or over, facilities must be provided for admitting patrons on opposite sides or ends convenient to prevent congestion during the seating period and familiarize patrons with exits closest to their seats. 
(c)	Aisles and exitways shall be used only for passage to and from seats and for vendors carrying their wares. No poles or ropes shall be permitted in aisles and exitways and exits shall be kept unobstructed at all times and so maintained as to not present a hazard from fire. The area for a distance of 20 feet beyond any exit shall be kept free and clear and be made readily passable. 
(d)	Where two or more tents adjoin, with an opening between, an exit to the outside shall be provided at the point of juncture. 
(Code 1996, § 5.803)  
Sec. 22-219. - Marking and lighting of exits. 
All required exits, other than those normally used for entrance, shall be plainly marked during hours of darkness, as to be readily distinguished. Required exitways shall be kept adequately lighted at such times, including the immediate area outside the exits. 
(Code 1996, § 5.804)  
Sec. 22-220. - No smoking. 
Signs prohibiting smoking shall be prominently displayed at all entrances and at other locations within any tent used as a place of assembly, so that they may be clearly visible to all occupants. Frequent announcement regarding such prohibitions shall be made, preferably over a public address system if available. Suitable noncombustible containers shall be provided at all entrances for the proper disposition of cigar or cigarette butts and pipe dottle, and a uniformed attendant shall be stationed at such locations to advise patrons of the non-smoking regulations. 
(Code 1996, § 5.805)  
Sec. 22-221. - Motion pictures. 
No motion picture vellum of the nitrocellulose type shall be used, stored or exhibited within a tent. Such exhibitions, when held within a tent, shall be restricted to the use of safety film only. 
(Code 1996, § 5.806)  
Sec. 22-222. - Automobiles, trucks, tractors, lighting equipment and other equipment using gasoline. 
All such appliances shall be filled with approved safety cans or by hose from fixed pumps, from wheeled tanks with pumps, or pump from a tank wagon located not closer than 25 feet to any tent. 
(Code 1996, § 5.807)  
Sec. 22-223. - Fire appliances. 
(a)	The chief of the fire department shall survey, or cause to be surveyed, each tent for which a permit has been granted, after it is erected and, if it is to be used as a place of assembly, before it is occupied. He shall require the installation of such fire appliances as are deemed necessary, and designate their location. Such fire appliances may consist of water tanks, pumps, hose, water buckets, extinguishers and fireproof blankets. 
(b)	All fire appliances shall be kept in working condition and all pumps and hose, when used in connection with tank wagons, shall be inspected, and tested, if deemed necessary, prior to the occupancy of the tent. Portable extinguishers and similar appliances shall be properly distributed and readily accessible. It shall be the duty of the owner or manager of such exhibition to properly train sufficient responsible employees in the use of fire equipment so that it can be quickly put in operation; the chief of the fire department may require these employees to prove their fitness. 
(Code 1996, § 5.808)  
Sec. 22-224. - Inspection and supervision by fire department. 
Uniformed firefighters shall be detailed to all circuses, carnivals, or other exhibitions where large crowds assemble. They shall familiarize themselves with all fire protection facilities and fire prevention features and with the condition of exits, and shall patrol the entire area of the tent during the time it is occupied. Special police officers or firefighters should see that overcrowding is not permitted, that aisles and exitways are kept open and that "no smoking" rules are observed. 
(Code 1975, § 6-8; Code 1996, § 5.809)  
Sec. 22-225. - Appeals. 
(a)	The applicant may appeal the decision of the chief of the fire department to deny, suspend, or revoke a license. 
(b)	The filing of an appeal shall not stay any actions of the chief of the fire department denying, suspending, or revoking a license associated with the license decision being appealed. 
(c)	Procedure to appeal to mayor. An appeal of the chief of the fire department's decision shall first be to the mayor. The aggrieved applicant shall be entitled to present evidence at this appeal before the mayor, but no witnesses or legal counsel will be allowed. 
(1)	An applicant who desires to file an appeal of the chief of the fire department's action must do so pursuant to the provisions set forth in this section. The applicant shall file a written appeal to the mayor within ten days of receiving notice of the adverse action and shall pay a filing fee in an amount as established by the city commission from time to time. The written appeal shall contain the following information: 
a.	The names of all applicants participating in the appeal; 
b.	A brief statement of the chief of the fire department's action appealed, together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the applicant; 
c.	A brief statement of the relief sought, and the reason why the protested chief of the fire department's action should be reversed, modified, or otherwise set aside; 
d.	The signatures of all parties named as applicants and their mailing addresses; and 
e.	The verification (by declaration under penalty of perjury) of at least one applicant as to the truth of the matters stated the appeal. 
(2)	Upon the receipt of the appeal and the filing fee, the city clerk shall schedule the matter to be heard before the mayor and give due notice thereof to the applicant. 
(3)	At or after the appeal hearing, the mayor may affirm, reverse, or modify the chief of the fire department's action or continue the hearing to a date certain for receipt of additional information. 
(4)	The mayor shall issue a written decision within 30 days after the hearing and shall cause copies thereof to be sent to the chief of the fire department and applicant. 
(5)	All written orders by the mayor pursuant to this section shall include findings of fact, conclusions, and the chief of the fire department's decision. 
(6)	The written decision of the mayor shall be a final order, and the applicant and the chief of the fire department shall be bound thereby unless the order is appealed to the city commission within 30 days. 
(d)	Procedure to appeal to city commission. An appeal of the mayor's decision shall be to the city commission. At the appeal before the city commission, the aggrieved party may present evidence, present and cross examine witnesses, and be represented by legal counsel. 
(1)	Parties aggrieved by the mayor's decision who desire to file an appeal to the city commission must do so pursuant to the provisions set forth in this section. The aggrieved party shall file a written appeal to the city commission within ten days of receiving notice of the adverse action and shall pay a filing fee in an amount as established by the city commission from time to time. The written appeal shall contain the following information: 
a.	The names of all applicants participating in the appeal; 
b.	A brief statement of the mayor's action appealed, together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the applicant; 
c.	A brief statement of the relief sought, and the reason why the protested mayor's action should be reversed, modified, or otherwise set aside; 
d.	The signatures of all parties named as applicants and their mailing addresses; and 
e.	The verification (by declaration under penalty of perjury) of at least one applicant as to the truth of the matters stated the appeal. 
(2)	Upon the receipt of the appeal and the filing fee, the city clerk shall schedule the matter to be heard before the city commission and give due notice thereof to the applicant. 
(3)	At or after the appeal hearing, the city commission may affirm, reverse, or modify the mayor's action or continue the hearing to a date certain for receipt of additional information. 
(4)	The city commission shall issue a written decision within 30 days after the hearing and shall cause copies thereof to be sent to the mayor and applicant. 
(5)	All written orders by the city commission pursuant to this section shall include findings of fact, conclusions, and the chief of the fire department's decision. 
(6)	The written decision of the city commission shall be a final order, and the applicant and the mayor shall be bound thereby unless the order is appealed to appropriate court within 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Secs. 22-226—22-243. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - COST RECOVERY 
 
Sec. 22-244. - Fee collection. 
(a)	The city shall collect fees for specialized fire protection services. Such fees may include reimbursement for all equipment, materials, maintenance and overhead expenses and costs which constitute full reimbursement to the city for such services actually rendered. 
(b)	Within 30 days of the date of providing specialized fire protection services, the chief of the fire department or his designee shall submit an invoice for all costs, fees, charges and expenses related to the provisions of such services to the owner's designated agent, representatives and insurance companies. All such bills are to be paid within 60 days of receipt to the city secretary. 
(c)	In addition, any bills, fines or penalties, including, but not limited to, clean up costs, fees or expenses, that are imposed upon the city, state or federal agencies and related to the same situation or occurrences may be billed separately within 30 days of receipt and shall be paid as provided hereinabove. 
(Code 1996, § 5.1201)  
Sec. 22-245. - Fees authorized. 
All fees will be collected in the amounts set forth in the fee schedule. 
(Code 1996, § 5.1202)  
Sec. 22-246. - Enforcement. 
The city may enforce the provisions of this article by civil actions in a court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of any amounts due hereunder, plus attorney fees, costs and expenses, and any other relief that may be appropriate. 
(Code 1996, § 5.1203; Ord. No. 2005-02, 9-6-2005)  
Chapter 26 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Flood Control and Insurance Act, Texas Water Code § 16.311 et seq.; authorizing municipalities to take all necessary and reasonable actions to comply with the requirements and criteria of the National Flood Insurance Program, Texas Water Code § 16.315. 
 
Sec. 26-1. - Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and methods. 
(a)	Statutory authorization. The legislature of the state has in the Flood Control Insurance Control Act, Texas Water Code § 16.315, delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the city commission does ordain as follows in this chapter. 
(b)	Findings of fact. 
(1)	The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)	These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(c)	Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)	Protect human life and health; 
(2)	Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)	Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)	Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)	Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)	Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)	Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(d)	Methods of reducing flood losses. In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter uses the following methods: 
(1)	Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)	Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)	Control filling, grading, dredging and other development, which may increase flood damage; and 
(5)	Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Code 1996, § 3.601; Ord. No. 2007-10, art. 1, 10-16-2007)  
Sec. 26-2. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
Appurtenant structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
Area of future conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one-percent annual chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one-percent or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
Base flood means the flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
Development means any manmade change to improved and unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building , for insurance purposes, means a nonbasement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
Existing construction , for the purposes of determining rates, means structures for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. The term "existing construction" may also be referred to as existing structures. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)	The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)	The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study (FIS). See Flood elevation study. 
Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see Flooding ). 
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term "floodplain management regulations" describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway. See Regulatory floodway. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term "functionally dependent use" includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)	Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.	By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.	Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations. 
Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level , for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, means the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
New construction , for the purpose of determining insurance rates, means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, the term "new construction" means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)	Built on a single chassis; 
(2)	400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; 
(3)	Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)	Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
Special flood hazard area . See Area of special flood hazard . 
Start of construction , for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure , for floodplain management purposes, means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before start of construction of the improvement. The term "substantial improvement" includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include either: 
(1)	Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or 
(2)	Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Variance means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements, see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations.) 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Code 1996, § 3.602; Ord. No. 2007-10, art. 2, 10-16-2007)  
Sec. 26-3. - General provisions. 
(a)	Lands to which this chapter applies. This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(b)	Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Harris County, Texas," dated June 18, 2007, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps dated June 18, 2007, and any revisions thereto, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. 
(c)	Establishment of development permit. A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)	Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(e)	Abrogation and greater restrictions. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(f)	Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
(1)	Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)	Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)	Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(g)	Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Code 1996, § 3.603; Ord. No. 2007-10, art. 3, 10-16-2007)  
Sec. 26-4. - Administration. 
(a)	Designation of the floodplain administrator. The public works director is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance, National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(b)	Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)	Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)	Review permit application to determine whether the proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)	Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this chapter. 
(4)	Review permits for proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)	Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(6)	Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is the state commission on environmental quality (TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)	Ensure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)	When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 26-3(b), the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of section 26-5. 
(9)	When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
(10)	Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, a community may approve certain development in zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by said section 65.12. 
(c)	Variance procedures. 
(1)	The appeal board, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)	The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(3)	Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(4)	The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the federal emergency management agency upon request. 
(5)	Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this chapter. 
(6)	Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(7)	Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this chapter and section 26-1(c). 
(8)	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(9)	Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(10)	Prerequisites for granting variances: 
a.	Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
b.	Variances shall only be issued upon: 
1.	Showing a good and sufficient cause; 
2.	A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
3.	A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
c.	Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(11)	Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided that: 
a.	The criteria outlined in subsections (c)(1) through (9) of this section are met; and 
b.	The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Code 1996, § 3.604; Ord. No. 2007-10, art. 4, 10-16-2007)  
Sec. 26-5. - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
(a)	General standards. In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements: 
(1)	All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)	All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)	All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)	All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)	All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(6)	New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(7)	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(b)	Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 26-3(b), section 26-4(b)(8), or subsection (c)(3) of this section, the following provisions are required: 
(1)	Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in this section is satisfied. 
(2)	Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(3)	Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.	A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.	The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. 
c.	Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(4)	Manufactured homes. 
a.	All manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.	Manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites: 
1.	Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
2.	In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
3.	In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or 
4.	In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood; 
Shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.	Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (b)(4) of this section shall be elevated so that either: 
1.	The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or 
2.	The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(5)	Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM shall either: 
a.	Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
b.	Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
c.	Meet the permit requirements of this section and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in subsection (b)(4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(c)	Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(1)	All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with section 26-1(b) through (d). 
(2)	All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet floodplain development permit requirements of section 26-3(c), and the provisions of this section. 
(3)	Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 26-3(b) or 26-4(b)(8). 
(4)	All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(5)	All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(d)	Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 26-3(b) are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)	All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). 
(2)	All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures: 
a.	Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two feet if no depth number is specified); or 
b.	Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, are designed so that below the base specified flood depth in an AO zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH zone, level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(3)	A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in this section are satisfied. 
(4)	Within zones AH or AO, there shall be adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(e)	Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 26-3(b) are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)	Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development, within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)	If subsection (e)(1) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section. 
(3)	Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first completes all of the provisions required by said section 65.12. 
(Code 1996, § 3.605; Ord. No. 2007-10, art. 5, 10-16-2007)  
Sec. 26-6. - Penalties. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $200.00, and each day of such failure or noncompliance shall be a separate violation punishable by a fine of $200.00 each day. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Code 1996, § 3.606; Ord. No. 2007-10, art. 5, 10-16-2007)  
Chapter 30 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Health and sanitation nuisances, Texas Health and Safety Code § 341.011; municipal authority to regulate sanitation and abate nuisances, Texas Health and Safety Code § 342.001 et seq.; authority of city to regulate the cleaning of a building, establishment, or ground from filth, carrion, or other impure or unwholesome matter, Texas Health and Safety Code § 342.003. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 30-1—30-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS AND FOOD HANDLERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal regulatory authority concerning food service employees not preempted by state regulation, Texas Health and Safety Code § 438.037; municipality which is member of public health district not prohibited from regulating or administering permit system concerning food service establishments, Texas Health and Safety Code § 437.004(d). 
 
Sec. 30-19. - Designation of health authority. 
(a)	The city designates the director of the county health department as its health authority for the purpose of food establishment surveillance for the public health protection of its residents. 
(b)	The county health department shall be responsible for the enforcement of this article and shall provide to the city's health officer a semiannual report which documents violations of health ordinances and food establishment surveillance program activities within the city. 
(Code 1996, § 6.101)  
Sec. 30-20. - State and county regulations adopted. 
(a)	There is hereby adopted by reference, the state department of health, division of food and drugs "Rules on Food Service Sanitation" and the "Rules on Retail Food Store Sanitation"; the Texas Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act; the "Rules on Food Service Sanitation for Harris County, Texas"; and all other statutes and rules presently in effect as may be adopted by the state and/or county as governing food establishments, sanitation, food handlers, and vendors selling or delivering food to the public. 
(b)	A true copy of the foregoing state and county statutes and regulations shall be kept in the office of the city secretary. 
(Code 1996, § 6.102)  
Sec. 30-21. - Definitions. 
All definitions contained in the state and county laws and rules referenced hereinabove are hereby adopted. In addition, the following definitions shall apply to this article, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City health officer means the representative of the city. 
Food establishment means each place, whether in a permanent or temporary building or in a vehicle, food or taco stand, mobile building, or any structure, where food or drink is manufactured, packaged, produced, processed, transported, stored, sold, commercially prepared, or otherwise handled, whether offered for sale, given in exchange or given away for use as food or furnished for human consumption. The term "food establishment" does not apply to private homes where food is prepared or served for guest and individual family consumption. The term "food establishment" does not apply to a place where commercially packaged, single portion, nonpotentially hazardous snack items and wrapped candy are sold over the counter. 
Health department means the county health department. 
Owner of business means the owner, manager or operator of the business or an employee in charge of the business in the absence of the owner, manager or operator. 
Regulatory authority means the representatives of the county health department. 
Service of notice means the personal delivery of a notice, prepared by the county health department or by the city health officer, to the holder of the permit or the person in charge, or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit or operator of the food establishment or the posting of a notice upon the building or place from which the food is sold or delivered. 
(Code 1996, § 6.103)  
Sec. 30-22. - Food permits. 
(a)	Requirements. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a food establishment in the city unless he possesses a current and valid health permit issued by the county health department and approved by the city health officer. 
(b)	Posting. A valid permit shall be posted in public view in a conspicuous place at the food establishment for which it is issued. 
(c)	Non-transference (change of ownership or operator). Permits issued under this section are not transferable. Upon change of ownership or operator of a business, the new owner or operator will be required to meet current standards as defined in city ordinances and state law before a permit will be issued. 
(d)	Denial, suspension or revocation of permits. The county health department or the city health officer may deny, suspend or revoke any permit to operate a food service establishment, retail food store, temporary food establishment, mobile food unit or taco stand, or roadside food vendor, or any other place which qualifies as a food establishment if the holder of the permit does not comply with these rules and regulations or if the operation of the establishment otherwise constitutes a substantial hazard to public health. A permit can be suspended only after notice and an opportunity for a hearing as described in subsection (e) of this section have been given. The notice must list specific violations of rules and regulations and state a reasonable period of time in which violations are to be corrected. Failure to correct the violations as listed on the notice will be grounds for denial, suspension or revocation of a permit. If a permit is then denied, suspended or revoked, the holder of the permit has three working days to request a hearing which must be in writing and delivered to the county health department with a copy to the city secretary. A hearing will be scheduled by the county health department. If no request for a hearing is made within the time limits, the denial, suspension or revocation is sustained without further notice. 
(e)	Hearings. The hearings provided for in these rules shall be conducted by the county health department at a time and place designated by it. The decision of the county health department concerning the violation shall be final. 
(f)	Application after revocation. Whenever a revocation of a permit has become final, the holder of the revoked permit may make written application for a new permit to the health department. 
(g)	Permit fees. A health permit fee as established by the commissioners court in unincorporated areas of the county is required annually for each food establishment. 
(h)	City fees. In addition to the fee required by the county, the business licenses and fees for all businesses as provided by city ordinances must be paid to the city secretary annually as provided in this Code. 
(Code 1996, § 6.104)  
Sec. 30-23. - Review of plans and compliance with city codes. 
(a)	Whenever a food establishment is constructed or remodeled and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling, or conversion shall be submitted to the county health department and the city for review and approval before construction, remodeling, or conversion is begun. Such plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, arrangement, mechanical, electrical and plumbing plans, and construction materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The county health department and the city shall approve the plans and specifications if they meet the requirements of the rules, regulations and ordinances of the state, county and city governments. 
(b)	The county health department and the city health officer shall inspect any food establishment prior to its beginning operation to determine compliance with approved plans and specifications and waive the requirements of these rules. 
(c)	All food establishments, including temporary, portable, vehicular or mobile food stands, taco stands or any structure from which food is prepared, sold or delivered to the public, shall comply with the building, plumbing, electrical and mechanical codes of the city. Temporary, vehicular or mobile food stands, taco stands or any structure from which food is prepared, sold or delivered to the public must also be connected to the city's water and sewer system and must be in compliance with all city codes regulating other businesses and structures in the city. 
(Code 1996, § 6.105)  
Sec. 30-24. - Food manager certification. 
(a)	Every permitted food establishment shall have a person employed in a managerial capacity possessing a current food manager's certification issued by the county health department. A certified manager or person in charge must be on duty during all hours of operation of the food service establishment. The county health department shall issue a food manager's certificate upon completion of a food manager's course, equivalent training, or examination as approved by the director of public health of the county. 
(b)	Persons participating as volunteer food handlers performing charitable activities for a period of 14 days or less may be exempted from the requirement for a manager's certificate. 
(Code 1996, § 6.106)  
Sec. 30-25. - Food peddlers and fruit stand peddlers permit. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any peddler to sell or offer for sale any food products, vegetables, fruits or any other article used primarily for human consumption in the city without having first applied for and obtained a permit to do so from the city secretary. 
(b)	The city secretary shall only issue a permit to a person who possesses and presents a valid health food handler's certificate issued by the county health department. 
(c)	Any person selling or offering for sale any food products, vegetables, fruits or other article used primarily for human consumption from a temporary or permanent location in the city, commonly known as a "fruit stand," shall also be required to obtain a permit. Such person shall pay to the city and the city secretary shall collect an annual fee for each stand or location as provided for in the fee schedule. 
(d)	It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any food product, ice cream, dairy product, fruit, vegetable, or any other article or product used for human consumption, in the city from a vehicle, whether traveling along the public streets or standing on a private lot or public right-of-way, without having first applied for and obtained a permit to do so from the city secretary. Such person shall pay to the city and the city secretary shall collect an annual fee per vehicle as provided for in the fee schedule. 
(Code 1996, § 6.107; Ord. No. 2006-09, 12-5-2006)  
Sec. 30-26. - Mobile food vendors. 
(a)	Definition. A mobile food vendor is a vehicle mounted food establishment designed to be readily moveable. Mobile units may not be permanently parked in one location. The food service establishment is housed in a truck or a trailer, commonly called a hot truck or an unrestricted mobile unit. Food preparation is permitted on the unit once certain requirements are met and a food establishment permit has been obtained. 
(b)	Submitting plans. 
(1)	Plans shall be submitted to the city permit department for new construction or the renovation or the conversion of a unit to a mobile food unit. Plans should show the equipment layout, and the arrangement and construction material of the inside of the unit including food preparation, storage, and window service areas (see handout on plan approval process). A fee will be charged to check plans; the fee shall be in an amount as established by the city commission from time to time. 
(2)	To obtain a food establishment permit a mobile food establishment must submit: 
a.	Written proof of an approved water source and approved waste disposal site by means of a commissary letter or letter of permission from an approved servicing area; and 
b.	A list of foods and beverages to be served on the unit stating the source of the item and when and where it will be prepared. 
(c)	Initial inspection of the mobile unit. Arrangements must be made for an inspection of the mobile food unit after plans are approved and before food can be prepared and sold from the unit. An application for a permit will be issued after the unit has passed an inspection. 
(d)	Permit and medallion. All mobile food vending units must have a permit issued by city. Once a permit application is issued, the permit may be purchased by cash, check or money order. Operation of a mobile food unit without a valid permit will result in immediate legal action. Permits are valid for one year from the date of issuance. 
(e)	Inspections. Mobile food units are inspected several times a year. The permittee should keep the permit department informed of the general location of the permittee's mobile unit. The permit department must know the permittee's location to renew the food establishment permit. 
(f)	Renewal of permit. 
(1)	If the inspector determines that the mobile food unit meets requirements, an application for a food establishment permit will be issued. If the inspector issues the application, the permittee may purchase the permit. 
(2)	To renew a food establishment permit, a mobile food establishment must submit written proof of an approved water source and approved waste disposal site by means of a commissary letter or a permission letter from an approved servicing area. 
(g)	Requirements. The following requirements for a mobile food unit permit were adopted from the Texas Food Establishment Rules (TFER) court order, "Rules for the Regulation of Food Establishments." The requirements must be met before an application is issued for a permit and a medallion. 
(h)	Food manager's training. A certified food manager must be present at the mobile food unit during each day of operation. See food school schedule for class dates and locations. 
(i)	Food source and food protection. 
(1)	All food sold on the unit must be either prepared on the unit or at an approved, permitted food establishment. Food may not be prepared at home, foods offered for sale must comply with labeling laws where applicable, food shall be in sound condition, free of spoilage, filth, or any other contamination and shall be safe for human consumption. 
(2)	Only ice that has been made from potable (drinking) water shall be used or offered for sale (see subsection (r) of this section). 
(3)	Food, whether raw or prepared, if removed from the original package or container, shall be stored in a clean, covered, impervious and nonabsorbent container, except during periods of preparation or service. Solid cuts of meat shall be protected by being covered during storage. 
(4)	Containers of food shall be stored at least six inches above the floor in a manner that protects food from splash and contamination and permits easy cleaning of the floor. 
(5)	No food can be stored in toilet rooms or vestibules. 
(6)	No food, including packaged foods, shall be stored in contact with water or undrained ice. Wrapped sandwiches shall not be stored in direct contact with ice. 
(7)	Conveniently located refrigeration facilities or effectively insulated facilities shall be provided to ensure that potentially hazardous foods are maintained at 41 degrees Fahrenheit or below. Potentially hazardous foods shall not be prepared in quantities so large that rapid cooling will not be possible. 
(8)	Potentially hazardous food requiring refrigeration after preparation shall be rapidly cooled to internal temperatures of 41 degrees Fahrenheit or below. Potentially hazardous foods shall not be prepared in quantities so large that rapid cooling will not be possible. 
(9)	Stored frozen foods shall be kept frozen. 
(10)	Ice intended for human consumption shall be used to cool foods, food containers, or food utensils. Ice used for cooling stored foods and food containers shall not be used for human consumption. 
(11)	The internal hot holding temperature of potentially hazardous food shall be 135 degrees Fahrenheit or above except during necessary periods of preparation. Each hot storage unit must have an accurate thermometer available. 
(12)	Live or dead fish bait shall be stored separately from food or food products. 
(13)	A product (stem type) thermometer is needed to check internal temperatures of potentially hazardous foods. 
(j)	Utensils. Only single-service (plastic or paper) utensils, tableware, plates, etc., shall be used. 
(k)	Insect and rodent control. All mobile food units shall be constructed in such a manner as to prevent the entrance of flies, dust, dirt, or other foreign matter. Mobile food units must be provided with tightfitting, solid, or screened doors or windows. 
(l)	Floors. 
(1)	Floors shall be constructed of smooth, easily cleanable materials such as ceramic tile, linoleum, or laminated wood. 
(2)	Sawdust, wood shavings, peanut hulls, etc., are prohibited. 
(3)	Mats and duckboards shall be nonabsorbent and cleaned daily. 
(m)	Walls and ceilings. 
(1)	Walls and ceilings shall be light colored, smooth, nonabsorbent and easily cleanable. 
(2)	Walls and ceilings including doors, windows, skylights, etc. 
(3)	Construction studs and joist rafters shall be exposed in food preparation or storage areas. 
(4)	Food preparation areas must have 50 footcandles of light. 
(5)	All lights in food preparation areas must be shielded. 
(n)	Ventilation. The ventilation system shall be installed and operated according to law. 
(o)	Animals. Live animals shall be excluded from the surrounding areas of all mobile food units. 
(p)	Cleaning and sanitization of equipment. 
(1)	A two-compartment sink with hot and cold running water under pressure is required. However, a three-compartment sink is recommended. 
(2)	The hand lavatory must be accessible and convenient. 
(q)	Toilet facilities. If toilet facilities are not provided on the mobile unit, a toilet facility shall be located within 500 feet of the unit. Written permission must be provided to the permit department verifying access to the toilet facility. 
(r)	Fresh water and wastewater systems. 
(1)	All mobile units must have potable (drinking) water and the storage of potable water must be according to law. Fresh water must come from an approved source (permitted commissary or approved servicing area). 
(2)	All mobile food units must have hot and cold running water under pressure. Hot water at a temperature of at least 100 degrees Fahrenheit shall be provided to all fixtures at all times while the unit is in operation. 
(3)	Fresh water must be provided in a self-contained system within the mobile food unit. Water may not be supplied to the mobile unit by running hoses from an establishment to the unit (except when filling the tank at the approved servicing area). 
(4)	The water inlet shall be capped when not being used to fill a water tank. 
(5)	Wastewater must be disposed in one of the following ways: at a permitted commissary that contains an approved servicing area or, if the commissary is used only to obtain food supplies, a separate, approved servicing area. 
(6)	Wastewater shall be stored in a permanently installed retention tank that is sized at least 15 percent larger in capacity than the water supply tank and is sloped to drain. The drain pipe must be at least 25 millimeters (one inch) in inner diameter or greater and equipped with a shutoff valve. 
(7)	Again, as a condition of both the initial issuance and yearly renewal of the food permit, all mobile food establishments shall submit a commissary letter or letter of permission for an approved servicing area. 
(s)	Commissaries and serving areas. 
(1)	All mobile units must report to a permitted commissary or other permitted, fixed food establishment for food supplies. The commissary or other fixed food service establishment, used as a base of operations for mobile food units, shall be constructed and operated in compliance with the rules and regulations for food service establishments. 
(2)	All mobile food units must report to a servicing area approved by the permit department for cleaning of the unit and the loading of fresh water and the unloading of wastewater. The location for the flushing and drainage of liquid wastes shall be separate from the location for water servicing and for the loading and unloading of food and related supplies. A commissary or fixed food establishment may also contain an approved servicing area. 
(3)	The surface of the servicing area shall be constructed of a smooth, nonabsorbent material such as concrete or machine-laid asphalt and shall be maintained in good repair, kept clean and graded to drain. 
(t)	Vehicle requirements. 
(1)	All mobile units shall be readily identifiable by business name, printed in bold black letters not less than three inches in height, not less than 1½ inches in width, permanently affixed, and prominently displayed upon at least two sides of the unit. 
(2)	All mobile food units shall maintain a current state motor vehicle inspection sticker and a current state motor vehicle license plate registration sticker. 
(3)	All mobile food units must be readily moveable (capable of moving immediately upon the request of the health investigator). 
(Code 1996, § 6.108; Ord. No. 2008-03, 3-1-2008)  
Secs. 30-27—30-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - WEEDS, BRUSH AND RUBBISH[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to require lot owner to keep lot free from weeds, rubbish, brush, and other objectionable, unsightly, or unsanitary matter, Texas Health and Safety Code § 342.004; additional municipal authority to abate dangerous weeds, Texas Health and Safety Code § 342.008. 
 
Sec. 30-56. - Nuisance. 
(a)	Whenever and wherever weeds, brush, rubbish, and all other objectionable, unsightly, and insanitary matter of whatever nature shall exist, covering or partly covering the surface of any lots or parcels of real estate situated within the corporate limits of the city, or when any of said lots or parcels of real estate, as aforesaid, shall have the surface thereof filled or partly filled with holes or be in such condition that the same holds or is liable to hold stagnant water therein, or if from any other cause shall be in such condition as to be liable to cause disease or produce, harbor or spread disease germs of any nature or tend to render the surrounding atmosphere unhealthy, unwholesome or obnoxious, or to constitute a fire hazard, the same shall constitute and is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance, the prompt abatement of which is hereby declared to be a public necessity. 
(b)	Any such nuisance shall be removed from such premises and burned or otherwise disposed of; if burned, same shall be done under the supervision of and with the permission of the fire chief of the city. Said lots or parcels of real estate, in addition to these grounds within their respective boundaries, shall be held to include all lots or parcels of ground lying and being adjacent to and extending beyond the property line of any such lots or parcels of real estate to the curbline of adjacent streets, and where a curbline has been established, and 14 feet beyond the property line where no curbline has been established on adjacent streets, and also to the center of adjacent alleys. 
(Code 1996, § 6.201)  
Sec. 30-57. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Any and all other objectionable, unsightly or insanitary matter of whatever nature includes all uncultivated vegetable growth, objects and matters not included within the meaning of the other terms defined in this section which are liable to produce or tend to produce an unhealthy, unwholesome or insanitary condition to the premises within the general locality where the same are situated, and also includes any species of ragweed or other vegetable growth which might or may tend to be unhealthy to individuals residing within the general locality of where the same are situated. 
Brush includes all trees or shrubbery under seven feet in height which are not cultivated or cared for by persons owning or controlling the premises. 
Rubbish includes all refuse, rejected tin cans, old vessels of all sorts, useless articles, discarded clothing and textiles of all sorts, and, in general, all litter and all other things usually included within the meaning of the term "rubbish." 
Weeds includes all rank and uncultivated vegetable growth or matter which has grown to more than nine inches in height, or which, regardless of height, is liable to become an unwholesome or a decaying mass or breeding place for mosquitoes or vermin. 
(Code 1975, § 6-12; Code 1996, § 6.202)  
Sec. 30-58. - Notice to remove or remedy conditions. 
(a)	In the event that the owner of any lot, tract, parcel of land, or a portion thereof, situated within the corporate limits of the city shall fail to comply with section 30-56, then the city shall give notice to such person setting forth the noncompliance with this article. Such notice shall be in writing and may be served upon such person in any one or more of the following ways: 
(1)	Personally given to the owner; 
(2)	Addressed to the owner by letter to the owner's post office address; or 
(3)	If personal service cannot be obtained or if the owner's post office address is unknown, service may be given by publication at least twice within ten consecutive days in the city's official newspaper or by posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the violation relates or by posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates, if the property contains no buildings. 
(b)	In the notice herein provided for, the city shall have the right to inform the property owner that if he commits another violation of the same kind or nature on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the city may, without further notice, correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expense against the property. 
(c)	Should the violation consist of weeds in excess of 48 inches in height which are deemed by the city to be an immediate danger to the health, life or safety of any person, the city may immediately abate said nuisance with no notice to the property owner. 
(Code 1996, § 6.203)  
Sec. 30-59. - Failure to take required action. 
Should any owner of any lot with the city, who shall allow weeds, rubbish, brush, or any other unsightly, objectionable or insanitary matter to grow or accumulate thereon, fail and/or refuse to cut down and/or remove such weeds, rubbish, brush, or unsightly, objectionable or insanitary matter, as the case may be, within ten days after notice to said owner to fail and/or refuse to drain and/or fill the same lot or remove filth, carrion or other impure or unwholesome matter, as the case may be, then the city, after notice to the owner, in writing, or by letter addressed to owner at his post office or within ten days after notice by publication as many as two times within ten consecutive days in any newspaper of general circulation in the city, may do such cutting down and/or removing such weeds, rubbish, brush, and any other unsightly, objectionable or insanitary matter, or cause the same to be done and may pay therefore and charge the expense incurred in doing such work or having such work done or improvements made at the expense of the city, which such expense was incurred. 
(Code 1975, § 6-12; Code 1996, § 6.204)  
Sec. 30-60. - Statement of lien. 
The mayor shall file a statement of such expense incurred under section 30-58 or 30-59, as the case may be, giving the amount of such expense, the date on which said work was done or improvements made, with the county clerk; and the city, shall have a privileged lien on such lot or real estate upon which said work was done or improvements made to secure the expenditures so made, in accordance with the provisions of said Article 4436, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas (Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4436), which said lien shall be second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements; and said amount shall bear ten percent interest from the date said statement was filed. It is further provided that for any such expenditures, and interest, as aforesaid, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure of said lien may be had in the name of the city; and the statement of expense so made, as aforesaid, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for such work or improvements. 
(Code 1996, § 6.205; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 30-61. - Summary abatement. 
In addition to the foregoing remedy and cumulative thereof, if it shall be brought to the attention of the city commission, and shall by the commission be determined that any such nuisance as hereinbefore described are likely to have an immediate adverse effect upon the public health, comfort or safety, then and in that event, the city commission may, by appropriate resolution or motion, order said nuisance summarily abated by the city in a reasonable prudent manner. 
(Code 1996, § 6.206)  
Sec. 30-62. - Penalty. 
Any owner, lessee, or occupant, whether a natural person or a corporation, or any agent, servant, representative or employee of any such owner, lessee or occupant, including any person having ownership, occupancy, or control of any lot or parcel of real estate or any part thereof, or interest therein, situated within this city, on which there exists any nuisance, who shall allow or permit any such nuisance to be created and established, or who shall fail, refuse or neglect to remove or abate such nuisance by grubbing or removing such weeds, brush, rubbish, or other objectionable, unsightly and unsanitary matter of whatever nature as the case may be, or by filling in, drainage, leveling, or otherwise regulating such lot or parcel of real estate so as to prevent stagnant water standing therein within ten days from the date of service of notice thereof as hereinbefore provided, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1-6. Each day during which such failure, refusal or neglect shall continue to exist, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1996, § 6.207)  
Sec. 30-63. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)	All notices to cut weeds and all bills evidencing costs to the city of cutting weeds upon failure, refusal or neglect of the owner to cut weeds after having been notified to do so, as well as all other clerical work incident to enforcement of this article, shall be prepared and mailed by the code enforcement officer. 
(b)	Any owners of vacant property in the city shall have the right to contract with the city to remove all such weeds and vegetation as may grow on said real estate by requesting in writing the city commission to do so, and by agreeing to the charge to be paid therefor, as provided for in the fee schedule, to be charged against said property for each such removal of weeds and vegetation. 
(c)	All payments of money by and collections of money from property owners for the purpose of paying the city for expense in cutting weeds shall be handled by the city secretary. Any such payment or collection so made shall be received by and receipted for by the city secretary, who shall note on such receipt the name and address of the property owner making such payment, a brief description of the property on which weeds were or are to be cut by reason of said payment, the dimensions of said property and the amount and date of said payment. 
(Code 1975, § 6-12; Code 1996, § 6.208)  
Chapter 34 - OFFENSES AND NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Preemption of criminal offenses by state penal code, Texas Penal Code § 1.08; concurrent jurisdiction of municipal court concerning certain violations of state statutes, Texas Government Code § 29.003(b); municipal authority to regulate discharge of firearms in municipal limits, Texas Local Government Code § 229.001(b). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 34-1. - Arrest of persons found in suspicious places. 
The city commission hereby authorizes the law enforcement officers of the city to arrest, without warrant, persons found in suspicious places, and under circumstances which reasonably show that such persons have been guilty of some felony or breach of the peace, or threaten, or are about to commit some offense against the laws. 
(Code 1975, § 1-10; Code 1996, § 7.400)  
Sec. 34-2. - Alcoholic beverages generally prohibited in public places. 
(a)	Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, possess, or consume any alcoholic beverages in a public place except in establishments licensed by the state for the sale of such beverages for consumption on the premises. 
(b)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage means alcohol, or any beverage containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, which is capable of use for beverage purposes, either alone or when diluted. 
Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, parks, swimming pools, schools and school campuses, and shopping centers. 
(Code 1975, § 1-1; Code 1996, §§ 7.601—7.603) 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages, Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code § 1.01 et seq.  
Sec. 34-3. - Graffiti. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to paint or draw any word, figure, letter, design or other "graffiti" upon any fence, building, motor vehicle, house or other object which is visible from a public way without the consent of the owner of said property and without a permit for such sign, drawing, painting, or other design first being obtained as provided by this Code. 
(b)	Any such graffiti or otherwise unauthorized signage visible from the public way is hereby declared to be a nuisance. The city may require a property owner within its jurisdiction to remove graffiti from the owner's property upon receipt of notice from the city. The city may not give notice to the property owner under this section unless the city has offered to remove the graffiti from the owner's property free of charge and the property owner has refused the offer. The property owner must remove the graffiti on or before the 15th day after the date the property owner receives the notice from the city. If the property owner fails to remove the graffiti on or before the 15th day after the date of receipt of the notice, the city may remove the graffiti and charge the expenses of removal to the property owner. An owner will not be required to remove graffiti as provided by this section if the graffiti is located on transportation infrastructure and the removal would create a hazard for the person performing the removal. 
(c)	Any person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1-6 for each such offense, and each day shall constitute a separate offense for the violation of this section. 
(Code 1996, art. 7.1000; Ord. No. 99-01, 2-16-1999)  
Secs. 34-4—34-24. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - UNLAWFUL NOISES 
 
Sec. 34-25. - Causing noises prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others, within the limits of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 7.101)  
Sec. 34-26. - Acts or conditions prohibited. 
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this article, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)	Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, street car or other vehicle on any street or public place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. The use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up. 
(2)	Radios, phonographs, etc. The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(3)	Loud speakers and amplifiers. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used, or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for any purpose. 
(4)	Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(5)	Animals, birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity. 
(6)	Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat, or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(7)	Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noises. 
(8)	Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same are in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital or court street. 
(9)	Hawkers, peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(10)	Pile drivers, hammers, etc. The operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or any time on Sundays, of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise. 
(11)	Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise. 
(Code 1996, § 7.102)  
Sec. 34-27. - Exceptions. 
The provisions in section 34-26 shall not apply to churches and schools in their conducting of parades, athletic contests and carnivals conducted for school or church purposes. 
(Code 1975, § 1-8; Code 1996, § 7.103)  
Secs. 34-28—34-57. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - FIREARMS 
 
Sec. 34-58. - Municipal court and court offices. 
(a)	The carrying of any gun, rifle, firearm, knife, or weapon of any deadly nature in the municipal courtroom or in the municipal court offices of the city is strictly prohibited. 
(b)	Any person who carries such prohibited weapon set forth in subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1-6. 
(Code 1996, §§ 7.301, 7.302; Ord. No. 96-01, §§ 1, 2, 12-19-1995)  
Sec. 34-59. - City business. 
(a)	The public works director is hereby directed to post on all city buildings in a conspicuous location clearly visible to the public, a sign stating "WEAPONS PROHIBITED ON PREMISES" and "PROHIBIDAS LAS ARMAS EN ESTA LOCAL." 
(b)	Any person who carries a weapon in a city building where a sign has been posted prohibiting such weapons on such premises shall be guilty of criminal trespass and shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1-6. 
(Code 1996, §§ 7.303, 7.304; Ord. No. 96-01, §§ 3, 4, 12-19-1995)  
Sec. 34-60. - Discharge of gun or torpedo. 
Any person who discharges any gun, pistol, or firearm of any kind, or any person who discharges an air rifle or pistol of any description, by whatever name known that by means of compressed air, compressed gas, springs, or any other means, is capable of discharging shots, pellets, or other solid objects, or any person who discharges any cannon cracker or torpedo, within the corporate limits of the city shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1-6. 
(Code 1975, § 1-9; Code 1996, § 7.200) 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality regarding firearms and explosives, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code § 229.001.  
Secs. 34-61—34-78. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Abatement of junked vehicle declared to be a public nuisance, Texas Transportation Code § 683.071 et seq. 
 
Sec. 34-79. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned motor vehicle means a motor vehicle that is inoperable and more than five years old and left unattended on public property for more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for a period of more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle that has remained on private property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property for more than 48 hours, or a motor vehicle left unattended on the right-of-way of a designated county, state, or federal highway within this state for more than 48 hours or for more than 12 hours on a turnpike project constructed and maintained by the Texas Turnpike Authority. 
Demolisher means a motor vehicle otherwise to wreck or dismantle motor vehicles, any person whose business is to convert into processed scrap or scrap metal. 
Garagekeeper means any owner or operator of a parking place or establishment, motor vehicle storage facility, or any establishment, for the servicing, repair, or maintenance of motor vehicles. 
Junked vehicle means a vehicle that is self-propelled and displays an expired license plate or invalid motor vehicle inspection certificate or does not display a license plate or motor vehicle inspection certificate; and is wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than 72 consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or 30 consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property. 
Motor vehicle means any motor vehicle subject to registration pursuant to the Texas Certificate of Title Act. 
Storage facility means a garage, parking lot or any type of facility or establishment for the servicing, repairing, storing, or parking of motor vehicles. 
(Code 1996, § 7.701)  
Sec. 34-80. - Junked vehicles declared a public nuisance. 
Junked vehicles which are located in any place where they are visible from a public place or public right-of-way are detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general public, tending to reduce the value of private property, to invite vandalism, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance, creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, and are detrimental to the economic welfare of the state, by producing urban blight which is adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the municipalities in the state, and such vehicles are, therefore, declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Code 1996, § 7.702)  
Sec. 34-81. - Written notice of public nuisance to owner or occupant. 
The city secretary shall mail a written notice to the last known registered owner of the nuisance, each lienholder of record of the nuisance, and the owner or occupant of the property on which the nuisance is located; or, if the nuisance is located on a public right-of-way, the property adjacent to the right-of-way stating the nature of the public nuisance and that it must be removed and abated within ten days, and further that a request for hearing must be made before the expiration of said ten day period. Said written notice shall be mailed by certified or registered mail with a five day return requested. If the notice is returned undelivered by the U.S. Post Office, official action to abate said nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten days from the date of such return. Provided, however, if the post office address of the last known registered owner of the nuisance is unknown, as an alternative form of notice, the city secretary may direct the police department to place a highly visible marker on the vehicle declaring it to be a nuisance and deliver said notice to abate to the owner or occupant in person giving said owner or occupant ten days to abate said nuisance. 
(Code 1996, § 7.703)  
Sec. 34-82. - Hearing before city commission; decision. 
If the owner or occupant of the premises in which vehicle is located requests a hearing within the ten days after service of a notice to abate the nuisance, the city commission shall hold a public hearing at the next regular city commission meeting; the city commission after said hearing shall make a decision regarding the request. 
(Code 1996, § 7.704)  
Sec. 34-83. - Removal order; removal by police. 
The city secretary shall issue an order for the removal of the vehicle which has been declared a public nuisance, such order shall include a description of the vehicle or part thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. The order shall be given to the police department who shall have the authority to enter upon private property to examine vehicles or parts thereof, obtain information as to the identity of vehicles at any time prior to the issuance of the order to remove said vehicle, or, after issuance of said order, to remove the vehicle. The police department shall remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1996, § 7.705)  
Sec. 34-84. - Reconstruction of vehicle after removal. 
After a vehicle has been removed it shall not be reconstructed or made operable. 
(Code 1996, § 7.706)  
Sec. 34-85. - Notice to state highway department; cancellation of certificate of title. 
The city secretary shall, within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or part thereof, give written notice to the state Department of motor vehicles identifying the said vehicle or part thereof. 
(Code 1996, § 7.707)  
Sec. 34-86. - Exceptions to article. 
This article shall not apply to: 
(1)	A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property. 
(2)	A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard, if the vehicle or part and the outdoor storage area, if any, are: 
a.	Maintained in an orderly manner; 
b.	Not a health hazard; and 
c.	Screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including a fence, rapidly growing trees, or shrubbery. 
(Code 1996, § 7.708)  
Sec. 34-87. - Administration of article. 
The administration of this article shall be by regularly salaried full-time employees of the city, except that the removal of vehicles or parts thereof from property may be by any other duly authorized person. 
(Code 1996, § 7.709)  
Sec. 34-88. - Disposal of junked vehicles. 
Junked vehicles or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard, demolisher, or any suitable site operated by the city for processing as a scrap or salvage, which process shall be consistent with state law. The city may operate such a disposal site when its governing body determines that commercial channels of disposition are not available or are inadequate, and it may make final disposition of such vehicles or parts, or the city may transfer such vehicle or parts to another, provided such disposal shall be only as scrap or salvage, consistent with Texas Transportation Code § 683.078. 
(Code 1996, § 7.710)  
Sec. 34-89. - Other statutes. 
Nothing in this article shall affect statutes that permit immediate removal of a vehicle left on public property which constitutes an obstruction to traffic. 
(Code 1996, § 7.711)  
Secs. 34-90—34-106. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ABANDONED VEHICLES AND OTHER PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 34-107. - Declaring certain property a nuisance and authorizing impounding. 
Any vehicle or other property or obstruction placed, left standing, parked, erected or lying in violation of any ordinance of the city or left unattended for more than 48 continuous hours in or on any public street, alley, sidewalk, park, or other public place of said city is declared to be a nuisance, and any such property when so found shall be removed summarily by any police officer of the city and taken to the police pound and shall be kept there until redeemed or sold as herein provided. 
(Code 1996, § 7.801)  
Sec. 34-108. - Lien on impounded property. 
The city shall have a lien on such impounded personal property for all costs incurred in impounding, storing, and advertising such property, and such lien shall be prior and superior to all other liens of every kind, save and except liens for ad valorem taxes, and the city may retain possession thereof until all costs are paid and may sell the same as herein provided. 
(Code 1996, § 7.802)  
Sec. 34-109. - Redemption. 
The owner or any person legally entitled to possession of such impounded personal property may redeem the same as follows: 
(1)	Before sale. By paying to the city secretary the impounding fee and any other actual expenses incurred by the city in impounding and keeping the impounded property, as determined by the city secretary. 
(2)	After sale. By paying to the buyer at the auction sale double the amount paid by him for such personal property and any reasonable expenses incurred by him for keeping same; provided that the said property must be redeemed from the auction buyer within 30 days after the date of the auction sale, excluding the date of sale; otherwise title to said property shall become absolute in the auction buyer. 
(Code 1996, § 7.803)  
Sec. 34-110. - Property to be sold. 
When any personal property, other than motor vehicles, is not redeemed within 60 days after being impounded, and when any motor vehicle is not redeemed after compliance by the city secretary or his designated agent with the provisions of section 34-112, the city secretary or his designated agent shall sell the same at public auction to satisfy the lien of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 7.804)  
Sec. 34-111. - Procedure for property other than motor vehicle. 
Before selling such personal property, other than motor vehicles, the city secretary shall post two notices thereof, one at the courthouse door of the county and one at the city hall, and shall cause a copy thereof to be published in the official newspaper of the city once a week for two consecutive weeks, the date of the first publication to be at least 14 days prior to the day of the auction sale. The notice of sale shall describe the impounded property, state that the same is unredeemed, state that the same will be sold at public auction, designate the place of sale, and state a time and date of sale which shall not be less than 14 days from the date of posting such notices as herein required. 
(Code 1996, § 7.805)  
Sec. 34-112. - Procedure for motor vehicles. 
(a)	Police department to obtain information on vehicle. When any motor vehicle has not been redeemed within 30 days from the date of its impounding, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to submit to the state highway department, and similar agency of the proper state when the vehicle is from another state, all information in his possession concerning said vehicle and to request that said department supply to him all information the records of the department contain on said vehicle. 
(b)	Chief of police to notify owner. Immediately on receipt of such information from said department, the chief of police shall notify the owner and lienholders as shown by the records of said department by registered mail, with return receipt requested, that said vehicle has been impounded and of the provisions of this article in regard to redemption and sale of impounded property. 
(c)	When chief of police to prepare notice of sale. In the event a motor vehicle has not been redeemed within 15 days from receipt of the return receipt or notice of nondelivery of said registered mail, the chief of police shall prepare a notice of sale of such vehicle, in the manner described in subsection (b) of this section, shall send a copy of said notice to the owner and lienholder, as shown by the records of said highway department, by registered mail, and shall post and advertise said notices in the manner required in subsection (b) of this section. Notice by registered mail to the address shown on the records of said highway department shall constitute notice of the pending sale to such owner and lienholders. 
(d)	When motor vehicles not redeemed. When the chief of police is unable to ascertain the names of the owners and lienholders, and the motor vehicle has not been redeemed within 45 days from its impounding, no notice of sale other than posting and advertising as herein prescribed shall be required. 
(Code 1996, § 7.806)  
Sec. 34-113. - Sale of property. 
When any impounded property, including motor vehicles, is not redeemed by the date and time designated in said notice of sale, the city secretary or his agent shall sell such property at public auction, and, as city auctioneer, shall execute bill of sale of said property to the purchaser thereof; provided he shall not execute or deliver any but a conditional bill of sale unless and until the title of said buyer has become absolute by an expiration of 30 days in time, exclusive of the day of sale, without being redeemed by the owner of the impounded property. 
(Code 1996, § 7.807)  
Sec. 34-114. - Disposal of proceeds of sale. 
After deducting the impounding fee and all other actual expenses incurred by the city in impounding, storing and selling of said property as determined by the city secretary, not to exceed a reasonable amount for each impounded article, he shall pay the balance of the proceeds of such sale, if any, to the owner of the property. If the owner fails to call for such proceeds, they shall be paid into the city treasury. Within six months after such auction sale, the owner may apply in writing to the chief of police, and upon satisfactory proof of ownership, shall be entitled to receive the amount of the proceeds delivered to the city treasury. 
(Code 1996, § 7.808)  
Sec. 34-115. - Junk. 
Impounded property which is offered for sale at a public auction in accordance with the procedure herein prescribed and upon which no person bids shall thereafter be sold or otherwise disposed of as junk. Money received for junk property shall be disposed of in the same manner as proceeds from an auction sale under this article. 
(Code 1996, § 7.809)  
Sec. 34-116. - Records and fees. 
(a)	The chief of police and city secretary shall keep a record book which shall contain a description of all property impounded, the date and time of such impounding, the date notices of sale were posted and advertised and mailed to owners and lienholders, the return receipts of registered notices, the date of the sale at auction, the amount realized for each article at such sale, the name and address of the owner and lienholders, if known, the name and address of the auction buyer, and any such other information as he may deem necessary. 
(b)	The fees, as provided for in the fee schedule, shall be charged under this article and shall be paid into the city treasury. 
(Code 1996, § 7.810)  
Secs. 34-117—34-145. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - CURFEW REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 34-146. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency includes, but is not limited to, fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident, or obtaining immediate medical care for another person. 
Guardian means any person to whom custody of a minor has been given by a court order. 
Minor means any person under 17 years of age. 
Parent means a person who is the natural or adoptive parent of a person. The term "parent" also includes a court-appointed guardian or other person 18 years of age or older, authorized by the parent, by a court order, or by the court appointed guardian to have the care and custody of a person. 
Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access. The term "public place" includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartments houses, office building, transport facilities, and shops. 
(Code 1996, § 7.901)  
Sec. 34-147. - Offenses. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any minor to purposefully remain, walk, run, stand, drive or ride about in or upon any public place in the city between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for the parent having legal custody of a minor to knowingly allow or permit the minor to be in violation of the curfew imposed in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1996, § 7.902)  
Sec. 34-148. - Defenses. 
It is a defense to prosecution under section 34-147 that: 
(1)	The minor was accompanied by his parent; 
(2)	The minor was accompanied by another adult approved by the parents; 
(3)	The minor was on emergency errand; 
(4)	The minor was attending a school or religious activity or is going to or coming from a school, religious, or government sponsored activity; 
(5)	The minor was engaged in a lawful employment activity or is going directly to or coming directly from lawful employment; 
(6)	The minor was on the sidewalk of the place where such minor resides or on the sidewalk of a place where the minor has permission from his parent or guardian to be or on the sidewalk of a next-door neighbor not communicating an objection to the police officer; 
(7)	The minor was upon an errand directed by his parent; 
(8)	The minor was in a motor vehicle involved in intrastate or interstate transportation or transportation for which passage through the curfew area is the most direct route; 
(9)	The minor was exercising his First Amendment Rights protected by the United States Constitution, including, but not limited to, the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; and 
(10)	The minor was married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with the Texas Family Code ch. 31. 
(Code 1996, § 7.903; Ord. No. 2007-09, 9-18-2007)  
Sec. 34-149. - Enforcement procedure. 
(a)	Any police officer, upon finding a minor in violation of section 34-147, may transfer the case to the proper authorities for handling under the provisions of Title 3 of the Texas Family Code. In addition, a complaint will be filed against the parents in municipal court for violation of section 34-147(b). The police department shall file all necessary legal papers, supply all necessary documentation, and provide necessary testimony as required for pursuing violation of this article by either the minor or by any parent or guardian. 
(b)	Provided that if a police officer shall find a minor in violation of section 34-147, who has once previously been so found, and warned as in subsection (a) of this section, the officer shall again record the name and address of the minor and his parent or guardian, shall issue a second warning notice, and direct the minor to go home by the most direct means and route. He shall immediately contact the minor's parent or guardian by phone or in person concerning the violation. A copy of the second warning shall be forwarded to the juvenile officer of the city, who at this point shall schedule a person-to-person conference with the parent or guardian and the child concerning this article and the city's expectation and requirement for parental control. 
(c)	Any police officer, upon finding a minor in violation of section 34-147, who has twice previously been found in violation and issued warnings as provided for in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, shall transfer the case to the proper authorities for handling under the provisions of Title 3 of the Texas Family Code. In addition, a complaint will be filed against the parents in municipal court for violation of section 34-147(b). The police department shall file all necessary legal papers, supply all necessary documentation, and provide necessary testimony as required for pursuing violation of this article by either the minor or by any parent or guardian. 
(Code 1996, § 7.904)  
Sec. 34-150. - Penalties. 
(a)	Any minor violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor as defined in the Texas Penal Code and shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of Title 3 of the Texas Family Code. 
(b)	A parent of a minor violating this article shall be guilty misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1-6. 
(c)	In assessing punishment for either a parent or a child, the municipal court judges are encouraged to consider the community service program. 
(Code 1996, § 7.905; Ord. No. 2007-09, 9-18-2007)  
Secs. 34-151—34-168. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - REGULATION OF SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY 
 
Sec. 34-169. - Findings and intent. 
(a)	The city commission finds that sex offenders that use physical violence and who are convicted of preying on others are sexual predators who present an extreme threat to the health, safety, and welfare of our citizens. Sex offenders are likely to use physical violence, to repeat an offense, have many more victims than ever reported, are prosecuted for only a fraction of their actual sexual offenses, and children not only lack the ability to protect themselves, but additional measures should be taken to keep known sex offenders from having access to children in areas where children generally feel safe. 
(b)	It is the intent of this article to serve the city's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city by creating areas around locations where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers wherein registered sex offenders and sexual predators are prohibited from establishing temporary or permanent residency. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 7.1101, 3-17-2015)  
Sec. 34-170. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Child or children means a person younger than 18 years of age. 
City means the City of Galena Park, Texas. 
Permanent residence means a place where the person abides, lodges, or resides for 14 or more consecutive days. 
Sex offender means a person with a reportable conviction or adjudication who is required to register with the state department of public safety under the provisions of Texas Code of Criminal Procedure ch. 62. 
Temporary residence means a place where the person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of 14 or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where the person routinely abides, resides, or lodges for a period of four or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 7.1102, 3-17-2015)  
Sec. 34-171. - Sex offender residency prohibition, penalty, and exceptions. 
(a)	If a person is required to register on the state department of public safety's sex offender database it is unlawful for that person to establish a permanent or temporary residence within 2,000 feet of any premise where children commonly gather, including a playground, school, child care facility, video arcade facility, public or private youth center, neighborhood, or public swimming pool, as those terms are defined in Texas Health and Safety Code § 481.134. It shall be prima facie evidence that this section applies to such a person if the person's record appears on the database. 
(b)	For the purpose of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent or temporary residence to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein, or in the case of multiple residences on one property, measuring from the nearest wall of the building or structure occupied or the parking/driveway, whichever is closer to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein. 
(c)	Any person violating a provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the general penalty, section 1-6. 
(d)	Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to modify or reduce the state's child safety ban. A person as described in subsection (a) of this section residing within 2,000 feet of those places where children commonly gather does not commit a violation of this section if any of the following apply: 
(1)	The person established the permanent or temporary residence and has complied with all sex offender registration laws of the state prior to the date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this section is derived; 
(2)	The person proves that the information on the database is incorrect and that, if corrected, this section would not apply to the person. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 7.1103, 3-17-2015)  
Sec. 34-172. - Property owners prohibited from renting real estate property to sex offenders. 
(a)	It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure or part thereof with the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent or temporary residence by any person prohibited from establishing such permanent or temporary residence pursuant to the terms of this article if such place, structure or part thereof is located within 2,000 feet, as described in section 34-171(a), of any premises where children commonly gather, including a playground, school, child care facility, video arcade facility, public or private youth center, neighborhood, or public swimming pool, as those terms are defined in of Texas Health and Safety Code § 481.134. 
(b)	Prior to renting any premises, all persons renting property in the city for permanent or temporary residence are required to first check the resident through the state department of public safety website or to call the city police department at (713) 675-3471 to obtain necessary information to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 7.1104, 3-17-2015)  
Sec. 34-173. - Penalty. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor to violate any provision or requirement hereof, and any person, firm or corporation convicted of violating any provision, restriction, requirement, or prohibition of this article shall be fined in a sum of not more than $500.00 for each violation. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(b)	A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this article and need not be proved. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05, § 7.1105, 3-17-2015)  
Secs. 34-174—34-191. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - ILLICIT SYNTHETIC DRUGS 
 
Sec. 34-192. - Findings. 
The findings contained in the preamble of the ordinance from which this article is derived are determined to be true and correct and are hereby adopted as part of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, § 1, 3-17-2015)  
Sec. 34-193. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Herbal incense means aromatic plant material, whether referred to as potpourri or otherwise, that is distributed in a loose, leafy, powder or granular form or in a compressed block or blocks that can be crushed to result in a powder or granular form, and can be placed into a pipe, cigarette paper, or other drug paraphernalia for purposes of ingestion by smoking, inhaling or other method, regardless of how the substance is labeled or marketed, including, but not limited to, whether or not such product is labeled as "not for human consumption." 
Illicit synthetic drug means: 
(1)	Any vegetative material, or herbal or plant material, however constituted, designed, intended, marketed, manufactured, or engineered, that contains any quantity of a synthetic chemical or synthetic chemical compound that has no legitimate relation to the advertised use of the product. 
(2)	Any vegetative material, or herbal or plant material, with packaging or labeling that indicates, suggests, or implies that the substance is a substitute for or otherwise mimics the pharmacological effects of marihuana (marijuana), a controlled substance, or a controlled substance analogue as defined by Texas Health and Safety Code § 481.002. 
(3)	Any vegetative material, or herbal or plant material, offered for sale or sold with verbal or written representations regarding the purpose, methods, use, or effect of the substance that indicates, suggests, or implies that the substance mimics the pharmacological effects of marihuana (marijuana), a controlled substance, or a controlled substance analogue as defined by Texas Health and Safety Code § 481.002. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, § 2, 3-17-2015)  
Sec. 34-194. - Prohibition of illicit synthetic drug. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, provide, sell, barter, produce, manufacture, distribute, or to offer, display, market or advertise for sale, or purchase with the intent to provide, sell, barter, produce, manufacture, or distribute, or to offer, display, market or advertise for sale any illicit synthetic drug. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, § 3, 3-17-2015)  
Sec. 34-195. - Failure to publicly display or label herbal incense. 
(a)	Herbal incense offered for sale to the public must be publicly displayed at all times through actual or representative packaging. 
(b)	All herbal incense offered for sale to the public must include a label listing each active ingredient. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, § 4, 3-17-2015)  
Sec. 34-196. - Penalty. 
(a)	Any violation of this article is a misdemeanor punishable upon conviction by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00. Each separate package, container, or other separate unit containing an illicit synthetic drug shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(b)	Any violation of this article is a misdemeanor punishable upon conviction by a fine not to exceed $2,000.00. Each separate package, container, or other separate unit containing any herbal incense shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(c)	Prosecution or conviction under this article is cumulative of and shall never be a bar to any other civil or administrative remedy provided or allowed in this article or by law. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, § 5, 3-17-2015)  
Sec. 34-197. - Affirmative defenses. 
(a)	It is a defense to prosecution under the provisions of this article that the person possessed the illicit synthetic drug under the lawful supervision of an authorized law enforcement officer to enforce or ensure compliance with this article. 
(b)	It is a defense to prosecution that a violation of this article is expressly permitted by state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, § 6, 3-17-2015)  
Sec. 34-198. - Seizure. 
Any product or substance possessed, provided, sold, bartered, produced, manufactured, distributed, or offered, displayed, marketed or advertised for sale or purchased with the intent to provide, sell, barter, produce, manufacture, or distribute, or to offer, display, market or advertise for sale, in violation of any provision of this article, may be seized by any peace officer. Such product or substance may be destroyed as authorized by state law after its use for evidentiary purposes is no longer required. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06, § 7, 3-17-2015)  
Chapter 38 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to improve land for park purposes, operate and maintain parks and recreation, to construct buildings, lay out and pave driveways and walks, construct ditches or lakes, and set out trees and shrubs, Texas Local Government Code § 331.001 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 38-1. - Hours of operation. 
The areas in the city's public parks as described in Exhibit A, attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived and located in the office of the city secretary, shall be open every day for use by the public at 6:00 a.m. in the morning and shall close every day at 11:00 p.m. in the evening. The public shall not be permitted to use public park areas described in said Exhibit A after closing at 11:00 p.m. in the evening except by special use permit issued by the city secretary. 
(Code 1996, § 1.1201; Ord. of 10-3-1989, § 1)  
Sec. 38-2. - Posting of signs. 
The public works director shall cause signs plainly visible to the public to be posted setting forth the hours during which the public park areas will be open for public use. 
(Code 1996, § 1.1202; Ord. of 10-3-1989, § 2)  
Sec. 38-3. - Loitering or remaining in parks. 
Any person who is found to be loitering or remaining in the public park areas after the said park areas are closed shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1-6. 
(Code 1996, § 1.1203; Ord. of 10-3-1989, § 3)  
Sec. 38-4. - Glass beverage containers prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess a glass beverage container in any park, swimming pool area and athletic facility of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 1-4; Code 1996, § 1.1204)  
Sec. 38-5. - Swimming pools. 
(a)	The city swimming pool shall be open for the public Tuesday through Sunday of each week commencing June 1, 2016, between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. and between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. during the swim season. 
(b)	The city swimming pool shall be closed to the public between the hours of 2:00 and 6:00 p.m. and on every Monday of each week for cleaning and maintenance. 
(c)	The fee for admission to the city swimming pool shall be $2.00 per person for the three-hour period between 11:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. 
(d)	The fee for admission to the city swimming pool shall $2.00 per person for the three-hour period between 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(e)	Swim classes. There shall be four, two week sessions for swim classes during the swim season. 
(f)	Fees for swim classes shall be $30.00 per child. For families with two children the swim classes shall be $40.00; for three children $50.00 and for four or more children $60.00. To receive the family discounted rate for the swim classes all the children must be siblings. 
(Res. No. R03-2013, §§ 1—3, 4-2-2013; Res. No. R05-2016, §§ 1—6, 5-17-2016)  
Secs. 38-6—38-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RENTAL OF FACILITIES 
 
Sec. 38-30. - City's community building/Galena Manor Recreation Center. 
(a)	Except as provided in this article, no fee shall be charged to the following service groups and organizations for the use of the buildings: 
(1)	Galena Park Chamber of Commerce; 
(2)	Galena Park Rotary Club; 
(3)	Galena Park Lions Club; 
(4)	Galena Park Independent School District; 
(5)	Retired Teacher Association; 
(6)	Brownies/Girl Scouts; Cub Scouts/Boy Scouts; 
(7)	Full Circle Club of Galena Manor; 
(8)	Bridge Club of Galena Manor; 
(9)	Galena Park Nonprofit Baseball Organizations; 
(10)	Churches, provided that a member of the church is a city resident with proper identification; 
(11)	City-sponsored events or city-approved community enrichment programs; and 
(12)	Other nonprofit community service groups as approved by the city commission. 
(b)	The city commission shall have the right to determine the frequency and use of the buildings by the above-listed service groups and organizations. All of the above service groups and organizations shall coordinate their requested use of the building with the recreation department. 
(Code 1996, App. A, art. 1.000(1))  
Sec. 38-31. - Rentals to groups and organizations within the city limits. 
All persons, groups and organizations residing inside the city limits shall be charged a rental fee per hour, with a minimum of two hours, a security deposit, a cleaning and damage deposit and an opening/closing fee, the amounts of which are all to be determined by the city commission from time to time. The security deposit and clean up and damage deposits may be refunded per the conditions set out in subsections (1) and (2) of this section. 
(1)	Cleaning and damage deposit. The cleaning deposit must be made at the time the rental contract is signed and shall be returned within five working days after the rental activity, provided the building is left in the same condition in which it was rented. 
(2)	Security deposit. A security deposit shall be made at the time the rental contract is signed and shall be returned within five working days after the rental activity, provided there is no damage to the building after being inspected by a recreation department employee. 
(3)	Opening/closing costs. In the event the recreation department is required to open and close the building, an opening/closing fee will be charged and must be paid at the time the rental contract is signed and is not refundable. If the renter fails to show up for the opening or delays the closing by more than 30 minutes, the renter will pay an additional opening/closing fee for each 30-minute delay. This amount will be deducted from the security and/or clean up deposit. 
(4)	Rental deposit. A rental deposit will be required to hold the date requested by the renter/user of any building. If the renter/user fails to confirm or cancel at least ten days prior to the date reserved, the rental deposit is not refundable. If said renter/user does confirm, this deposit may be applied to their rental charge and/or their cleaning/damage deposit, whichever applies. Should cancellation be made at least ten days prior, the rental deposit will be refunded. This deposit will be required by all users of the building who are required to pay the hourly rental and/or cleaning/damage deposit. 
(Code 1996, App. A, art. 1.000(2))  
Sec. 38-32. - Rentals to groups and organizations outside the city limits. 
All persons, groups and organizations residing outside the city limits shall be charged a rental fee per hour, with a minimum of two hours, a security deposit, a cleaning and damage deposit and an opening/closing fee, the amounts of which are all to be determined by the city commission from time to time. The security deposit and clean up and damage deposit may be refunded per the conditions set out in section 38-31(1) and (2). 
(Code 1996, App. A, art. 1.000(3))  
Sec. 38-33. - Holiday rentals. 
All persons, groups and organizations, whether residing inside or outside the city limits, shall be charged an additional fee in an amount to be determined by the city commission from time to time for all holiday rentals. 
(Code 1996, App. A, art. 1.000(4))  
Sec. 38-34. - Fundraising or special use activities. 
(a)	If the building is rented for a fundraising activity or other special activity the organization will be required to furnish to the recreation department proof of an event insurance-policy. 
(b)	Nonprofit organizations. All organizations that rent or use the building after hours for fundraising or other special activities will pay the security/cleanup deposit. The same rules will apply as to the security/cleanup deposit refund as set out in section 38-31(1) and (2). 
(Code 1996, App. A, art. 1.000(5))  
Sec. 38-35. - City employees, recreation board and volunteers. 
City employees, active recreation board members, active reserve police officers, and active volunteer firefighters will be allowed the use of one of the buildings one time each year at no charge. The security deposit and clean up deposit will be required and will be refunded under the same terms and conditions as set out in section 38-31(1) and (2). 
(Code 1996, App. A, art. 1.000(6))  
Sec. 38-36. - Timely payment of rental fees. 
All rental fees, security deposits, opening/closing fees and clean up deposits must be paid by the renter seven days prior to the desired rental date. If unpaid on or before this time, the renter will not be guaranteed the use of the building. 
(Code 1996, App. A, art. 1.000(7))  
Sec. 38-37. - Alcohol. 
Consumption of alcoholic beverages may be permitted only at the consent of the director of parks and recreation. If alcohol is allowed, the renter shall be required to provide two uniformed peace officers. In the event there are more than 100 people in attendance the renter shall provide an additional peace officer for each additional 100 persons or part thereof. These officers will be hired by the recreation department. The fee for such service will be paid to the city by the person renting the building. The fee for such services will be a reasonable rate charged by peace officers in the county for such services. The number of hours of security will be the same as the number of hours the building is rented. 
(Code 1996, App. A, art. 1.000(8))  
Sec. 38-38. - Ball park facilities. 
Nonresident baseball organizations will pay a fee per day for the use of the city ball park facilities as established by the city commission from time to time. A security deposit as established by the city commission from time to time will also be paid and may be refunded if the ball parks are left in the same condition in which they are at the time of rental. 
(Code 1996, App. A, art. 1.000(9))  
Sec. 38-39. - Swimming pool. 
The fee for use of the swimming pool shall be as established by the city commission from time to time for three hours with one approved Red Cross trained life guard per 20 people. The required life guards are to be employed by the city but will be paid by the renter. 
(Code 1996, App. A, art. 1.000(10))  
Sec. 38-40. - Contracts for rental and use. 
The recreation director of the city or his designee is hereby authorized to execute a contract with private groups or individuals on behalf of the city based on the foregoing rates and on the form contracts marked Exhibits A, B and C, attached to the ordinance from which this section is derived, on file in the office of the city secretary, and made a part hereof for all purposes. 
(Code 1996, § 1.1402; Ord. of 9-1994)  
Chapter 42 - SIGN REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 42-1. - Scope. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all signs, as that term is defined in section 42-4, within the extraterritorial jurisdiction or the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1401)  
Sec. 42-2. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to establish the reasonable, orderly and effective display of outdoor advertising on all highways, streets and roads in the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1402)  
Sec. 42-3. - Superiority clause. 
If any subdivision or individual tract of land contains restrictions or covenants relating to signs, or any person enter into a legally binding agreement which provides for the regulating of signs in a particular development which are more restrictive than these regulations, the more restrictive requirements shall apply. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1403)  
Sec. 42-4. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Advertising means to seek the attraction of or to direct the attention of the public to any goods, services or merchandise whatsoever or a location that provides goods, services or merchandise. 
Alterations or repair to an advertising display means repairs or improvements to a display, sign or sign structure not exceeding 50 percent of its replacement value. 
Banner means any piece of cloth, plastic, canvas or similar material on which there appears a display, typically supported at both ends. 
Business means the erection or use of any property, building or structure, permanent or temporary, for the primary purpose of conducting in said building or structure or on said property a legitimate commercial enterprise in compliance with all ordinances and regulations of the city governing such activity. Business purpose shall not include any property, building or structure erected or used for the primary purpose of securing a permit or erecting a sign. 
Display means the message of any sign whether it is in words, symbols or objects. 
Face means the total display area and border of a sign. 
Federal primary system means the interstate and freeway primary system and the non-freeway primary system. 
Intersection means the intersection of streets, driveways, alleys or any two surfaces intended for motor vehicles. 
Interstate and freeway primary system means the portion of the national system of interstate and defense highways located within the state which are now or hereafter may be officially designated the interstate system by the state highway and public transportation commission and approved pursuant to Title 3, United States Code Section 131, as amended. 
Nameplate means a non-electrical sign identifying only the name and occupation or profession of the occupant of premises on which the sign is located and not exceeding six inches by 18 inches. 
Non-freeway primary system means that portion of the connective main highway located within the state which now or hereafter may be designated the primary system by the state highway and public transportation commission and approved pursuant to Title 23, United States Code Section 131, as amended. 
Owner means the person who owns or leases the on-premises sign, the owner of the off-premises sign, or the owner of the real property on which the sign, whether it is on-premises or off-premises, is located. 
Person means an individual/company, corporation, partnership, association or any other entity. 
Primarily residential area means the right-of-way (and adjoining property area) between two intersecting public streets in which a majority of the total front footage is used for residential purposes. 
Public street means the entire width between property lines of any road, street, way, alley, bridge or other similar thoroughfare, not privately owned or controlled, when any part thereof is open to the public for vehicular traffic, is the responsibility of the city or other similar public agency to maintain, and over which the city has legislative jurisdiction under its police power. 
Reconstruction means the repair of a sign and its structure that has fallen or has been blown down or the repairs amount to a sum in excess of 50 percent of its replacement value. 
Registration means the registration of the currently existing non-permitted signs. 
Relocate means the removal of a sign and any supporting structure from one location and placing it or its replacement at a new location. 
Residential purposes means property devoted to use as a single-family or multifamily residence. Residential purposes shall include, but not be limited to, property used for houses, duplexes, condominiums, town houses, town homes, patio homes and apartments; property used for hotel, motels and boardinghouses shall not be considered as used for residential purposes. Property devoted to both residential and nonresidential use shall be considered as used for residential purposes. 
Right-of-way means the property fronting or immediately adjacent to, and on either side of, a public street or a non-public street which the public authority has the authority to use for the road or street. 
Sight triangle means the triangle formed at an intersection by intersecting curblines and a non-curbline joining the curblines. The distance on the curbline as used in this chapter shall be 40 feet, rather than 30 feet, along each curb and the triangle shall extend to a height of 12 feet above the highest point of the grade. 
Sign means an outdoor structure, sign, display, light, device, figure, painting, drawing, message, plaque, poster, billboard or other thing that is designed, intended or used to advertise or inform. 
Sign administrator means the sign administrator as defined herein and those representatives that he may designate. 
Sign appeals committee means the committee as defined herein and appointed as established herein. 
Sign company means the person who engages in the business of leasing, constructing or maintaining signs or sign structures. 
Sign structure means any structure which supports or is capable of supporting any sign. A sign structure may be a single pole and may or may not be an integral part of a building. 
Time periods means calendar days unless otherwise specified. Such periods shall start on the day following the event starting the time period to run and end at 5:00 p.m. local time on the last day of such period. Any period ending on a day the city hall is closed for any reason shall be extended until the next actual working day at the city hall of the city. 
Visible means that the message, copy area or advertising display seen (whether or not it is legible) without visual aid by a person of normal visual acuity; or, simply stated, it can be seen. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1404)  
Sec. 42-5. - Sign classifications. 
(a)	Site classification. For the purpose of this chapter, signs shall be first classified as either an on-premises sign or an off-premises sign. 
(1)	On-premises sign. The term "on-premises sign" means any sign identifying or advertising a business, person or activity, installed and maintained on the same premises as the business, person or activity. 
(2)	Off-premises sign. The term "off-premises sign" means any sign displaying advertising copy that pertains to a business, person, organization, activity, event, place, service or product not principally located or primarily manufactured or sold on the premises of which the sign is located. 
(b)	Type classification. All signs shall further be classified into one of the following type signs: 
(1)	Ground sign. The term "ground sign" means a sign which is supported by uprights or braces in or upon the ground, including monument signs, two pole monument signs, converted portable signs and portable signs. 
(2)	Marquee sign. The term "marquee sign" means a projecting sign attached to or hung from a canopy or covered structure projecting from and supported by a frame or pipe support extending beyond a building. 
(3)	Monument sign. The term "monument sign" means either a monument sign or enlarged monument sign as follows: 
a.	Monument sign. The term "monument sign" means any sign ten feet or less in height as measured from the natural ground level to the top of the sign. Such sign shall be a maximum of 60 square feet on each side, contain no cutouts from the ground to the top and shall be permanently affixed to the ground. 
b.	Enlarged monument sign. The term "enlarged monument sign" means any sign 12 feet or less from the natural ground level to the top of the sign. Such sign shall be six feet of nonadvertisement and contain no cutouts from the ground to the bottom of the advertising and shall be permanently affixed to the ground. 
(4)	Projecting sign. The term "projecting sign" means any sign which is affixed to any building wall or structure and extends beyond the building wall or structure more than 12 inches. 
(5)	Roof sign. The term "roof sign" means any sign erected, constructed or maintained above or upon the roof of any building. 
(6)	Wall sign. The term "wall sign" means any sign affixed to or painted upon the wall of any building. 
(7)	Flag sign. The term "flag sign" means any sign constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric or material affixed to a building, wall, fence or on a staff or pole set in a concrete foundation. 
(8)	Awning sign. The term "awning sign" means any sign made of cloth, metal or plastic with a metal frame attached to a building and projecting over a sidewalk, thoroughfare or parking area when the same is so erected as to permit its being raised to a position flat against the building when not in use. 
(9)	Canopy sign. The term "canopy sign" means any sign, other than an awning attached to a building, projecting over a thoroughfare, sidewalk or parking area and not erected so as to permit its being raised to a flat position against the building, does not permit use of marquee letters and is commonly supported by poles or uprights set upon the underlying ground. 
(10)	Multiple business sign. The term "multiple business sign" means that type of sign that is a single structure but has a different display for each different business such as may be found at a shopping center. 
(11)	Improved portable sign. The term "improved portable sign" mean any on-premises portable sign converted to a fixed sign. 
(c)	Special function classification. Any on-premises or off-premises sign of any type may also be included within one or more of the following additional classifications according to the special functions of that sign: 
(1)	Electrical sign. The term "electrical sign" means any sign containing electrical wiring or utilizing electric current, but not including signs illuminated by a light source exterior to the sign structure. 
(2)	Portable sign. The term "portable sign" means any sign designed or constructed to be easily moved from one location to another, including signs mounted upon a motor vehicle or designed to be mounted upon a trailer, bench, wheeled carrier or other non-motorized mobile structure. A portable sign with the wheels removed shall still be considered a portable sign hereunder. For the purpose of this chapter, trailer signs and signs on benches are portable signs. 
(3)	Spectacular sign. The term "spectacular sign" means any sign which has any automatically changing advertising, which is equipped with glaring or rotating strobe or spotlights or which has any moving message whatsoever. 
(4)	Temporary sign. The term "temporary sign" means any sign including a banner constructed of cardboard, wallboard or other light materials not to exceed 12 square feet in size. Further, a temporary sign is intended to be used for a specific period of time (not to exceed 30 days) and then removed. A portable sign and flag sign shall not be considered a temporary sign. 
(5)	Moveable sign. The term "moveable sign" means signs of six square feet or less designed to be moved by hand and normally stored inside the building during the nighttime. 
(6)	Emitting sign. The term "emitting sign" means any sign or symbol that emits any noise, chemical substance or odor. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1405)  
Sec. 42-6. - Sign administration and enforcement. 
(a)	Sign administrator. The mayor shall appoint or shall designate a sign administrator to administer and enforce the terms and conditions of this chapter and all other provisions of the laws relating to signs. The sign administrator is empowered to delegate the duties and powers granted to and imposed upon him by this chapter to other persons serving under the sign administrator. The sign administrator and such other persons shall constitute the sign administration section. The sign administrator is directed to enforce and carry out all provisions of this chapter. 
(b)	Enforcement responsibility. The duties of the sign administrator shall include not only the approval of issuance of permits as required by this chapter, but also the responsibility of insuring that all signs comply with this chapter and all other applicable law, and that all signs for which a permit is required, do in fact have a permit. The sign administrator shall make such inspections as may be necessary and initiate appropriate actions to bring about compliance with this chapter and other applicable laws if such inspection discloses any instance of noncompliance. The sign administrator shall investigate thoroughly any complaints of alleged violations of this chapter. 
(c)	Powers of the sign administrator. The sign administrator shall have the power and authority to administer and enforce the conditions of this chapter and all other laws relating to signs. Included among such powers are the following specific powers: 
(1)	Inspection and approval. Every sign for which a permit is required shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the sign administrator. When deemed advisable by the sign administrator, a sign may be inspected at the point of manufacture if such point is within or adjacent to the city limits 
(2)	Warranties search. Upon presentation of proper identification to the owner, agent or tenant in charge of such property, he will admit the sign administrator or his representative to the premises to inspect said premises concerning the sign. The applicant, owner or other person in charge of the premises where the sign is located agrees, by making application for a sign or renewal for a sign permit, to admit the sign administrator or representative for the purposes of inspecting and investigating signs or sign structure, any building, structure, or other premises or property between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Mondays through Fridays; provided, however, that in cases of emergency where extreme hazards are known to exist which may involve imminent injury to persons, loss of life or severe property damage, and where the owner, agent or tenant in charge of the property is not available after the sign administrator has made a good faith effort to locate same, the sign administrator may enter the aforementioned structures and premises at any time upon presentation of proper identification to any other person on the premises. 
(3)	Stop work order. When the sign administrator or his representative discovers that a sign is being constructed not in conformance with this chapter, he shall issue a stop work order to the person known to be so engaged. Upon notice and issuance of a stop work order from the sign administrator, work on any sign being conducted in a manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter or being conducted in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall be immediately stopped. Such notice and order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, to his agent or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, written notice shall not be required to be given by the sign administrator. The stop work order shall contain a notice of the right to appeal as provided herein. Work shall not resume until the condition causing the stoppage is corrected to the sign administrator's satisfaction or the appeal process results in a reversal of the administrator's stop work order. 
(4)	Permit and license revocation. The sign administrator shall have and is hereby granted the power and the authority to revoke any and all licenses or permits authorized by this chapter for violation of the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
(5)	Appeal procedure. Upon revoking such license or permits, the sign administrator shall notify by certified mail with return receipt requested to the address given by the permutes or licensee on the application for such permit or license, to advise the permutes or licensee of such revocation and notify the permutes or licensee that the revocation will become final if not appealed to the sign appeals committee within ten days. 
(6)	Establish procedures. The sign administrator shall have the authority to adopt procedures and provide forms required to implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(7)	Enforce state and federal regulations. Pursuant to and in accordance with any agreement between the city and the state, or the United States Government, the sign administrator is hereby authorized to enforce any applicable terms and provisions of the Texas Highway Beautification Act, Texas Transportation Code § 391.001 et seq., the Agreement for Carrying Out National Policy Relative to Control of Outdoor Advertising, entered into between the United States of America and the state, by instrument dated May 2, 1972, and any supplements or amendments to that agreement, and any rules or regulations promulgated by the state and/or the state highway department, pursuant to the said Act or agreements, with regard to signs. 
(8)	Issue citations. The sign administrator or his designated representative shall have the authority to issue citations to any owner, agent of the owner or person in charge of the premises for any violation of this Code existing on the premises. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1406)  
Sec. 42-7. - Appeals to city commission 
Any person wishing to appeal a decision of the sign administrator on the grounds that the decision misconstrues or wrongly interprets this chapter may, within ten days after receiving an adverse ruling of the committee either by personal service or by certified mail return receipt requested, appeal the same to the city commission, provided that the appealing party shall personally deliver to the city secretary or deposit that notice in the United States Mail addressed to the city secretary within the said ten-day period. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1407)  
Sec. 42-8. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)	Standards. 
(1)	General. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction by court of competent jurisdiction thereof, be punished by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1-6. Each day in which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, the city attorney is hereby authorized to take all actions, both legal and equitable, necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(2)	Real property owner. Any person who is the owner of the real property upon which an on-premises or off-premises sign is located and who shall permit a violation upon such real property of any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction thereof, be punished by a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1-6 for each violation. Each day on which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, the city attorney is hereby authorized to take all actions, both legal and equitable, necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(b)	Subterfuge. Any permit secured before or after the effective date of this chapter which in the opinion of the sign administrator has been secured through subterfuge and not in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the sign administrator. 
(c)	Denial of entry for inspection. Whenever the sign administrator or his representative, after showing proper identification, is denied admission to inspect any premises, the sign administrator may revoke all sign permits. 
(d)	Work done without a permit. Any person, firm or organization installing, erecting or reconstructing a sign or changing the location of a sign without a proper permit will be assessed an amount twice the applicable permit fees, in addition to any penalties, civil or criminal, which may be assessed as a result of a violation of the terms of this chapter. 
(e)	Illegal political campaign signs. No political campaign signs of any description shall be allowed on publicly owned property or the property of a public utility. All political campaign signs posted on private property shall be posted only with the consent of the owner or lessee of such property. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1408)  
Sec. 42-9. - Sign applications, permits and fees. 
(a)	Application procedure. Applications for permits required by this chapter shall be made upon forms provided by the sign administrator and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(1)	Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. This shall be kept current at all times. 
(2)	Location of the building, structure, or lot to which or upon which the sign is to be attached or erected, including lot, block, section number and subdivision name, or a metes and bounds description. 
(3)	Position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings or structures and all street curblines and sidewalks bounding any part of the lot on which such sign is to be placed. 
(4)	Two blueprints or ink drawings on a scale not smaller than one inch to 15 feet of the plans and specifications showing the method of construction and attachment to the building or in the ground. 
(5)	Applications for new ground signs when erected or constructed to heights exceeding 12 feet above ground level, or for new roof signs when erected 12 feet above roof level, shall be accompanied by a drawing of the sign structure and sign prepared by and certified by a professional engineer registered in the state. 
(6)	The sign administrator at his option may also require similar certification by a registered professional engineer where any unusual structural provisions of a proposed sign indicate such certification is necessary in the interest of public safety. 
(7)	A copy of stress sheets and calculations showing how the structure is designed for dead load and for wind pressure on every point in the display surface. 
(8)	The name, street address, business address, business telephone number and home telephone number, and driver's license number of the foreman, supervisor or other person in charge of the construction, destruction, placement or relocation of the sign and related structures. 
(9)	Notarized written consent of the owner, lessee or duly authorized agent of the building, structure or land to which or on which the sign is to be erected. 
(10)	Any electrical permit required and issued for the sign. 
(11)	Evidence of the insurance policy required by this chapter. 
(12)	Such other information as the sign administrator shall require to show full compliance with this chapter and all other laws and ordinances of the city. 
(13)	Permission to enter the property under the provisions herein set out for inspection of the sign and its structure. 
(14)	The location of the sign. 
(b)	Permit required. No person shall hereafter erect, take down, construct, destroy, reconstruct, relocate, remove, alter or use a sign without first having secured a written permit as herein provided from the city. All signs illuminated by direct or indirect lighting, shall in addition, be subject to the electrical code and the permit requirements thereof. Permits are not transferable and will be used only by the person to whom it was issued. A copy of the permit will be posted at each erection site. 
(c)	Permit duration. Any permit to erect, take down, construct, destroy, reconstruct, relocate, remove or alter a sign shall become null and void unless erection, take down, construction, destruction, reconstruction, relocation, removal or alteration of the sign is completed within 90 days, or the permit is renewed for an additional 90 days, in which case an additional fee shall be payable equal to one-half the original fee paid and the proposed sign shall meet all of the requirements of this chapter on the date of renewal. 
(d)	Relocation permits. Relocation permits are required before any sign may be removed for relocation. 
(e)	Definition of permits, applications and fees. The following is a list off the various required applications and permits and for which a fee is charged: 
(1)	Application. 
a.	Required. There shall be an application made for all permits or renewal of permits. 
a.	Construction/destruction/reconstruction permit . The term "construction/destruction/reconstruction permit" means the permit required to construct, destroy or reconstruct a sign or sign structure. 
(2)	Inspection. Inspection, except for portable and exempt signs, will consist of three phases: 
a.	Site. Site inspection required before a sign may be located; 
b.	Construction. Construction inspection to determine if the design requirements are met; and 
c.	Hole. Hole inspection is required for all ground signs. 
(3)	Inspection of portable signs. Inspection of portable signs will consist of one inspection after installation to determine if all requirements of this chapter are met. 
(f)	Sign fees. Fees for permits and other administrative procedures shall be as provided for in the fee schedule. 
(1)	Exemptions. 
a.	No permit shall be required under this chapter for the following on-premises signs unless any such sign is a spectacular sign or a portable sign. Any sign listed hereunder shall be erected and maintained in conformity with the provisions otherwise of this chapter: 
1.	Signs painted on glass surface of windows or doors not to exceed 25 percent of the window or door area. 
2.	Directional and regulatory signs erected by the city, state (inducing its political subdivisions such as counties and school districts), or the federal government and the lessees of such governmental entities. 
3.	Railroad signs. 
4.	Legal notices, and house numbers, "no trespassing," "no parking" and other similar warning signs, not exceeding two in number. 
5.	Temporary signs smaller than six square feet, provided the number of such signs on any one address does not exceed one in number. 
6.	Signs required by federal, state or local law. 
7.	On-premises signs setting forth the location of or directions to parking or buildings located on the premises or regulating the flow of on-premises traffic, only if they do not include any electrical wiring. 
8.	Signs displayed, designed or used for or upon motor vehicles as long as such vehicles are used by the business for delivery or identification. (This is not to be construed to exempt signs built or placed upon a motor vehicle solely for the purpose of advertisement.) 
9.	Signs designed and used for display upon or with heavier-than-air craft. 
10.	Signs which are painted on the face of a building not exceeding five percent of that wall's surface area and no higher than the roofline and state only the street number and name of the proprietor; provided that the number of such signs shall be one per address for such premises. 
11.	Signs within a stadium, open-air theater, arena, public or recreational area which are designed primarily to be viewed by patrons within such stadium, open-air theater or arena. 
12.	On-premises real estate signs five square feet or less. 
13.	Christmas displays and similar temporary displays erected without advertising; however, such displays shall be subject to the fire and electrical code and fire safety rules promulgated by the fire marshal. 
14.	A sign not over 40 square feet in area setting forth information concerning a building or other structure under repair or construction or advertising the sale or rental of the premises. 
15.	Subdivision identification signs, one per subdivision 40 square foot or under. 
16.	One flag of the United States and/or the state and/or the flag of the city. 
17.	Fast food establishments may have in and out directional signs with the company logo if they do not exceed 1½ square feet in addition to the five allowed by this subsection. 
18.	Any on-premises sign viewed only from within the premises and not visible from any public road. 
19.	Any nameplate sign placed on the entrance door or within six inches of the entrance opening. 
b.	Signs exempt from operating permit only. 
1.	Any on-premises sign used for the purpose of perpetuating the doctrines and teachings of any generally recognized church or religious organization holding a valid nonprofit charter which has been filed in the Office of the Secretary of State and for which a current tax exemption certificate has been issued by the Internal Revenue Service; 
2.	Signs which are mounted on the face of a building no higher than the roof-line and state only the street number and name of the proprietor; provided that the number of such signs shall be one per address for such premises; or 
3.	Any on-premises sign operated by and used to further the interests of other recognized charitable organizations holding valid nonprofit charters which have been filed in the Office of the Secretary of State and for which current certificates have been issued by the Internal Revenue Service. 
c.	It shall be the duty of any person, company, organization or entity claiming exemption status under this section to provide any documentation or other items of proof to the sign administrator. An organization claiming exemption status as a tax-exempt organization shall submit a photocopy of its charter and state and federal tax exemption certificate to the sign administrator. 
(g)	Normal maintenance, changing of message or electric light bulbs. No sign permit is required for the change of any of the ornamental features, normal maintenance or the advertising display of a sign previously permitted. This provision shall not release a person from complying with all other applicable permitting requirements of the city, including those of the any building and construction technical code as adopted by reference by the city in the building and construction chapter of this Code. 
(h)	Any misstatement, misrepresentation or incorrect information supplied in order to obtain any type of sign permit, whether or not intentionally done, shall be grounds for the revocation of such sign permit. Such sign shall be removed within 24 hours after permit revocation. If the sign is not removed within 24 hours after permit revocation, the city may remove the sign at the owner's expense and place a lien against the property of the owner for the cost of removal. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1409)  
Sec. 42-10. - Sign companies. 
(a)	Insurance required. Each sign company, under the terms of this section, shall submit copies of policies of insurance certified by the agent issuing them, together with written proof that the premiums have been paid, showing that the performance of work in connection with each sign will be covered by approved public liability and property damage insurance in the amount of $50,000.00 for any person injured, $100,000.00 for injury to more than one person and $50,000.00 for property damage. Such policies of insurance shall be in a form selected or approved by the city and shall name the city as an additional insured. In addition, such policies of insurance shall be issued by an insurance company duly authorized to do business and issue such policies of insurance in the state and maintaining an office or represented by an authorized agent in the state, shall expressly state that it may not be cancelled unless ten days written notice is given to the sign administrator before cancellation of the policy, and must contain an endorsement to the effect that the issuer waives any claim or right in the nature of subrogation to recover against the city, its officers, agents or employees. Whenever any policy of insurance is cancelled, the sign administrator shall require that all work to which such policy applies be stopped immediately. No permits shall be issued until such time that the person or company complies with these insurance requirements. 
(b)	Number to be displayed on vehicles. Vehicles owned or operated by a duly licensed sign installer shall have displayed thereon, at all times, the license number shown on such installer's license, prefixed by the initials "P.S.I." 
(c)	Electrical sign contractors. Each sign company, under the terms of this section, whose operations include signs that in any manner include the use of electrical power, shall adhere to the requirements provisions of the electrical code of the city as that code now exists or may hereinafter be amended. 
(d)	Violations of chapter. Violations of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be grounds for the revocation of the license or denial of the license application of any person who has committed such violation. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1410)  
Sec. 42-11. - Sign maintenance and removal. 
(a)	Maintenance. 
(1)	The area around any sign location must be maintained and kept clean by the owner. Grass will be cut a minimum of six feet from said billboard on all sides and entirely to the street curb on the side nearest the street and debris, etc., will be removed at least weekly. 
(2)	All signs shall be thoroughly painted as often as is necessary, unless of galvanized or non-corroding metal or treated with appropriate wood preservative, and shall be kept in good repair consistent with good maintenance. All braces, bolts, clips, supporting frame and fastenings shall be free from deterioration, termite infestation, rot or loosening. All signs shall be able to withstand safely at all times the wind pressures specified elsewhere in this chapter. In case any sign is not so maintained, the sign administrator shall give written notice to the owner or lessee thereof to so maintain the signs or to remove the sign. Non-maintenance shall be considered a misdemeanor and penalty shall be assessed accordingly. 
(b)	Unsafe signs. Should any sign in the opinion of the sign administrator become insecure or in danger of falling or otherwise unsafe, the sign administrator shall give written notice of the condition of the sign to the person owning, leasing or responsible for the sign. Said person so notified shall correct the unsafe condition of the sign in a manner to be approved by the sign administrator in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)	Unlawful signs. In case any sign shall be installed, erected, constructed or maintained in violation of any of the terms of this chapter, in addition to any other rights and remedies provided herein, the sign administrator shall give written notice to the owner, lessee or person responsible for said sign ordering said owner, lessee or person to alter the sign such that it complies with this chapter, or to remove the sign. 
(d)	Removal of signs. 
(1)	Removal of unlawful signs by the city. The following procedures will be followed by the city in removal of unlawful signs by the city. 
a.	Signs found on public property. All signs found on public property or public utility property or easement may be removed and discarded by the city without notice to the owner. This removal does not relieve the owner of any penalties. 
b.	Portable signs found on public property. 
1.	The owners of portable signs that have the proper identification on them found on public property or public utility property or easement may be removed by the city and stored for ten days after the notice or removal is received by the owner for the owner to reclaim. If not reclaimed within ten days, the sign may be sold at auction or disposed of by the city. The cost to reclaim shall be the sum of the following: 
(i)	A civil penalty; 
(ii)	Actual cost of removal and hauling (minimum $50.00); 
(iii)	Storage fee charged per day per 160 square feet of storage surface; and 
(iv)	The cost of the employee's time to administer such confiscation. 
2.	The amounts of the above-listed costs and fees shall be as determined and established by the city commission from time to time. 
c.	Other signs removed by city. 
1.	All other signs removed by the city under any provision of this chapter shall be stored for ten days after the notice of removal is issued to the last known address of the owner of the sign or the owner is personally notified. If such sign is not reclaimed by the owner within ten days of such notice, the sign may be sold at auction or disposed of by the city. The cost to reclaim shall be the sum of the following: 
(i)	A civil penalty; 
(ii)	Actual cost of removal and hauling (minimum $50.00); 
(iii)	Storage fee charged per day per 160 square feet of storage surface; and 
(iv)	The cost of the employee's time to administer such confiscation. 
2.	The amounts of the above-listed costs and fees shall be as determined and established by the city commission from time to time. 
(e)	Replacement or repair of sign. 
(1)	When any sign or a substantial part of it is blown down or otherwise destroyed or taken down or removed for any purpose other than maintenance operations or for changing the letters, symbols or other matter on the sign, it may not be replaced, re-erected, reconstructed or rebuilt except in full conformance with the provisions and requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the requirement of obtaining a permit. 
(2)	For purposes of subsection (e)(1) of this section, a sign or substantial part of it is considered to have been destroyed if the costs of repairing the sign is more than 50 percent of the cost of replacing the sign, exclusive of the pole or poles supporting the sign. 
(3)	The engineering specifications must receive final inspection and approval by the city sign administrator or his designee prior to setting. 
(4)	It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter to continue any work after having been verbally advised to stop work or given a stop work order by the city sign administrator or his designee. 
(5)	It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter to remove a stop work order issued by the sign administrator or his designee. 
(6)	In addition to all other requirements of this chapter, a new sign permit is required whenever the cost of repairing the sign, exclusive of the pole, is more than 50 percent of the cost of erecting a replacement sign of the same type at the same location. 
(7)	Whenever there is a change in ownership or use of the business premises upon which an on-premises sign is located, any and all on-premises signs on such premises shall be made to conform to all applicable requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1411)  
Sec. 42-12. - Prohibited use of signs. 
(a)	Signs not to be posted on or to public property. It shall be unlawful for any sign other than official signs erected by the city, county, independent school district, state or railway company to be placed or caused to be placed, painted, printed, posted or affixed in any manner, any picture, bill, sign or other advertising matter whatsoever on any curb, sidewalk, pavement, telephone pole, electric pole, traffic signal standard or pole or other public improvement in any public street or grounds, or upon any bridge, overpass, underpass or parts of the same, median, esplanade, road right-of-way or public utility easement, traffic island, or public building, structure or erection of any type belonging to the city. 
(b)	No sign shall resemble an official sign. No sign shall be constructed which resembles any official marker erected by the city, state or any governmental agency or which by reason of position, shape or color would conflict with the proper functioning of any traffic sign, signal or which by its shape or color would conflict with or be confused with emergency vehicle lights, especially blinking lights. Use of words such as "stop," "look," or "danger," or any other word, phrase, symbol or character in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic is prohibited. 
(c)	Sign not to interfere with official signs. Signs may not be located or illuminated in such a manner as to obscure or otherwise interfere with the effectiveness of an official traffic sign, signal or device, or so as to obstruct or interfere with the view of a driver or approaching, emerging or intersection traffic. All such signs shall comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)	Proper shielding of lighted signals; interference with drivers of motor vehicles. Signs containing lights which are not effectively shielded as to prevent beams or rays of light from being directed at any portion of the traveled way from which the sign is primarily viewed and which are of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or to impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicles, or which otherwise interfere with any driver's operation of a motor vehicle, are prohibited. 
(e)	Spectacular signs. The following types of spectacular signs shall be deemed prohibited: 
(1)	Signs with strobe, rotating strobe or blinking strobe lights. 
(2)	Signs with flashing spotlights, or blinking spotlights shall not be operated in a capacity which will interfere with traffic. 
(3)	Automatically changeable advertising signs with more than one message which changes every three seconds. 
(4)	Flashing lights with bulbs of greater than 15 watts. 
(5)	Spectacular signs placed perpendicular to the roadway with the exception of automatically changeable advertising as regulated above. 
(f)	Signs not to obstruct egress. 
(1)	No sign shall be erected, constructed or maintained so as to obstruct any means of egress, or any opening necessary for required light, ventilation or fire fighting or for escape from the premises, or so as to prevent free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof. 
(2)	No sign shall be attached to any exterior stairway, fire escape, fire tower balcony or balcony serving as a horizontal exit. 
(3)	No sign shall be erected, constructed. or maintained so as to interfere with the operation of a counterbalanced section of a fire escape, and no projecting sign shall be erected, constructed or maintained without a minimum of seven feet of clearance over any such counterbalanced section. 
(4)	No sign shall obstruct the free use of any window above the first story. 
(g)	Emitting signs prohibited. No emitting sign shall be permitted and are strictly prohibited at any location within the city. 
(h)	Signs employing motion picture machines. No sign shall employ a stereopticon or motion picture machine. 
(i)	Signs not to create easements. No permit for a sign extending beyond private property onto a public street, public sidewalks or public alley shall constitute a permanent easement, and every such permit shall be revocable at any time by action of the city commission. The city shall not be liable for any damages to the owner by reason of such revocation. The only time such a permit shall be issued shall be in the case of a projecting sign extending over a public sidewalk when such sidewalk abuts the front of the building to which the projecting sign is attached. Nor shall any sign by virtue of its longevity create an interest in real property by limitations or otherwise. 
(j)	Vision restrictions prohibited. Any sign that restricts vision necessary for safety is prohibited. If such a sign is erected and it does restrict vision so as to be a safety hazard it will be removed or modified to correct such restriction and eliminate the hazard. It is the responsibility of the person owning and erecting the sign to ensure that the sign does not create such a hazard. The following are guidelines to construction to prevent such restrictions of vision: 
(1)	Any sign over pedestrian traffic shall be no lower than eight feet above the pedestrian surface. 
(2)	Any sign over passenger vehicle traffic shall be no lower than ten feet above the vehicular traffic surface. 
(3)	Any sign over general vehicular traffic shall be no lower than 14 feet six inches above the traffic surface. 
(4)	Any sign which obstructs vision within the sight triangle. 
(k)	Obscene signs prohibited . No obscene sign shall be permitted. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1412)  
Sec. 42-13. - On-premises and off-premises sign regulations. 
(a)	General requirements. 
(1)	No sign in sight triangle. All ground signs discussed in this section shall not be placed in the sight triangle as defined herein, and shall not be placed in or extend into a public street, easement or right-of-way. 
(2)	Shall not obstruct view. No sign shall in any way obstruct the view of traffic over the sight triangle or as defined in this chapter. 
(3)	Roof sign clearance. Roof signs must have one foot of open space between the roofline and the bottom of the sign and three feet of open space shall be required between the sign structure and the edge of the roof and between sign structures. 
(b)	Height restrictions. No billboard may be erected that exceeds an overall height of 22½ feet, excluding cutouts extending above the rectangular border, measured from the highest point on the sign to the ground level of the ground. A roof sign may not at any point exceed 25 feet above the roof level. 
(c)	Face restrictions. 
(1)	No business may have more than five faces per on-premises location except for wall signs. For signs on a double-faced, back-to-back, four-sided or V-type nature, each face is considered a separate sign in computing the face area. A curved surface sign shall be considered as three faces and a circular sign shall be considered as four faces. Those five signs may not exceed in total face area the greater of: 
a.	Three hundred square feet; or 
b.	One percent of the total useable square feet of the building plus one square foot for each linear foot of frontage on the adjacent streets. 
The total area of all wall signs shall not exceed 20 percent of the area of the wall of building below roofline. 
(2)	No off-premises billboard shall exceed 672 square feet plus cutouts as herein provided. 
(d)	Size and quantity of types restrictions. Total number of on-premises signs allowed at any one business shall not exceed five except for wall signs. The maximum of the individual types of categories of signs are as follows: 
(1)	One portable sign for not more than 60 days a year or one improved portable sign. 
(2)	One monument sign, maximum of 60 square feet each side. 
(3)	Two monument signs if the business has frontage on two roads with a total street frontage of 300 feet or more. 
(4)	One marquee sign. 
(5)	Two canopy signs. 
(6)	One ground sign per separate street frontage. 
(e)	Cutout areas permitted. Exclusions or appendages (cutouts) shall not exceed 20 percent of the total sign face area and shall not exceed five additional feet in height or three feet of additional width. 
(f)	Spacing. No off-premises sign will be placed within 1,500 feet of another sign subject to the provisions hereof. No on-premises pole sign shall be erected within 500 feet of a pole sign for the same business on the same street, except each business within the limit of five signs shall be permitted one sign for each street frontage. 
(g)	Movable signs. Movable signs in addition to all other regulations herein contained shall observe the following rules applicable to the installation and operation of moveable signs. 
(1)	The number of moveable signs allowed for the first street of frontage is one moveable sign. 
(2)	One additional moveable sign will be allowed for each additional street that adjoins the business. 
(h)	Subdivision signs. Only one off-premises sign with the name of the subdivision and directions thereto will be permitted in addition to the one exempt sign for a residential subdivision situated within the city limits that has been approved by the city and duly platted and recorded in the records of the county. The size of such sign inclusive of all sides shall not exceed a total of 70 square feet. Such sign is allowed for a maximum period of two years and shall be promptly removed at the end of the two-year period. If the subdivision is less than 95 percent sold, the sign may be re-permitted for two years. 
(i)	Location. No off-premises sign shall be located in a primarily residential area. 
(j)	Relocation, removal and construction. 
(1)	Relocation of off-premises signs will be permitted only in the case of a governmental taking of the land used for the sign location and no compensation paid to the sign owner. 
(2)	The owner of the billboard or portable sign must obtain a site for relocation of the billboard or portable sign within one month of removal and construction or placement must be completed within 90 days thereafter. 
(3)	The city will only permit reconstruction if the sign proposed to be constructed will be in compliance with all the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)	Removal of any sign may be required if, in the opinion of the sign administrator, the sign unnecessarily distracts motorists, hinders the view of the natural landscape or although grandfatherered is still in too close of proximity to other signs. 
(k)	Off-premises signs on private property. No person shall place an off-premises sign on private property without the consent of the owner or agent for the owner of said private property. Further, no person shall place an off-premises portable sign on private property without the authorized written notarized consent of the owner or agent for the owner of said private property. 
(l)	Accumulation of rainwater prohibited. All signs shall be designed, constructed and maintained to prevent the accumulation of rainwater in or on the sign. 
(m)	Garage sale signs. All garage sale signs shall be governed by the existing ordinance which is incorporated herein and made a part hereof for all purposes. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1413)  
Sec. 42-14. - Structural requirements; generally and for specific signs. 
(a)	Design. 
(1)	General. 
a.	All sites and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist wind forces as specified in this section. All bracing systems shall be designed and constructed to transfer lateral forces to the foundations. For signs on building the dead and lateral loads shall be transmitted through the structural frame of the building to the ground in such manner as not to over stress any of the elements thereof. 
b.	The overturning movement produced from lateral forces shall in no case exceed two-thirds of the dead load resisting movement for all signs. Uplift due to overturning shall be adequately resisted by proper anchorage to the ground or to the structural frame of the building for all signs. The weight of earth superimposed over footing may be used in determining the dead-load resisting movement. Such earth shall be carefully placed and thoroughly compacted. 
(2)	Wind loads. All signs and sign structures shall be designed to resist wind loads as follows: 
Wind Load Pressures in Pounds Per Square Foot for All Signs 
Height Above Ground*, Feet 	Pressure Pounds/Ft2 
0—50 	30 
51—99 	35 
 
*Measured above the average level of the ground adjacent to the structure 
(3)	Vertical design loads. Vertical design loads, except roof live loads, shall be assumed to be acting simultaneously with the wind loads. 
(4)	Working stresses. All signs shall be designed to conform with the requirements of the any building and construction technical code as adopted by reference by the city in the building and construction chapter of this Code regarding allowable working stresses. The working strength of chains, cables, guys or steel rods shall not exceed one-fifth of the ultimate strength of such chains, cables, guys or steel rods. 
(5)	Registered engineer's seal. All commercially erected signs over 12 feet shall be approved by a professional registered engineer registered in the state and all plans shall contain the engineer's seal. 
(b)	Construction. 
(1)	General. The supports for all signs or sign structures shall be placed in or upon private property and shall be securely built, constructed and erected in conformance with the requirements of the any building and construction technical code as adopted by reference by the city in the building and construction chapter of this Code. 
(2)	Materials. Materials for construction of all signs and sign structures shall be of the quality and grade as specified for buildings in the any building and construction technical code as adopted by reference by the city in the building and construction chapter of this Code. Notwithstanding any of those provisions to the contrary, examples of approved sign face materials are lexan, acrylic, MDO duraply and luster. 
(3)	Nonstructural trim. Nonstructural trim and portable display surface may be of wood, metal, approved plastics, or any combination thereof, consistent with any building and construction technical code as adopted by reference by the city in the building and construction chapter of this Code. 
(4)	Anchorage. Members supporting unbraced signs shall be so proportioned that the bearing loads imposed on the soil in either direction, horizontal or vertical, shall not exceed the safe values load specified in subsection (a)(2) of this section acting in any direction. Anchors and supports shall be designed for safe bearing loads on the soil and for an effective resistance to pull out amounting to a force 25 percent greater than the required resistance to overturning. 
(c)	Electrical requirements. All electrical fixtures, equipment and appurtenances installed in conjunction with a sign shall be designed and installed in accordance with the city electrical code as it now exists or may hereinafter be amended. 
(d)	Clearances. 
(1)	Clearances from high voltage power lines. Signs shall be located a minimum distance of 12 feet measured horizontally and 12 feet measured vertically from overhead electrical conductors commonly called distributions lines, and a minimum distance of five feet measured horizontally and five feet measured vertically from what are commonly called service drop lines. The term "electrical conductors," as used in this subsection, means any electrical conductor, either bare or insulated, installed above the ground. 
(2)	Clearance from poles. No sign shall be erected nearer than five feet horizontally or eight feet vertically from any telephone pole or cable pole or cross-member of that pole. 
(e)	Exempt signs, not exempt from this section. No sign which is otherwise exempt is exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1414)  
Sec. 42-15. - Portable signs. 
(a)	Standards. Portable signs for the purpose of this chapter shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter, including the structural requirements, spacing requirements, permitting and fee requirements, insurance and bonding requirements and all other provisions of this chapter applicable to ground signs, unless a provision specifically includes or excludes a portable sign. 
(b)	Maintenance. The area where any portable sign is located must be maintained and kept clean by the owner. Grass will be cut a minimum of six feet from said sign on all sides and entirely to the street curb of the side nearest the street and debris etc. will be removed at least every seven days. 
(c)	Number on premises. Each business will be allowed one on-premises improved portable sign or one portable on-premises sign displayed for no more than 60 days per calendar year and meets all requirements of this chapter. 
(d)	Electrical. No portable sign may contain electrical components unless it fully meets the city electrical code. Extension cords may not be laid across any sidewalk, driveway or any other line of traffic. 
(e)	Size. No portable sign shall exceed in outside dimension 6½ feet vertical or 12½ feet horizontal. The advertising space on each side shall not exceed 72 square feet or a dimension of six feet by 12 feet. 
(f)	City permit is not an endorsement. Any approval of a sign or its structure by the city is not a verification or endorsement of the worthiness of the sign and any failure of the sign or its structure is strictly the responsibility of the owner, operator, designer or person erecting the sign and its structure. 
(g)	The sanitation division is designated to assist in removals. The sanitation division of the public works department is designated as the division of the city government to assist and aid the sign administrator in the removal of signs. The sign administrator shall make a request in writing on forms provided and prepared by him to the sanitation division indicating the sign and its location and the location to which it is to be removed. 
(h)	Signs advertising an event of a non profit organization. City functions and government entities will be permitted to display their signs not over 60 days prior to the event without permit provided the signs meet all other requirements of this chapter. 
(i)	Official state historical signs and markers. Official state historical signs and markers are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 4.1415; Ord. of 5-15-2001)  
Chapter 46 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
(RESERVED)  
Chapter 50 - TAXATION  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 50-1. - Penalty for delinquent taxes. 
The city hereby adopts the provisions of Texas Tax Code § 33.01 et seq., to defray costs of collection of delinquent taxes. 
(Code 1996, art. 1.1100; Res. No. R09-2000, 5-2-2000) 
State Law reference— Imposition of penalty for collection of delinquent taxes, Texas Tax Code § 33.01 et seq.  
Sec. 50-2. - Goods in transit. 
All such goods in transit personal property as covered by Texas Tax Code § 11.253 shall be, and are hereby declared to be, taxable by the city for every year, all as provided for and in accordance with Texas Tax Code § 11.253. 
(Code 1996, art. 1.1900; Ord. of 2011-04, 10-11-2011) 
State Law reference— Tax exemption for goods in transit, Texas Tax Code § 11.253.  
Secs. 50-3—50-22. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LOCAL OPTION MUNICIPAL SALES AND USE TAX[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal Sales and Use Tax Act, Texas Tax Code § 321.001 et seq. 
 
Sec. 50-23. - Adoption. 
There is hereby enacted a one percent local sales tax to be collected by the state along with the state sales tax. 
(Code 1996, § 1.701) 
Editor's note— This section was approved by referendum in December, 1968.  
Sec. 50-24. - Exemptions. 
(a)	There is hereby exempted from the one percent city sales tax, residential use of gas and electricity by consumers within the territorial limits of the city, to become effective on October 1, 1978. 
(b)	As provided in this exemption, the term "residential use" means use of gas and electricity in a family dwelling, a multifamily apartment, a housing complex or building or portion of a building occupied as a home or residence within the city limits. 
(Code 1975, § 1-6; Code 1996, § 1.702)  
Secs. 50-25—50-51. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - AD VALOREM TAX EXEMPTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Residence homestead exemptions, Texas Tax Code § 11.13. 
 
Sec. 50-52. - Residence homestead tax exemption for the elderly. 
(a)	There is hereby granted to the resident home owners of the city, who are 65 years of age by January 1 of each year, a property tax exemption in the sum of $30,000.00 of the assessed evaluation of said resident homestead. 
(b)	Said property owners should make application for said tax exemption with the city tax collector between January 1 and April 30 of each year and present proof of age and ownership of said property. 
(Code 1996, § 1.801; Res. No. R08-2013, § 1, 9-3-2013)  
Sec. 50-53. - Residence homestead tax exemption for the disabled. 
(a)	There is hereby granted to the resident home owners of the city, who are disabled as of January 1, of each year, a property tax exemption in the sum of $30,000.00 of the assessed evaluation of said resident homestead. 
(b)	The term "disabled" means under a disability for purposes of payment of disability insurance benefits under Federal Old-Age, Survivors and Disability Insurance. 
(c)	Said property owners should make application for said tax exemption with the city tax collector between January 1 and April 30 of each year and present proof of disability and ownership of said property. 
(Code 1975, Ch. 1, § 7; Code 1996, § 2-1.802; Res. No. R08-2013, § 1, 9-3-2013)  
Sec. 50-54. - Tax freeze for residential homestead property owners of the city who are disabled or 65 years of age or older. 
(a)	Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Disabled has the same meaning as set forth in Texas Tax Code § 11.13(m)(1), as it currently exists or may be amended. 
Residence homestead has the same meaning as set forth in Texas Tax Code § 11.13(j)(1), as it currently exists or may be amended. 
Tax code means the Texas Tax Code as it currently exists or may be amended. 
(b)	Residence homestead tax freeze for elderly or disabled people. 
(1)	There is hereby created and established a tax freeze on the amount of property taxes imposed by the city on the homesteads of disabled individuals or individuals age 65 or older, which shall be governed by Texas Tax Code § 11.261, as follows: 
a.	The tax freeze shall become effective beginning with the 2004 tax year, and shall remain effective for each successive tax year until otherwise amended or repealed by the city commission or other appropriate authority. 
b.	The total amount of ad valorem taxes imposed on the residence homesteads of a person who qualified that residence homestead for the exemption in accordance with the tax code as that of a person who is disabled or is 65 years of age or older shall not be increased while it remains the residence homestead of that person or that person's spouse who is disabled or 65 years of age or older. 
c.	If the person who is disabled or is 65 years of age or older dies in a year in which the person received a residence homestead exemption, the total amount of ad valorem taxes imposed on the residence homestead shall not be increased while it remains the residence homestead of that person's surviving spouse if: 
1.	The surviving spouse is 55 years of age or older at the time of the person's death; 
2.	The residence homestead of the deceased person is also the residence homestead of the surviving spouse on the date of the person's death; and 
3.	The residence homestead remains the residence homestead of the surviving spouse. 
d.	Notwithstanding anything contained herein, taxes on the residence homestead may be increased to the extent the value of the homestead is increased by improvements other than repairs and other than improvements made to comply with governmental requirements. 
e.	An improvement to property that would otherwise constitute an improvement is not treated as an improvement if the improvement is a replacement structure for a structure that was rendered uninhabitable or unusable by a casualty or by wind or water damage. For purposes of appraising the property in the tax year in which the structure would have constituted an improvement, the replacement structure is considered to be an improvement under that subsection only if: 
1.	The square footage of the replacement structure exceeds that of the replaced structure as that structure existed before the casualty or damage occurred; or 
2.	The exterior of the replacement structure is of higher quality construction and composition than that of the replaced structure. 
f.	A person may not receive freeze taxes for more than one residence homestead, no matter where located, in the same year. A person may designate a new residence homestead within the city in accordance with the tax code. 
(2)	The limitation on taxes provided by this section may expire in accordance with Texas Tax Code § 11.261(d). If a tax limitation is erroneously allowed, back taxes may be assessed in accordance with Texas Tax Code § 11.261(e). 
(Code 1996, § 1.803; Ord. No. 2004-01, 2-3-2004)  
Chapter 54 - TRAFFIC CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Rules of the Road, Texas Transportation Code § 541.001 et seq.; powers of local authorities regarding regulation of traffic, Texas Transportation Code § 542.202; limitations on local authorities, Texas Transportation Code § 542.203. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 54-1. - Definitions. 
(a)	The definitions contained in state traffic laws and in the manual on uniform traffic control devices shall be applicable to the words and phrases used in this Code, except the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Alley means any narrow street having no legal or official name other than alley. 
Business district includes every block in which the greater portion of the street frontage is used for commercial or business purposes. 
Holidays includes only such holidays as are designated by the city commission. 
One-way street means any street or highway on which traffic is restricted to movement in one direction only. 
Safety zones means areas or spaces set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians pursuant to authority from the city commission, wherein vehicular parking or movement is prohibited. 
Taxicab stand means that portion of a street set aside, pursuant to authority from the city commission, for the use of taxicabs licensed as such by the city. 
(b)	The definitions set forth in Texas Transportation Code § 541.001 et seq. (Rules of the Road - Definitions), as amended, shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this chapter. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this chapter, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in Texas Transportation Code § 541.001 et seq., as amended, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in Texas Transportation Code § 541.001 et seq., as amended. 
(Code 1975, § 9-1; Code 1996, § 10.100)  
Sec. 54-2. - Vehicles not to drive on fresh pavement. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle or ride any horse or other animal upon any portion of the streets in the city that has been freshly paved, unless all barriers or signal lights have been lawfully removed therefrom indicating that said street is ready for travel. 
(Code 1996, § 10.801)  
Sec. 54-3. - Unlawful to store property on street. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any junk, property, object or obstruction of any kind whatsoever under his control to be or remain in or upon any public street or sidewalk of the city, so as to obstruct or prevent the free use of an established public or private driveway or sidewalk or entrance from such street into any public or private place or property. 
(Code 1996, § 10.802)  
Sec. 54-4. - Delivery of bottled beverages prohibited at certain times. 
The operation of automobiles, trucks, horse-drawn trucks or any other character of vehicle upon the streets of the city for the transportation or delivery, wholesale or retail, to residences, places of business or other points within the city limits, of bottled milk or milk products or other forms of bottled foods, beverages or drinks or any empty bottles used in connection with such foods between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., is hereby prohibited; provided that individual deliveries by drugstores, restaurants and grocery stores in response to specific orders, placed within two hours before such delivery, may be made notwithstanding this section. The provisions of this section, however, shall not apply to trucks or other vehicles entering or leaving the city for the purpose of transporting such bottled goods, beer or malt liquors as are above enumerated to or from points outside the city; provided that the loading or unloading of such long-haul trucks or other vehicles shall require not more than three stops within the city limits. 
(Code 1996, § 10.803)  
Sec. 54-5. - Erecting detour or barricade signs. 
Contractors or other persons authorized to erect detour or barricade signs on streets before, during or after construction work shall, before erecting such detour or barricade signs, obtain the written permission of the traffic director to do so, who shall notify the chief of the fire department, the chief of the police department and the head of the street and bridge department immediately upon granting such permission. 
(Code 1975, § 9-8; Code 1996, § 10.804)  
Sec. 54-6. - Garage keeper to report damaged vehicle. 
The person in charge of any garage or repair shop to which is brought any motor vehicle which shows evidence of having been involved in an accident or struck by any bullet shall file written report of same with the police department within 24 hours after such vehicle is received and before any repairs have been made, giving the make of car, engine number and name and address of the person representing himself as being in charge of said vehicle. 
(Code 1975, § 9-8; Code 1996, § 10.805)  
Sec. 54-7. - Failure to appear for trial. 
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to fail to appear for the trial of any charge against such person pending in the corporation court of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 10.806)  
Sec. 54-8. - Unnecessary to deny exceptions, etc., in complaint or indictment. 
In any complaint, information or indictment, and in any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of any provisions of this chapter, it shall not be necessary to deny any exception, excuse, proviso or exemption contained in this chapter, and such exception, excuse, proviso or exemption shall be a matter of defense that must be claimed by a defendant, and the burden of proving such defense shall be on defendant. 
(Code 1996, § 10.807)  
Sec. 54-9. - Knowledge of ordinances. 
It shall be the duty of every police officer to thoroughly acquaint himself with provisions of all of the traffic code and to assist all persons using the streets of the city to become acquainted and to comply therewith. 
(Code 1996, § 10.808)  
Sec. 54-10. - Enforcement of ordinances. 
It shall be the duty of the police department of the city to enforce all of the terms and provisions of all ordinances and laws regulating traffic. 
(Code 1996, § 10.809)  
Sec. 54-11. - Special orders. 
The chief of police or any police officer of the city, in case of necessity or emergency or of congestion by traffic, may make such special orders to pedestrians or to drivers of vehicles as in his judgment may be necessary to meet the emergency or relieve the congestion. 
(Code 1996, § 10.810)  
Sec. 54-12. - Arrest without warrant. 
Any police officer of the city shall have the power and is hereby authorized to arrest, without a warrant of arrest being first issued, any person who violates any ordinance of the city in the presence of or within the view of such arresting officer. Any such officer may also arrest without warrant any person whom said officer has probable cause to believe has recently committed a violation of any such ordinance. 
(Code 1975, § 9-8; Code 1996, § 10.811)  
Sec. 54-13. - Riding or driving animals in parks and city recreation areas. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or drive any horse, mule or livestock of any character, upon, over or across the grounds of any public park, playground or other recreational facility in the city, including public school campuses. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit riders of horses or mules from riding or driving along roadways, driveways, streets or other areas designated for such use in said public parks, playgrounds, or other recreational facilities, including public school campuses. 
(Code 1975, § 9-10; Code 1996, art. 10.1000)  
Sec. 54-14. - Riding or driving motor vehicles upon public lands. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or drive a motor vehicle, as herein defined, upon, over or across the grounds of any public park, playgrounds or other recreational facility, including public school campuses; or upon any esplanade within the city limits. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit riding or driving any vehicle licensed by the state along roadways, driveways or streets through park grounds. The term "motor vehicles," as used in this chapter, means any vehicle which is, or can be, self-propelled. 
(Code 1975, § 9-11; Code 1996, art. 10.1100)  
Sec. 54-15. - Street names. 
(a)	Where a duplication exists in a street's name, the city will change the name of that street where the least amount of people will be affected. 
(b)	Approval of the county planning commission will be obtained before any change in a street name is adopted. 
(c)	Where the street bears a number such as 1st Street, 2nd Street and 3rd Street or an alphabetical designation such as "A" Street, "B" Street and "C" Street, where it is practical and possible, a preface will be added to the name of said street. In the city, the streets will be known as Galena "A," Galena "B," and Galena "C," or Galena 1st, Galena 2nd and Galena 3rd. 
(d)	Any street which has been dedicated but not fully developed with a duplicated name will be changed immediately by the governing body. 
(e)	Where two streets are connected and the two streets become one street, then a single name will be given the two streets provided the streets are a continuation of each. 
(f)	Before changing the names of any streets, the city will request from the post office a recommendation as to such change. 
(g)	Changes of identical duplications will be given priority. For example, where two streets are spelled the same, the governing body will attempt to change these streets before changing two streets that are spelled differently but that are pronounced the same. 
(h)	The city commission recommends the placing of house numbers on the house and on the curbline. 
(Code 1975, § 1-12; Code 1996, art. 10.1300)  
Sec. 54-16. - Registration of bicycles. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use a bicycle propelled wholly or in part by muscular power upon any of the streets, alleys or public highways of the city without first obtaining from the police department a license therefor. 
(b)	The police department is hereby authorized and directed to issue, upon written application, bicycle licenses, and said licenses shall be issued for the calendar year commencing on January 1 of each of said calendar years and ending on December 31 of said calendar year. Said licenses when issued shall entitle the licensee to operate such bicycle for which said license has been issued, upon all streets, alleys and public highways, exclusive of the sidewalks thereof, in the city. 
(c)	The city shall provide each year metallic license plates and seals, together with registration cards and holders therefor, said metallic license plates and registration cards having numbers stamped thereon in numerical order, beginning with Number 1, and indicating the year for which the same are issued, and the letters GPBL stamped thereon; such metallic license plates shall be suitable for attachment upon the frames of bicycles, and it shall be the duty of the police department to attach one such metallic license plate to the frame of each bicycle and to issue a corresponding registration card to the licensee upon the payment of the license fee herein provided for. Such metallic license plate shall remain attached during the existence of such license. The police department shall also keep a record of the date of issue of each license, to whom issued, and the number thereof. 
(d)	All persons engaged in the business of buying secondhand bicycles are hereby required to make daily report to the police department, giving the name and address of the person from whom each bicycle is purchased, the description of each bicycle purchased, the frame number thereof, and the number of the metallic license plate found thereon, if any. All persons engaged in the business of selling new or secondhand bicycles are hereby required to make a daily report to the police department, giving a list of all sales made by such dealer, which list shall include the name and address of each person to whom sold, the kind of bicycle sold, together with a description and frame number thereof, and the number of the metallic license plate attached thereto, if any. 
(e)	It shall be the duty of every person who sells or transfers ownership of any bicycle to report such sale or transfer by returning to the police department the registration card issued to such person as licensee thereof, together with the name and address of the person to whom said bicycle was sold or transferred, and such report shall be made within five days of the date of said sale or transfer. It shall be the duty of the purchaser or transferee of such bicycle to apply for a transfer of registration therefor within five days of said sale or transfer. 
(f)	It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the number of any bicycle frame licensed pursuant to this section. It shall also be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate or alter any license plate, seal or registration card during the time in which such license plate, seal or registration card is operative. Provided, however, that nothing in this section shall prohibit the police department from stamping numbers on the frames of bicycles on which no serial number can be found, or on which said number is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes. 
(g)	The annual license fee to be paid for each bicycle shall be as provided for in the fee schedule and shall be paid in advance. All license fees collected under this section shall be paid into the general fund of the city. 
(h)	It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or propel a bicycle on the streets, alleys and public highways of the city not equipped with lights or reflectors that cannot be seen at a distance of 100 feet during the night time. 
(Code 1975, § 9-14; Code 1996, § 10.1400)  
Sec. 54-17. - [Motor vehicle idling limitations.] 
It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of a motor vehicle, with gross vehicle weight rating of more than 14,000 pounds, operated within the City of Galena Park, Texas, to cause or allow the engine of the vehicle to idle for more than five minutes when the vehicle is not in motion. Provide however, it shall be an affirmative defense for which the underlying prohibited does not apply including: 
(1)	A vehicle that is equipped with a 2008 or subsequent model year heavy-duty diesel engine or liquefied or compressed natural gas engine that has been certified by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or another state environmental agency to emit no more than 30 grams of nitrogen oxides emission per hour when idling; 
(2)	A motor vehicle force to remain motionless because of traffic conditions over which the operator has no control; 
(3)	The engine of a motor vehicle that is being used to supply heat or air conditioning necessary for passengers comfort and safety in vehicles intended for commercial or public passengers transportation, or passenger transit operations, in which case idling up to a maximum of 15 minutes is allowed; 
(4)	The engine of a motor vehicle being used to provide air conditioning or heating necessary for employee health or safety in an armored vehicle while the employee remains inside the vehicle to guard the contents while the vehicle is being loaded or unloaded. 
(5)	The engine motor vehicle being used to provide air conditioning or heating necessary for employee health or safety while the employee is using the vehicle to perform an essential job function related to roadway construction or maintenance; 
(6)	The engine of a motor vehicle providing a power source necessary for mechanical operations, other than propulsion and/or passengers compartment heating, or air conditioning; 
(7)	The engine of a motor vehicle being operated for maintenance or diagnostic purposes; 
(8)	The engine of a motor vehicle being operated solely to defrost a windshield; 
(9)	The engine of a motor vehicle being used as airport ground support equipment; 
(10)	The owner of the motor vehicle rented or leased to a person that operates the vehicle and is not employed by the owner; or 
(11)	The motor vehicle when idling is necessary to power a heater or air conditioner while a driver is using the vehicle's sleeper berth for government-mandated rest period and is not within two miles of a facility offering external heating and air conditioning connections at a time when those connections are available. 
(Ord. No. 2015-13, § 1, 10-20-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-13, § 1, adopted Oct. 20, 2015, did not specify manner of inclusion, hence, codification as § 54-17 was at the discretion of the editor.  
Secs. 54-18—54-35. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 54-36. - Required obedience to traffic regulations. 
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to perform any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required in this Code. 
(Code 1996, § 10.201)  
Sec. 54-37. - Obedience to police. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer pertaining to the movement of traffic or pedestrians on the public streets, whether given in person or by means of visible or audible signals. 
(Code 1996, § 10.202)  
Sec. 54-38. - Exemptions to authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)	The provisions of this Code regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles, as defined in this article, other than vehicles of the police and fire departments, except as follows: 
(b)	A driver when operating any such vehicle in an emergency, except when otherwise directed by a police officer, may: 
(1)	Park or stand notwithstanding the provisions of this Code; 
(2)	Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation; 
(3)	Exceed a maximum speed limit, except as provided by an ordinance adopted under Texas Transportation Code § 545.365, as long as the operator does not endanger life or property; and 
(4)	Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified direction, so long as he does not endanger life or property. 
(c)	The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of his reckless disregard of the safety of others. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, vehicles of the police and fire departments of the city, while sounding a siren or bell, shall have the right-of-way over all other vehicles, and, at such times, all ordinances and regulations pertaining to official traffic signals, stop signs or official traffic control devices shall not apply to such police and fire department vehicles. 
(Code 1996, § 10.203)  
Sec. 54-39. - Persons propelling push carts or riding bicycles or animals to obey traffic regulations. 
Every person propelling any push cart or riding a bicycle or an animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal-driven vehicle or any type of vehicle whatever, whether named herein or not, shall be subject to the provisions of this Code, except those which by their nature can have no application. 
(Code 1996, § 10.204)  
Sec. 54-40. - State traffic laws. 
Texas Transportation Code ch. 541 et seq., as amended, and all other state laws applicable to motor vehicles and to traffic regulations within the city are hereby adopted in full and may be considered as included in the city traffic code. 
(Code 1975, § 9-2; Code 1996, § 10.205)  
Secs. 54-41—54-68. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate parking, Texas Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(2). 
 
Sec. 54-69. - Parking prohibited on certain streets. 
When signs designating an area where parking is prohibited are erected or placed pursuant to authority from the city commission on any street, bridge or parkway in the city, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Code 1996, § 10.301)  
Sec. 54-70. - Parking prohibited in certain places. 
No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or unloading of passengers or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals of a police officer. No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1996, § 10.302)  
Sec. 54-71. - Parking prohibited during certain hours in designated places. 
When signs are erected or curbs or streets painted pursuant to authority from the city commission, prohibiting parking during designated hours in the area thus marked, it shall be unlawful and an offense for any person or driver or owner to park or stand any vehicle, or for any owner knowingly to suffer or permit any driver of any vehicle belonging to such owner, to park or stand the same at the place and during the hours so designated, except Sundays and holidays and after 6:00 p.m. on any day. 
(Code 1996, § 10.303)  
Sec. 54-72. - Parking time limited in designated places. 
When signs are erected or curbs or streets painted or parking meters installed giving notice of time limits for the parking of vehicles, it shall be unlawful and an offense for a person to park a vehicle for a longer period of time than that designated on the signs, streets or curb markings or parking meters. 
(Code 1996, § 10.304)  
Sec. 54-73. - Standing for loading only. 
It is prohibited and shall be unlawful and an offense for a person to stop, stand or park any vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, in any place marked as a passenger loading zone, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day, and then only for a period not to exceed two minutes, except Sundays and legal holidays. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or stand any vehicle other than a commercial vehicle in any truck loading zone between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. No person shall park or stand any commercial vehicle in any truck loading zone between such hours except for the purpose of unloading and delivery, or pickup and loading of materials. In no case shall such stop exceed 30 minutes unless otherwise designated by appropriate signs or markings. This section shall not apply on Sundays or legal holidays. 
(Code 1996, § 10.305)  
Sec. 54-74. - Bus stops and taxicab stands. 
The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not stand or park the vehicle operated by him upon any street in any business district at any place other than at a bus stop or taxicab stand, respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the driver of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading and unloading passengers. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately marked, except for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone, and in no case shall the driver of a vehicle leave the same while it is in such bus stop or taxicab stand. 
(Code 1996, § 10.306)  
Sec. 54-75. - Methods of standing or parking. 
Except when necessary, in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals or to avoid contact with another vehicle or a pedestrian, the driver of any vehicle shall not stop, stand or park such vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of traffic, and with the curb-side wheels of the vehicle within 18 inches of the edge of the roadway, and, if in any parking meter zone, such vehicle shall be parked with the hood of such vehicle along-side of or next to the parking meter; provided that other methods of parking than those above described shall be followed at places where such other methods are indicated by appropriate signs or markings. 
(Code 1996, § 10.307)  
Sec. 54-76. - Unlawful parking. 
No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of: 
(1)	Displaying it for sale. 
(2)	Washing, greasing, repairing or dismantling such vehicle, except for making repairs necessitated by the physical impossibility of removing such vehicle until such repairs have been made. 
(Code 1996, § 10.308)  
Sec. 54-77. - Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or a traffic control device or marking, at any of the following places: 
(1)	Upon any street or at any place thereon, at any time when signs are erected or markings established showing a loading zone, unless it is a commercial vehicle, and in this case only for the purpose of loading and unloading as provided in this article. 
(2)	In front of the entrance or exit of any theater, hotel, inn or depot for a space of 30 feet immediately in front of said theaters, hotels, inns or depots and ten feet immediately in front of all other exits thereof. 
(3)	Within two blocks of any burning building or structure, nor shall any vehicle be driven or operated within two blocks of any burning building or structure except to drive away from said burning building, or when within four blocks of any burning building or structure, to drive past, either to the left or to the right of any vehicle, except to drive away from said building. These provisions, however, shall not apply to any member of the city fire department or police department or any city official when actually engaged in an official duty, or to the owner or other person directly interested in the building or structure on fire, or to the operators of public utility service cars and ambulances in the case of an emergency or to those persons who are assisting in the extinguishing of the fire, or in salvage. 
(Code 1996, § 10.310)  
Sec. 54-78. - Vehicles backed to curb. 
The driver of any horse-drawn vehicle backed to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading is required to stand the horses parallel to the curb and headed in the direction of traffic. When an articulated vehicle of six wheels or more is backed to the curb for the purpose of unloading or loading, the front or tractor portion shall, as far as physically possible, be turned parallel to the curb and headed in the direction of traffic, and the rear or trailer portion shall be parked at an angle to the curb of not more than 45 degrees. 
(Code 1996, § 10.311)  
Sec. 54-79. - Maximum time trucks and trailers to be parked on-streets. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, stand, or park a truck in excess of one ton and trailers, either attached or unattached to a motor vehicle, on the public streets of the city for a period of time in excess of two hours. Police are authorized and directed to have said vehicles towed away by private wreckers at the owner's expense. 
(Code 1996, § 10.312)  
Sec. 54-80. - Continuous parking in excess of 24 hours. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or any owner knowingly to leave standing in any public street, alley or other public place any vehicle, automobile, wagon or other character of private property unattended for a longer continuous period of time than 24 hours. 
(Code 1996, § 10.313)  
Sec. 54-81. - Manner of stopping, etc., at curb. 
No operator of a vehicle shall stop, stand or park the same with its left side nearer to the curb than its right side, except when it has been specifically provided otherwise on one-way streets now or hereafter designated. 
(Code 1996, § 10.314)  
Sec. 54-82. - Cut-back curbs. 
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to cut back any curb in front of any place or establishment for the purpose of providing individual parking space or parking space for the use of customers of such person without the consent of the city commission; provided that this article shall not apply where curbs heretofore have been cut back under authority granted by previous city ordinances, and at such locations parking may be at a 27½ degree angle to the curb, but in no event shall any portion of a parked vehicle extend more than six feet into the roadway from the curbline as it would exist in the absence of such a cut-back; and provided, further, that this article shall not be construed so as to prevent the owner or person in charge of any property from providing parking space for vehicles wholly on property owned or controlled by him if no part of the space thus provided includes any portion of the right-of-way of a street, and if such person otherwise complies with all valid ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 10.315)  
Sec. 54-83. - Owner and operator responsible for illegal parking. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, having registered in his name or owning or operating or having in charge any vehicle, knowingly to allow or suffer or permit same to stop, stand or be parked in any street in the city in violation of any of the ordinances of the city regulating the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles. 
(Code 1996, § 10.316)  
Sec. 54-84. - Presumption of parking by owner when car illegally parked. 
When any person is charged with having parked or left standing a vehicle on any street in the city at a place on said street where parking of vehicles is prohibited, or with parking such vehicle on said street in a manner which violates the manner of parking a vehicle as designated, or with parking such vehicle for a length of time in excess of that allowed in the space where said vehicle was parked, proof that said vehicle was, at the date of the offense alleged, owned by the person charged with the offense, shall constitute prima facie evidence that said vehicle was parked or left standing at the place charged by said owner, but the owner shall have the right to introduce evidence to show that said vehicle was not parked by him as charged in the complaint. In any proceeding where a person is charged with parking a vehicle on the streets of the city in violation of any ordinance of the city regulating the parking of vehicles, a certified copy of the registration receipt issued by the assessor and collector of taxes of any county in the state shall be admissible in evidence for the purpose of proving that the license plate displayed on said vehicle at the time of the offense was issued to the person so charged, and proof of such fact shall constitute a prima facie presumption that the vehicle was parked by the person to whom said registration receipt was issued. 
(Code 1975, § 9-3; Code 1996, § 10.317)  
Sec. 54-85. - No parking areas. 
(a)	No parking areas are hereby established along the following streets on Mondays through Fridays during the time when school is in session from 7:30 a.m. until 3:30 p.m.: 
Street 	Limit of Zones 	Direction 
West side of Parkside Drive 	From the north line of 7th Street to the south line of 11th Street 	N & S 
North and south sides of 4th Street 	From the intersection of North Main and 4th Streets west 50 feet on 4th Street from said intersection 	E & W 
East side of North Main Street 	From the north line of 3rd Street to the south line of 5th Street 	N & S 
East side of North Main Street 	From the north line of 16th Street to the south line of 18th Street 	E & W 
North side of 3rd Street 	From the east line of North Main Street to the west line of Keene Street 	E & W 
Stewart Street 	From the north line of 2nd Street to the south line of 3rd Street 	N & S 
7th Street 	From the intersection of Keen and 7th Street west 50 feet on 7th Street from said intersection 	E & W 
North side of 11th Street 	From Parkside Drive to North Main 	E & W 
South side of 11th Street 	From the east line of Keen Street east to the west line of Sinclair Street 	E & W 
7th Street 	100 feet west from Holland Avenue on the north and south sides 	
 
(b)	The parking of any motor vehicle, Mondays through Fridays, during the hours of 7:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m., in the 1700 block of Ninth Street, and more particularly described hereinbelow shall be prohibited; to-wit: 
(1)	Beginning where the existing Ninth Street intersects to the west R-O-W line of the existing Parkside Drive, this place of beginning being the Ezekial Thomas Survey "A," Harris County, Texas. 
(2)	Thence go west a distance of 350 feet to the beginning (east boundary line of Clinton Subdivision). This distance of 350 feet is commonly known as the 1700 Block of Ninth Street. 
(c)	The above described area is hereby designated as a tow-away zone during the days and hours specified hereinabove and any motor vehicle parked or standing in the prohibited area may be towed away at no cost to the city at the direction of the police chief. 
(Code 1975, § 9-3; Code 1996, § 10.318; Ord. of 3-6-1990, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 95-12-19-01, 12-19-1995)  
Sec. 54-86. - Ratification of existing devices. 
All parking regulations and no parking areas heretofore established and all yield signs, stop signs, and traffic control devices heretofore erected are hereby confirmed and ratified. Additional parking regulations and no parking areas may be established and additional yield signs, stop signs, and traffic control devices erected in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1975, § 9-3; Code 1996, § 10.319)  
Secs. 54-87—54-115. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - STARTING, DRIVING, STOPPING AND TURNING 
 
Sec. 54-116. - One-way streets. 
Upon these streets and parts of streets which have been designated for use as one-way streets as provided in this article, and on which appropriate signs have been erected indicating the permitted direction of travel, it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to operate such vehicle on such streets or parts of streets except in the direction thus indicated. Specified one-way streets are as follows: 
(1)	On First Street from the west line of Center Drive to the west line of Westway Street: one-way for vehicles westbound on First Street. 
(2)	From the north line of First Street south to Clinton Drive on Westway Street: one-way for vehicles traveling south on Westway Street. 
(3)	It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to operate such vehicle on such streets or parts of streets except in the direction indicated by appropriate signs erected indicating the permitted direction of travel upon the following additional streets from Monday through Friday of every week during school days between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., to-wit: 
a.	3 rd Street between Main Street and Keene Street from the 1500 block of 3 rd Street thru the 1800 block of 3 rd Street. 
b.	1700 Keene Street to Parkside Drive. 
c.	1600 block of 9 th Street thru the 1800 block of 9 th Street. 
(Code 1996, § 10.401; Ord. No. 2015-14, § 1, 11-3-2015)  
Sec. 54-117. - Limitations on backing. 
The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same into an intersection or over a crosswalk at any intersection. The driver shall not in any event or at any place back a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety. 
(Code 1996, § 10.402)  
Sec. 54-118. - Permits for parades and processions. 
No parade, excepting of the forces of the United States Army or Navy, the military forces of this state and the forces of the police and fire departments, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street except in accordance with a permit issued pursuant to the terms of the ordinances now in effect governing parades or any amendments thereto which may be made. 
(Code 1996, § 10.403)  
Sec. 54-119. - Funeral and other processions. 
A funeral composed of a procession of vehicles shall be identified as such by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant of a type approved by the traffic director. Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and follow the vehicle ahead as closely as is practical and safe. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle other than ambulances on emergency calls, or vehicles of the fire and police departments to drive across or through the line of vehicles comprising a funeral or other procession authorized by the city commission. It shall be unlawful for any person operating a vehicle, except drivers of ambulances on emergency calls, and drivers of police and fire department vehicles, to overtake or to pass any funeral procession that is proceeding in the same direction as the vehicle that said person is operating. 
(Code 1996, § 10.404)  
Sec. 54-120. - Limitations on turning around. 
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in the downtown business district or at any signalized intersection or at those intersections where turns are prohibited by official signs or markings, unless such turn is affirmatively authorized by an appropriate sign or signal. The driver of any vehicle shall not upon any other street so turn a vehicle unless such movement can be made in safety and without interfering with other traffic, and then only where a street is crossed or makes intersection with another street. 
(Code 1996, § 10.405)  
Sec. 54-121. - Emerging from and entering alley or private driveway. 
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway. Any vehicle emerging from an alley or private driveway in a business district shall proceed straight ahead or make a right turn. It shall be unlawful and an offense to make a left turn upon emerging from or entering any alley or driveway in a business district. 
(Code 1996, § 10.406)  
Sec. 54-122. - Cutting corners. 
It shall be unlawful and an offense to drive a vehicle over any sidewalk area and through any driveway, parking lot or any business entrance at any intersection, in making either a right or left turn, except for the purpose of coming to a complete stop to obtain or render some service or make a sale or purchase. It is the intention of this article to prohibit corner cutting by driving a vehicle from one street into another across any sidewalk and driveway and through any driveway. 
(Code 1996, § 10.407)  
Sec. 54-123. - Vehicles not to be driven on sidewalk. 
The rider or driver of any animal or vehicle shall not ride, drive or park such animal or vehicle within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
(Code 1996, § 10.408)  
Sec. 54-124. - Clinging to moving vehicles. 
Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates or any toy vehicle shall not attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway. 
(Code 1996, § 10.409)  
Sec. 54-125. - Unlawful riding. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or jump on any vehicle without the consent of the driver, or with any part of his person protruding beyond the limits of said vehicle. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on any portion of any vehicle not designed or intended for the use or passengers. However, this provision shall not apply to any employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty or to persons riding within the space of truck bodies intended for merchandise. 
(Code 1996, § 10.410)  
Sec. 54-126. - Riding on handle bars, etc., prohibited. 
The operator of a motorcycle or bicycle when in use on a street shall not carry any other person upon the handle bars, frame or tank of any such vehicle, nor shall any person so ride upon any such vehicle. 
(Code 1996, § 10.411)  
Sec. 54-127. - Use of coasters, roller skates and similar devices restricted. 
No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device, shall go upon any roadway. 
(Code 1975, § 9-4; Code 1996, § 10.412)  
Secs. 54-128—54-152. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SPEED RESTRICTIONS 
 
Sec. 54-153. - Specified. 
(a)	A person commits an offense if he drives a vehicle on the following designated streets at a speed which is greater than is reasonable and prudent under the circumstances then existing. Any speed in excess of the maximum speed specified in this article shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful. 
Street 	Limits of Zone 	Direction 	Speed 
Federal Road 	From the south city limits north to the north rail or the Port Terminal Railroad Track 	N & S 	45 
Federal Road 	From the north rail of the Port Terminal Railroad Track to the north city limits 	N & S 	35 
Holland Avenue 	From the Port Terminal Railroad tracks northward to the city limits 	N & S 	45 
Industrial Road 	From the east line of Federal Road east to the city limits 	N & S 	35 
16th Street 	From the east line of North Main Street to the west line of Keene Street 	E & W 	20 
Clinton Drive 	From the east city limits westward to a point 200 feet east of Panther Creek 	E & W 	35 
North Main 	From the north line of the city park known as Philpot Field North to the city limits 	N & S 	35 
Clinton Drive 	From the 100 Block of Clinton Drive to the 1,000 Block of Clinton Drive 	E & W 	45 
Second Street through 16th Street 	2,500 Block 	E & W 	20 
Sage Drive 	200 Block through 1,500 Block 	N & S 	20 
Bank Drive 	200 Block Through 1,600 Block 	N & S 	20 
Hunter Street 	1,500 Block Through 1,600 Block 	N & S 	20 
Galena Manor Dr. to South line of Second St. 	North line of Clinton Drive 	N & S 	20 
Birdie Lane 	All 	E & W 	20 
Dunaway 	All 	N & S 	20 
Pinkey Way 	All 	E & W, N & S 	20 
Parkey Lane 	All 	E & W, N & S 	20 
Industrial 	West of Federal Road 	E & W 	20 
Claudia 	All 	E & W 	20 
Kayla Lane 	All 	E & W 	20 
Kitty Lane 	All 	E & W 	20 
Ledger Lane 	All 	N & S, E & W 	
First Street through 18th Street 	All 	E & W 	20 
Avenues F, J and K 	All 	E & W 	20 
Graham 	All 	N & S 	20 
McConnico 	All 	N & S 	20 
Craig 	All 	N & S 	20 
Leggett 	All 	N & S 	20 
Zuber 	All 	N & S 	20 
Pugh 	All 	N & S 	20 
Benson 	All 	N & S 	20 
Eastway 	All 	N & S 	20 
Westway 	All 	N & S 	20 
Woolfe 	All 	N & S 	20 
Sinclair 	All 	N & S 	20 
Galena 	All 	N & S 	20 
Crown 	All 	N & S 	20 
Charlton 	All 	N & S 	20 
Stewart 	All 	N & S 	20 
Keene 	All 	N & S 	20 
Parkside 	All 	N & S 	20 
 
(b)	The maximum speed on the following streets shall be 20 miles per hour from 7:45 a.m. to 8:30 a.m., 10:45 a.m. to 1:00 p.m., and 2:00 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. on Mondays through Fridays during the time when school is in session: 
Street 	Limits of Zones 	Direction 
Bank Drive 	From Panther Creek to 16th Street 	N & S 
16th Street 	From west city limits to Galena Manor Park 	E & W 
 
(c)	The maximum speed on the following streets shall be 20 miles per hour from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on Mondays through Fridays during the time when school is in session: 
Street 	Limits of Zones 	Direction 
North Main 	From a point 150 feet north of the north line of 18th Street to the south line of Second Street 	N & S 
18th Street 	From the east line of Eastway Street east to the west line of North Main Street 	E & W 
11th Street 	From the east line of North Main Street to the west line of Sinclair Street 	E & W 
6th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th Streets 	From the east line of North Main to the west line of Parkside Drive 	E & W 
Parkside Drive 	From the south line of 6th Street to the north line of 14th Street 	N & S 
5th Street 	From the east line of North Main Street to the Galena Park Independent School District Stadium 	E & W 
4th Street 	From the east line of Center Driver to the west line of North Main Street 	E & W 
3rd Street 	From the east line of North Main Street to the west line of Keene Street 	N & S 
Stewart Street 	From the north line of 2nd Street to the south line of 3rd Street 	N & S 
Keen Street 	From the north line of 2nd Street to the south line of 16th Street 	N & S 
3rd through 11th 	From the west line of Wolfe Street to east line of Keen Street 	E & W 
 
(Code 1975, § 9-5; Code 1996, § 10.500; Ord. of 4-3-1990; Ord. of 10-20-1992; Ord. of 3-21-1995; Ord. of 10-17-1995) 
State Law reference— Authority to establish or alter prima facie speed limits, Texas Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(12).  
Sec. 54-154. - In general. 
A person commits an offense if he drives a vehicle on any street within the city at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the circumstances then existing. Any speed in excess of 30 miles per hour on a public street, or 15 miles per hour in a public alley or city park, unless otherwise provided by this article, shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is unlawful. 
(Code 1975, § 9-6; Code 1996, art. 10.600)  
Secs. 54-155—54-176. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - VEHICULAR ROUTES, PERMITS, LIMITS AND APPLICATION FEES 
 
Sec. 54-177. - Vehicular routes. 
No truck, tractor, trailer or other heavy vehicular equipment in excess of 8,000 pounds, 25 feet maximum total length, 96 inches in width and/or a height which exceeds 13 feet six inches, including load, shall be operated on the streets or roadways of the city except for the following streets: Clinton Drive, Federal Road, Industrial Road east of Federal Road, Mayo Shell Road, Main Street south of Clinton Drive, Holland Avenue between Clinton Drive and Eighteenth Street, Avenue K west of Main Street, Eastway Street south of Clinton Drive, Magnolia Street, Pine Street, South Fourth Street, Philpot Drive, First Street to Eastway Street to Westway Street and Avenues F, G, and H south of the Southern Pacific Railroad and east of Main Street, and hereinafter the above streets shall be designated as vehicular routes and be referred to as "commercial streets." 
(Code 1975, § 9-7; Code 1996, § 10.701)  
Sec. 54-178. - Vehicular limits. 
The maximum weight, height, width and length limits on all commercial streets in the city shall be as follows: 
(1)	Weight limits. The maximum weight limits shall be 80,000 pounds and shall not have a greater weight than 20,000 pounds carried on any one axle, including all enforcement tolerances; or with a tandem axle in excess of 34,000 pounds including all enforcement tolerances; and no turning axle shall have a greater weight that 12,000 pounds if said vehicle has tandem axles on the same vehicle. 
(2)	Height limits. No vehicle unladen or with load shall exceed a height of 14 feet, including load. 
(3)	Width limits. No vehicle shall exceed a total outside width, including any load thereon, of 102 inches. 
(4)	Length limits. There is no length limitation for a truck-tractor, semi-trailer combination other than the trailer is limited to not more than 59 feet in length. All other vehicles and combinations may not exceed 65 feet in length. 
(Code 1996, § 10.702; Ord. No. 2001-02, 3-20-2001)  
Sec. 54-179. - Permits required. 
Any owner or operator desiring to operate any trucks, tractors, trucks in tandem, heavy equipment graders, pavement rollers, bulldozers, cranes, maintainer equipment or any other type of vehicle which exceeds the limits set out in sections 54-177 and 54-178 or any owner or operator desiring to operate said vehicle with or without a police escort shall be required to make written application for a special permit and obtain such special permit before said vehicle is operated on the streets and roadways of the city. The application and permit shall be obtained from the city secretary, traffic director, or their designated agent and shall contain such information as shall be deemed necessary to effectuate the purpose of this article. A permit is required for each vehicle which exceeds the limits set out in sections 54-177 and 54-178 and such permit shall be good for only that date as is specified on the permit. The limits prescribed in sections 54-177 and 54-178 shall not apply to public busses, school busses or to any equipment used by the United States, the state, the county, the city, or any contractor building or repairing the streets or roadways within the city limits. 
(Code 1975, § 9-7; Code 1996, § 10.703)  
Sec. 54-180. - Application fees. 
There shall be and is hereby levied, and there shall be collected from every person, firm, company, or association of persons pursuing a permit required by section 54-179, an application fee in the sum as provided for in the fee schedule for each and every oversized or overweight truck, tractor and tractor trailer loads operating in the city. 
(Code 1996, § 10.704; Ord. No. 2009-05, § 1, 6-16-2009)  
Sec. 54-181. - Liabilities. 
Any person moving, or causing to be moved, a load which together with the weight of the vehicle exceeds four tons on any street other than those commercial streets prescribed in section 54-177, or moves or causes to be moved any load which exceeds those limits prescribed in section 54-178 for commercial streets, shall be liable to the city for any damage done by such load to the streets, bridges, culverts, collection basins, curbs, gutters, water valves or lines, sewer lines, manholes or cleanouts, traffic signals, traffic signs, poles or wiring within the city limits. The acceptance of either of the aforesaid permits shall be conclusive evidence that the person to whom such permit is issued agrees to make good and pay all such damages and related costs upon demand therefore being made by the city. 
(Code 1996, § 10.705)  
Secs. 54-182—54-200. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - TRAFFIC DIRECTOR AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to place and maintain traffic control devices, Texas Transportation Code § 542.202(a)(1); interference with traffic control device or railroad sign, Texas Transportation Code § 544.005. 
 
Sec. 54-201. - Traffic director designated. 
The director of public works is hereby designated as traffic director of the city, and shall cause traffic control devices to be erected and maintained in the city. All traffic control devices including signs, signals, and markings (pavement and/or curb) installed or used for the purpose of directing and controlling traffic within the city shall conform with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways, hereafter called the manual. 
(Code 1996, § 10.901)  
Sec. 54-202. - Traffic condition studies. 
The traffic director shall submit to the city commission in writing based on a study of all traffic conditions, including, but not limited to, the dimensions of the streets and sidewalks and the use of property abutting the streets, the frequency of passage of vehicles or pedestrians, or both, railroad crossings, curbs, and congestion of traffic, recommendations necessary for the free flow of traffic and expeditious handling of traffic and safety of persons and property. 
(Code 1996, § 10.902)  
Sec. 54-203. - Authority of traffic director. 
Whenever and wherever the congestion of traffic, the frequency of passage of vehicles or pedestrians, or both, the direction of the flow of traffic, the dimensions of the streets and sidewalks and the use of property abutting the streets are such that he finds it to be necessary for the safety of persons and property, the traffic director is authorized upon approval of the city commission to: 
(1)	Designate and maintain crosswalks at intersections by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway. 
(2)	Establish safety zones and school zones on any of the streets of the city. 
(3)	Mark lanes for traffic on the streets of the city. 
(4)	Place proper signs, signals or markings prohibiting the making of right, left or complete turns at any intersection of streets in the city. 
(5)	Place signs, signals, or markings within or adjacent to intersections, indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersection. 
(6)	Install or cause to be displayed signs, signals or markings for the direction of traffic near public or private schools, parks and public buildings. 
(7)	Determine the location of passenger zones and freight loading zones and to place and maintain appropriate signs or markings indicating the same. 
(8)	Designate spaces on the streets of the city for exclusive use as bus stops and to mark the same with appropriate signs or markings. 
(9)	Designate areas on the streets of the city which shall not be used as spaces for the parking of vehicles and to mark such areas with appropriate signs or markings. 
(10)	Designate intersections of streets at which drivers operating vehicles approaching the intersection on one or more of the intersecting streets must bring such vehicle to a complete stop before proceeding into such intersection, and to install and maintain appropriate signs and markings directing such drivers to stop at such intersections. 
(11)	Designate intersections of streets at which drivers operating vehicles approaching the intersection of one or more of the intersecting streets must reduce the speed of such vehicle to not to exceed ten miles per hour upon reaching such intersection and continue at not more than such speed for a distance of 100 feet, and to install appropriate signs and markings directing such drivers thus to reduce the speed of their vehicles. 
(12)	Designate streets and portions of streets on which drivers of vehicles are prohibited from driving except in one direction and to designate the direction in which driving is prohibited and that in which driving is permitted, and to install appropriate signs and markings designating such one-way streets. 
(13)	Designate the routes which must be followed by commercial vehicles in using the streets of the city; provided that no such vehicle shall be prohibited from using any street for the purpose of going directly to or from any residential, commercial or industrial establishment abutting on such street. 
(14)	Determine and allocate parking time limits on streets and portions of streets and place appropriate signs or markings giving notice thereof. 
(15)	Designate intersections, the crossing of which shall be controlled by red, green and amber lights and arrows as elsewhere provided in this Code, and to determine the type of such lights or traffic control devices to be installed at each intersection and to cause the same to be installed, and it shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to obey the instructions transmitted by means of such lights or traffic control devices. 
(16)	Make such changes as changing conditions may require in any designation, determination or regulation he is herein authorized to make. 
(Code 1996, § 10.903)  
Sec. 54-204. - Designation of "quiet zones." 
Whenever he finds it is necessary to the public health, comfort and safety, the traffic director is hereby authorized to designate areas of the streets of the city to be known as "quiet zones" in the vicinity of any hospital, church, school or public institution, and to mark such area with appropriate signs directing the drivers of vehicles not to sound a horn or other warning device while traveling in the area thus designated. 
(Code 1996, § 10.904)  
Sec. 54-205. - Regulations, etc., to be in writing and filed with city secretary. 
Every regulation, designation, delineation or determination promulgated by the traffic director pursuant to the authority granted in this Code shall, unless otherwise provided herein, be described in writing and filed with the city secretary. Such writing shall constitute a public record, and all persons shall be charged with notice of the contents of the same. 
(Code 1996, § 10.905)  
Sec. 54-206. - Effect of installing traffic control device, signal, etc. 
The installation under the direction of the traffic director of any traffic control device, sign, signal or marking provided for in this article shall at once cause to be effective the instruction to pedestrians or drivers of vehicles transmitted by means of such device, sign, signal or marking. 
(Code 1996, § 10.906)  
Sec. 54-207. - Installation of signs by other than traffic director prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person other than the traffic director to install or cause to be installed any sign purporting to direct the use of the streets or the activities on the streets of pedestrians or vehicles. 
(Code 1996, § 10.907)  
Sec. 54-208. - Instructions to be conveyed by lights, signals, etc.; location of lights, signals, etc., to be established by traffic director. 
Any of the well-known types of lights, signals, signs and markings, the instructions intended to be conveyed by which are matters of common knowledge in the city, when installed in or near any street in the city shall convey the instruction commonly known to be intended. The location of each such device, light, sign, signal and marking shall be established by the traffic director in accordance with his findings as to the existing facts when applied to the standards laid down in this Code for his guidance. 
(Code 1996, § 10.908)  
Sec. 54-209. - Failure to observe instructions of traffic control devices, lights, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to fail to observe or obey any instruction of any traffic control device, signal light, sign or marking installed as provided for in this article. 
(Code 1996, § 10.909)  
Sec. 54-210. - Proof of violation. 
Proof, in any prosecution for a violation of this Code that any traffic control device, sign, signal or marking was actually in place on any street in the city shall constitute prima facie evidence that the same was installed by the traffic director or under his direction pursuant to the authority herein granted. 
(Code 1996, § 10.910)  
Sec. 54-211. - Emergency measures. 
The chief of police or any police officer of the city, in case of necessity or emergency or of congestion by traffic, may make such special orders to pedestrians or to drivers of vehicles as in his judgment may be necessary to meet the emergency or relieve congestion. 
(Code 1975, § 9-9; Code 1996, § 10.911)  
Secs. 54-212—54-230. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - PARADES 
 
Sec. 54-231. - Permit required. 
(a)	A person seeking to hold a parade consisting of 12 or more people in or on a public place within the city shall file an application with the city secretary for a parade permit not less than ten days nor more than 30 days before the date upon which the parade is proposed to be conducted. Any person who participates in a parade that has not been issued a permit by the chief of police, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1-6. 
(b)	The term "public place," as used in this article, means any road, street, alley or sidewalk within the city. 
(Code 1996, § 10.1501)  
Sec. 54-232. - Manner in which to apply for permit. 
Any person desiring to acquire a permit to parade within the city may make application for such with the city commission of said city or their designees, either in writing or verbally, setting out the general purpose of said parade and the beginning point and point of termination of such and the route generally to be followed during said parade. 
(Code 1996, § 10.1502)  
Sec. 54-233. - Standards for issuance. 
The chief of police shall issue a parade permit when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, it is found: 
(1)	The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route or place of occurrence. 
(2)	The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement or the place of occurrence and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city. 
(3)	The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances and other emergency vehicles as to prevent normal ambulance and other emergency service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed parade and areas contiguous thereto. 
(4)	The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with police, fire and other emergency services to areas contiguous to such assembly areas. 
(5)	The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of fire fighting equipment en route to a fire. 
(6)	The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or to create a disturbance. 
(7)	The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route.  
Sec. 54-234. - Notice of rejection. 
The chief of police shall act upon the application for a parade permit within three business days after the filing thereof. If the chief of police disapproves the application, he shall mail to the applicant, within three business days after the date which the application was filed, a notice of his action stating the reasons for his denial of the permit. Notice shall be deemed complete when mailed.  
Sec. 54-235. - Appeal procedure. 
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the mayor. The appeal shall be taken within 60 days after notice. The mayor shall act upon the appeal within 30 days after its receipts. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 54-236. - Alternative permits. 
The chief of police, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route, or in a place, different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five days after notice of the action of the chief of police, file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of and shall have the effect of a parade permit under this article.  
Secs. 54-237—54-265. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - PARKING LOTS AND OFF-STREET PARKING 
 
Sec. 54-266. - Parking lots. 
The parking of trucks, automobiles or any motor vehicles on any commercial parking lots or other property used for the parking or storage of trucks, automobiles or other motor vehicles for which a fee, lease payment or rental payment or other consideration is paid or given to the owner of such parking lot or other property used to park or store said motor vehicles shall be unlawful, unless a special use permit is first issued by the city. 
(Code 1996, § 10.1601)  
Sec. 54-267. - Special use permit. 
A special use permit may be granted by the city upon an application requesting the issuance of a permit for the construction and operation of said commercial parking lot or other parking or storage lots used for the parking or storage of trucks, automobiles or other motor vehicles. The application shall be furnished by the city secretary and shall be submitted to the building official for approval. The building official shall approve or deny the issuance of the permit. Any denial of said permit may be appealed to the mayor in writing within ten days of such denial by the building official. The mayor shall review such denial and shall approve or set aside such denial in writing within 15 days of the appeal of such denial. The decision of the mayor shall be final. 
(Code 1996, § 10.1602; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 54-268. - General requirements. 
(a)	Paving. All commercial parking lots or other property used for the parking or storage of trucks, automobiles or other motor vehicles, any portion of driveway, or any entrance or exit, that is on city property, shall be paved with concrete or with a minimum of two inches of asphalt laid upon a substantial base material. The remaining portion of the parking lot may consist of any substantial base material, firm enough to support trucks, so that no mud or debris will come from the parking lot or vehicle onto city streets. Plans and specifications for such paving shall first be approved by the city's building official prior to construction of said paving. 
(b)	Setback lines. All setback lines required by the zoning ordinances, deed restrictions, or other legal requirements shall be strictly enforced. 
(c)	Fencing. Fencing shall be installed on all lots where there are residential homes adjacent to such parking lot as determined by the building official. This fencing shall be a privacy fence at a minimum of eight feet tall. 
(d)	Traffic hazard. No permit shall be issued if the parking or storage of such motor vehicles constitute a traffic hazard to persons traveling on the public streets near or adjoining said parking or storage lots. Appropriate safety procedures must be taken when pulling or backing into said lots. 
(e)	Access. All said parking or storage lots shall have adequate turning space and safe access to and from said lots. 
(f)	Adjoining lots. No such special use permit shall be granted if the said parking or storage lot unreasonably interferes with the use or enjoyment of any adjoining residential lot. 
(Code 1996, § 10.1603)  
Sec. 54-269. - Residential lots. 
No such parking or storage lots shall be allowed on any residential lot in the city. 
(Code 1996, § 10.1604)  
Sec. 54-270. - Permit fee. 
The city secretary shall collect a nonrefundable fee for such special use permit as provided for in the fee schedule. 
(Code 1996, § 10.1605)  
Sec. 54-271. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any section or part of this article shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and shall be fined as provided for in the general penalty provision found in section 1-6, and each day such violation shall continue shall also constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Code 1996, § 10.1606; Ord. No. 98-02, 2-3-1998)  
Chapter 58 - UTILITIES AND SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal power concerning sewers and privies, Texas Health and Safety Code § 342.002; exclusive original jurisdiction of municipality over electric utility rates, operations and services within the municipal territory, Texas Utilities Code § 33.001 et seq.; municipal utility systems generally, Texas Local Government Code § 552.001 et seq.; certain public services and utility systems in home rule municipalities, Texas Local Government Code § 552.002; water systems in home rule municipalities, Texas Local Government Code § 552.017. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 58-1. - Utility billing procedures. 
After the tenth day of each month, if the water bill exceeds the customer's deposit, the customer shall be notified of the same by sending a delinquent notice giving the customer a period of 15 days in which to pay the same. If not paid during the 15-day period, the water service shall be discontinued without further notice. A charge, as provided for in the fee schedule, shall be made to reinstate the service. In the event a meter is removed for non-payment of a water bill, there shall be a charge, as provided for in the fee schedule, for reinstallation. The owner of any delinquent account shall deposit an amount equal to the amount that exceeded the original deposit. These fees and all bills shall be payable before water service is restored. 
(Code 1996, § 11.300; Ord. No. 93-10-05-02, § 13, 10-5-1993)  
Secs. 58-2—58-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWER, GARBAGE, AND MOSQUITO SERVICE RATES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of home rule municipality to prescribe rates for the use of water to compel the payment thereof, Texas Local Government Code § 552.017. 
 
Sec. 58-21. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Owner means any person having legal or equitable interest in the property establishing ownership. 
Residential means a dwelling where one resides; a place that is used mainly for the purpose of residing. The term "residential" includes apartment houses and churches. 
Residential other than owner means any person who rents or leases from a landlord, agent, firm or corporation. 
(Code 1996, § 11.101; Ord. No. 93-10-05-02, § 1, 10-5-1993)  
Sec. 58-22. - Rate change. 
There shall be an automatic annual increase of three percent in the minimum bills for water usage and an annual increase of three percent for sewer usage for all residential, commercial and industrial customers for a period of five years with the first such annual increase for water and for sewer usage to commence August 1, 2014, and a like annual increase on August 1 of each year thereafter for said five-year period. The final annual increase for such water and sewer usage shall be on August 1, 2018, unless continued by a resolution of the city commission extending such annual increase in the minimum water and minimum sewer rates. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07, § 2, 7-16-2013)  
Sec. 58-23. - Residential water service rates. 
The monthly rates to be charged residential accounts by the city for water service shall be as provided for in the fee schedule. 
(Code 1996, § 11.102; Ord. No. 93-10-05-02, § 2, 10-5-1993)  
Sec. 58-24. - Residential sewer service rates. 
The monthly rates to be charged residential accounts by said city for sewer service shall be as provided for in the fee schedule. 
(Code 1996, § 11.103; Ord. No. 93-10-05-02, § 3, 10-5-1993)  
Sec. 58-25. - Commercial water service rates. 
The monthly rates to be charged commercial accounts by the said city for water service shall be as provided for in the fee schedule. 
(Code 1996, § 11.104; Ord. No. 93-10-05-02, § 4, 10-5-1993)  
Sec. 58-26. - Commercial sewer service rates. 
The monthly rates to be charged commercial accounts by said city for sewer service shall be as provided for in the fee schedule. 
(Code 1996, § 11.105; Ord. No. 93-10-05-02, § 5, 10-5-1993)  
Sec. 58-27. - Industrial water service rates. 
The monthly rates to be charged industrial accounts by said city for water service shall be as provided for in the fee schedule. 
(Code 1996, § 11.106; Ord. No. 93-10-05-02, § 6, 10-5-1993)  
Sec. 58-28. - Industrial sewer service rates. 
The monthly rates to be charged industrial accounts by said city for sewer service shall be as provided for in the fee schedule. 
(Code 1996, § 11.107; Ord. No. 93-10-05-02, § 7, 10-5-1993)  
Sec. 58-29. - Water and sewer service rates outside city. 
The monthly rates to be charged outside customers by said city for water and sewer service shall be as provided for in the fee schedule. 
(Code 1996, § 11.108; Ord. No. 93-10-05-02, § 8, 10-5-1993)  
Sec. 58-30. - Water rates applicable to contractors. 
(a)	The rates to be charged contractors for the purpose of water, when the meter and connections are supplied by the contractor, shall be as provided for in the fee schedule. 
(b)	The rate to be charged contractors for the purchase of water, when the meter and connections are supplied by the city, shall be as provided for in the fee schedule. 
(Code 1996, § 11.109; Ord. No. 93-10-05-02, §§ 9, 10, 10-5-1993)  
Sec. 58-31. - Water turn off charge. 
There shall be a minimum charge, as provided for in the fee schedule, for people living inside the city to have the water turned on or off for repair and for cleaning purposes. 
(Code 1996, § 11.110; Ord. No. 93-10-05-02, § 11, 10-5-1993)  
Sec. 58-32. - Mosquito control fee. 
A fee, as provided for in the fee schedule, shall be added to each water customer's monthly bill for the purpose of providing funds for the control of mosquitoes. 
(Code 1996, § 11.111; Ord. No. 83-10-18-01, § 2, 10-18-1983)  
Sec. 58-33. - Temporary water and sewer service. 
There shall be a minimum charge, as provided for in the fee schedule, for temporary water and sewer service to a vacant property. Temporary service cannot exceed one month. Additional charges for usage in excess of 3,000 gallons will be billed at the published rates. The owner or owner's agent must make application and pay the minimum charge at city hall prior to receiving temporary service. The city will discontinue the temporary service at the end of one month, unless prior arrangements are made. 
(Code 1996, § 11.112; Ord. No. 95-11-06-02, 11-6-1995)  
Sec. 58-34. - Water and sewer tap fees and deposits. 
The rate to be charged by the city for tap fees and deposits for water and sewer users shall be as provided for in the fee schedule. 
(Code 1996, § 11.200; Ord. No. 93-10-05-02, § 12, 10-5-1993)  
Secs. 58-35—58-56. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - HANDLING AND DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE AND WASTE 
 
Sec. 58-57. - Placement for collection. 
It shall be the duty of every person in charge of inhabited premises within the city to prepare the garbage, trash, and rubbish from such premises and timely place the same for collection by the city in accordance with the terms and conditions of this article. 
(1)	The owner of each residence within the city shall prepare for disposal of dry kitchen refuse, kitchen garbage and rubbish in disposable bags or containers that are entirely sealed and disposable. Cardboard boxes and other disposal containers may be used in addition to sacks, provided that they are tightly sealed and disposable. No containers of any shape, size or form will be emptied and returned to the curb. Containers having a total loaded weight in excess of 75 pounds will not be handled by city crews. 
(2)	All loose trash accumulations shall be deposited in receptacles as specified in subsection (1) of this section, and set out for collection. No single item of trash shall exceed four feet in length or width or two feet in diameter. No item or trash subject to being blown by winds from its place of deposit for collection on the premises shall be deposited loose on the premises, but shall be placed in required receptacle. 
(3)	Garbage sacks and other disposable containers used for dry kitchen refuse, kitchen garbage and rubbish shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and closed tightly when containing any dry kitchen refuse, kitchen garbage and/or rubbish. Lime must be used at places where such receptacles are located to be collected by the city if needed to abate odors, flies, or vermin. 
(4)	Garbage cans or other nondisposable containers and containers which are broken, split or open, or which are capable of causing injury to city handling personnel, shall not be touched by city personnel or the contents of such cans or receptacles collected except as set out in this article. 
(5)	Garbage sacks and other disposable containers to be collected by city personnel shall be placed inside the curb or drain ditch line of the street near the front property line of the premises, no later than 7:30 a.m. on those days designated from time to time for garbage pick up. 
(6)	Tree limbs and shrubbery shall be cut or broken into lengths of not more than four feet and suitably bundled, baled or interlaced through limb branches so as to permit collection without gathering up individual limbs. 
(7)	Apartments and commercial establishments may continue to use garbage cans and other watertight receptacles which shall have a close-fitting cover and with handles and of sufficient capacity and of sufficient numbers to accommodate and securely keep all the garbage, rubbish, trash and miscellaneous wastes that may accumulate from any such premises. 
(8)	The city shall not collect kitchen garbage, rubbish, trash or tree limbs where the same are not prepared for collection and placed in accordance with this article. 
(9)	It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with garbage sacks, other containers, trash receptacles or city sanitation container units or to pilfer or scatter the contents thereof in any city street, alley or easement. 
(10)	All garbage, trash, rubbish, ashes, or miscellaneous waste, which may be disposed of by any person, shall not be deposited at any place within the city, and within the police jurisdiction thereof, except at a city dump ground, or at such other place as may be directed by the city officials. 
(11)	Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1-6; and each day that any person shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall constitute a separate offense and be punishable as such. 
(Code 1975, § 10-4; Code 1996, § 11.401)  
Sec. 58-58. - Garbage rates. 
(a)	The fees to be charged for garbage service shall be as provided for in the fee schedule. 
(b)	Customers over the age of 65 years shall be eligible for a monthly reduction in said garbage rate, as provided for in the fee schedule. Such persons must apply for this discount and show acceptable proof of age. Said discount is applicable to the occupant of the subject property (as opposed to the owner). 
(Code 1996, § 11.402; Ord. No. 93-10-05-02, § 14, 10-5-1993)  
Sec. 58-59. - Commercial rates for garbage and trash service. 
The fees to be charged for collection of commercial garbage and brush and limb shall be as provided for in the fee schedule. 
(Code 1996, § 11.404; Ord. No. 93-10-05-02, § 16, 10-5-1993)  
Secs. 58-60—58-76. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SANITARY CONTROL OF SEWAGE 
 
Sec. 58-77. - Generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to dispose of any human excreta or waste within the corporate limits of the city except in a sanitary water flush tank connected to the city's sanitary sewer system or to a septic tank built and installed according to the specifications of the Texas State Department of Health for Harris County. 
(Code 1975, § 10-5; Code 1996, § 11.500(a))  
Sec. 58-78. - Sewer connection required. 
Every building intended for human habitation or occupancy abutting upon any road, street or alley in which there is a public sewer line, or within 300 feet of such public sewer line, shall as provided in this article be connected to such public sewer line by the owner or agent of the premises in the most direct manner possible. 
(Code 1975, § 10-5; Code 1996, § 11.500(b))  
Sec. 58-79. - Application required for connection. 
It shall be necessary for the owner or agent of any such premises mentioned in this article, and he is hereby expressly required, to make application to the city for connection of said premises to such public sewer line and such connection shall be made according to the requirements and subject of the approval of the city and its duly authorized representative and after connection the same shall be inspected by such representative for compliance with existing regulations. 
(Code 1975, § 10-5; Code 1996, § 11.500(c))  
Sec. 58-80. - Water, gas and sewer lines in separate trenches. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to lay any water service line, gas service line or sewer line in the same trench within the corporate limits of the city. All water service lines and sewer lines shall be laid in separate trenches and such trenches shall be separated by a distance of at least ten feet. 
(Code 1975, § 10-5; Code 1996, § 11.500(d))  
Sec. 58-81. - Septic tanks. 
In areas and localities within the corporate limits of the city where the public sanitary sewer lines are distant from any building inhabited or occupied by human beings of more than 300 feet, or where such public sanitary sewer service is not available, then and in such event, each house or building occupied or inhabited by human beings within such area or locality shall be connected to a sanitary septic tank built, constructed and installed to meet the requirements and specifications of the Texas State Department of Health for Harris County, and it shall be necessary for the owner or agent of such premises to notify the city and the county health unit of his intention to construct and install such septic tank. The city and the county health unit shall approve or disapprove the location of the septic tank prior to its installation, and if the location or site thereof is so approved, such septic tank shall be constructed and installed but shall be finally inspected by said city and health unit and approved or disapproved prior to being put into actual use. 
(Code 1975, § 10-5; Code 1996, § 11.500(e))  
Sec. 58-82. - Declaration of public nuisance. 
All outdoor privies, and all cesspools or tanks constructed in manner contrary to this article, existing or being used or maintained within the corporate limits of the city are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and a menace to the public health, and shall immediately be abandoned and replaced by suitable means of sewage disposal as provided by this article. 
(Code 1975, § 10-5; Code 1996, § 11.500(f))  
Sec. 58-83. - Violation and penalty. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the terms or conditions of this article shall be guilty of an offense punishable by fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1-6, and each day of such violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Code 1975, § 10-5; Code 1996, § 11.500(g))  
Secs. 58-84—58-109. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - INDUSTRIAL WASTE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to adopt rules to control and regulate disposal system waste, Texas Water Code § 26.176; water pollution control duties, Texas Water Code § 26.177. 
 
Sec. 58-110. - Purpose. 
(a)	This article sets forth uniform requirements for contributors into the wastewater facilities of the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable federal, state and local regulations. 
(b)	The objectives of this article are to prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city's wastewater facilities which: 
(1)	Will interfere with the operation of the facilities or contaminate the resulting sludge; and 
(2)	Could pass through said facilities, resulting in inadequately treated effluent, into the receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the sanitary sewer facilities. 
(c)	This article provides for the regulation of all contributors to the city's wastewater facilities and the enforcement of these general requirements authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user reporting, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(d)	This article shall apply to all users of the city's wastewater facilities, whether such users are located within or outside the boundaries of the city. Except as otherwise provided herein, the commission shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1996, § 11.601; Ord. No. 2006-01, 4-18-2006)  
Sec. 58-111. - Definitions. 
Unless the context requires otherwise, the following terms and phrases as used in this article shall have the meanings hereinafter designated: 
Amenable to treatment means susceptible to reduction in concentration by treatment routinely provided in the wastewater treatment plant to a level which is in compliance with federal and state effluent limitations for discharge into a watercourse. 
Building sewer means a sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to the wastewater facilities. 
City's engineer means SCL Engineering or such other company or person as may from time to time be duly appointed by the city. 
Cooling water means the water discharges from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
Domestic waste means waterborne wastes normally discharged into the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartments, hotels and motels), office buildings, factories and institutions, that are free of stormwater, surface water, and industrial wastes; concentrations for five-day 20 degrees C BOD or CBOD and total suspended solids shall not exceed 200 ppm (mg/l) and ammonia (ammonia-nitrogen) shall not exceed 25 ppm (mg/l) as nitrogen. 
Floatable grease means grease, oil or fat in a physical state such that it will separate or stratify by gravity in water. 
Grease means fatty acids, soaps, fats, waxes, petroleum products, oil and any material which is extractable by hexane or Freon solvent from an acidified sample and which is not volatilized during evaporation of the solvent. 
Industrial user means a person who discharges industrial waste, provided that schools, churches and day care centers shall not be considered to be industrial users for the purpose of this article. 
Industrial waste means the waterborne solids, liquids, and/or gaseous wastes (including cooling water), excluding domestic waste, resulting from any industrial, manufacturing, trade, business, commercial, or food processing operation or process, or from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of such solids, liquids or wastes with water, stormwater or domestic waste. 
Interference means any discharge of wastewater into a sanitary sewer system which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the wastewater treatment plant, its treatment processes and operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal, and therefore causes or contributes to causing a violation of any federal, state or local regulation or statute applicable to the city or its wastewater treatment plant. 
mgd means million gallons per day. 
Milligrams per liter (mg/l) means a weight-to-volume ratio; the milligrams per liter value multiplied by the factors 8.337 (pounds per gallon of water) is equivalent to pounds of constituent per million gallons of water. The term "milligrams per liter (mg/l)" is the same as parts per million (ppm) for wastewater. 
National categorical pretreatment standard or pretreatment standard or federal categorical pretreatment standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Federal Clean Water Act which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
National pollution discharge elimination system or NPDES permit means a permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Pass through means a discharge that exits the city's wastewater treatment plant into a watercourse in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, causes or contributes to causing a violation of any federal, state or local regulation or statute applicable to the city or its wastewater treatment plant. 
Pollutant means any substance or material in any form that may degrade the quality of the effluent from treatment facilities, may cause violation of the permit, may cause degradation of water quality in the receiving stream, may cause damage to the sanitary sewer system, or may endanger public health in any manner. 
ppb means parts per billion, weight-to-weight ratio, equivalent to micrograms per liter; the ppb value multiplied by a factor of 8.337 shall be equivalent to pounds per billion gallons of water. 
ppm means parts per million, weight-to-weight ratio, equivalent to milligrams per liter; the ppm value multiplied by a factor of 8.337 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water. 
Pretreatment or treatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the wastewater facilities. 
Sanitary sewer means a public sewer which carries wastewater and/or industrial wastes, and to which stormwater, surface water, and groundwater is not intentionally admitted. 
Sanitary sewer system means all facilities owned or operated by the city for collecting, conveying, pumping, treating, and discharging sewage to the wastewater treatment plant, as well as any extensions of or additions to these facilities that the city may construct, acquire or operate from time to time. 
Significant industrial user means any industry which discharges to the city's wastewater facilities that: 
(1)	Is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards; 
(2)	Discharges a nondomestic waste stream of 25,000 gallons per day (0.025 mgd) or more; 
(3)	Contributes a nondomestic waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the wastewater facilities; or 
(4)	Has a reasonable potential, in the opinion of the commission, to adversely affect the city's wastewater facilities whether by inhibition, pass through of pollutants, sludge contamination or endangerment of personnel of the wastewater facilities or any other means. 
Standard methods means the laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," as prepared, approved, and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Federation of Sewage and Industrial Wastes Association. 
Stormwater means that portion of the rainfall that is drained into any sanitary or stormwater sewer. 
TCEQ means the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality and any of its predecessor or successor agencies. 
Trap means a device designed to skim, settle or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes or other harmful substances. 
User means any person who has a building sewer connected to the city's sewer, or contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the city's wastewater facilities, including those who discharge holding tank waste into the wastewater facilities. 
Wastewater means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed or discharged into or permitted to enter the city's sanitary sewer system. 
Wastewater facilities means all city-owned equipment, devices and structures used for receiving, collecting, pumping and disposing of sewage, sludges and residues. 
Wastewater treatment plant means any city facilities, devices and structures used for receiving, processing and treating wastewater, industrial waste and sludges from the sanitary sewers. 
(Code 1996, § 11.602; Ord. No. 2006-01, 4-18-2006)  
Sec. 58-112. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a)	No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or performance of the wastewater facilities. No user shall contribute any of the following to any sanitary sewer: 
(1)	Any wastewater with concentrations of any substances above the limits as set by federal, state or local regulations. 
(2)	Any wastewater with concentrations of any substances prohibited by federal, state or local regulations. 
(3)	Any substance that is not amenable to treatment or reduction to acceptable levels by process units or that would cause interference or pass through at the wastewater treatment plant or is amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the wastewater treatment plant's effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving stream. 
(4)	Any wastewater discharged at rates or times in excess of flow regulation or equalization requirements as determined from time to time by the city. 
(5)	Any wastewater containing any fats, wax, grease, or oil, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous between 32 and 120 degrees Fahrenheit. These prohibitions include, but are not limited to: 
a.	Floatable grease of any origin; and 
b.	Free or emulsified grease of petroleum or mineral origin, or both, including, but not limited to: 
1.	Cooling or quenching oil; 
2.	Lubrication oil; 
3.	Cutting oil; or 
4.	Nonsaponifiable oil. 
(6)	Any inflows or infiltration, including, but not limited to, stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, noncontact cooling water or from sources such as downspouts, yard drains, yard fountains or ponds, swimming pools or lawn sprinklers. 
(7)	Any substance which will cause the wastewater treatment plant to violate the NPDES and/or Texas Commission on Environmental Quality's permit or the receiving water quality standards. 
(8)	Any liquid having a temperature higher than 120 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(9)	Any solids, liquids or gases which by themselves or by interaction with other substances may cause fire or explosion hazards, or in any other way is injurious to persons, property or the operator of the sewage disposal works. 
(10)	Any solids, slurries, or viscous substances of such character as to be capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works, such as ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, whole blood, hair and fleshings, entrails, lime slurry, lime residues, slops, chemical residues, paint residues or bulk solids. 
(11)	Any noxious or malodorous substance, except human excretions, which either singly or by interaction with other substances is capable of causing objectionable odors or hazard to life; or forms of solids in concentrations exceeding limits established in this article or creates any other condition deleterious to structures or treatment processes; or requires unusual provisions, alteration or expense to handle such materials. 
(12)	Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5 or having any corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazards to structures, equipment or personnel of the sewage disposal works. 
(13)	Any wastes or waters containing suspended or dissolved solids of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage treatment facility or in the public sewage works. 
(14)	Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous substances such as plating or wastes from heat treating processes in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, to constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or to create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. 
(15)	Any cyanide in concentrations greater than 1.0 mg/l as CN. 
(16)	Any hexavalent chromium in concentrations greater than 1.0 mg/l. 
(17)	Any trivalent chromium in concentrations greater than 3.0 mg/l. 
(18)	Any copper in concentrations greater than 1.0 mg/l. 
(19)	Any nickel in concentrations greater than 1.0 mg/l. 
(20)	Any cadmium in concentrations greater than 0.5 mg/l. 
(21)	Any zinc in concentrations greater than 1.0 mg/l. 
(22)	Any phenols in concentrations greater than 10 mg/l. 
(23)	Any iron in concentrations greater than 5.0 mg/l. 
(24)	Any tin in concentrations greater than 1.0 mg/l. 
(25)	Any arsenic in concentrations greater than 0.05 mg/l. 
(26)	Any barium in concentrations greater than 5.0 mg/l. 
(27)	Any boron in concentrations greater than 0.5 mg/l. 
(28)	Any lead in concentrations greater than 1.0 mg/l. 
(29)	Any manganese in concentrations greater than 1.0 mg/l. 
(30)	Any mercury in concentrations greater than 0.005 mg/l. 
(31)	Any radioactive wastes in concentrations greater than allowable releases specified by current United States Bureau of Standards Handbooks dealing with the handling and release of radioactivity and radioactive substances. 
(32)	Except in quantities or concentrations or with provisions as stipulated herein, it shall be unlawful for any person, corporation or individual to discharge waters or wastes to the sanitary sewer containing: 
a.	Cyanides or cyanogens compounds capable of liberation hydrocyanic gas or acidification in excess of one-half mg/l as CN in the wastes from any outlet into the public sewers. 
b.	Materials which exert or cause: 
1.	Unusual concentrations of solids or composition; 
2.	Excessive discoloration; 
3.	Unusual BOD or an immediate oxygen demand; 
4.	High hydrogen sulfide content; or 
5.	Unusual flow and concentration. 
(b)	The commission may add or delete pollutants and/or substances to be controlled or the city may modify specific concentrations as necessary to comply with federal, state and local regulations or to protect the treatment facilities and the public health and the environment. 
(Code 1996, § 11.603; Ord. No. 2006-01, 4-18-2006)  
Sec. 58-113. - Supervision. 
If the city or its designated representative determines that a discharge or a proposed discharge into the wastewater facilities may deleteriously affect the wastewater facilities or receiving waters, or create a hazard to life or health, or create a public nuisance, it may require any one or more of the following: 
(1)	Require such user to dispose of such waste otherwise and prevent it from entering the system; 
(2)	Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge into the wastewater facilities; and 
(3)	Exercise control over the quantities and rates of discharge. 
(Code 1996, § 11.604; Ord. No. 2006-01, 4-18-2006)  
Sec. 58-114. - Permits. 
(a)	Generally. An industrial waste permit is required for any industrial user that, in the opinion of the city, contributes or could contribute industrial waste to the sanitary sewer system. All industrial users, upon request by the city, shall submit to the city an industrial waste permit application. 
(b)	Permit application. The permit application shall include the following information and shall be submitted within 30 days of request from the city: 
(1)	Application fee. A fee as provided for in the fee schedule shall accompany the permit application. 
(2)	Industrial waste permit application. An example of the industrial waste permit application form is located in Appendix A attached to Ordinance 2006-01 adopted April 18, 2006, on file in the office of the city secretary. 
(3)	Inspection and testing. At the discretion of the city, inspection and testing may be required or performed by the city's personnel and/or other qualified personnel whose services are retained by the city. If inspection and testing are required, the applicant shall be required to pay for all such additional costs. The applicant shall not be issued an industrial waste permit if its discharge fails to meet applicable standards or requirements. 
(c)	City review of permit application. Within 30 days, the city will respond to the applicant. If the city determines that no additional information is required and the application is otherwise satisfactory, the city will send the applicant a letter stating that the application is complete. 
(d)	Permit issuance and conditions. At such time that all information requested of the applicant has been submitted and reviewed and found to be satisfactory by the city, the city will then send the applicant a letter stating that the application is complete. Following the review of the permit application and providing the applicant has met all of the terms as outlined herein, the city will issue the user an industrial waste permit which is valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance. The permit shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article and all other applicable ordinances or regulations. The permit may be subject to but not limited to the following requirements or conditions: 
(1)	User charges and surcharges as adopted and revised from time to time by the city. 
(2)	Average and maximum concentrations, characteristics, or constituents of the user's wastewater discharge into the sanitary sewer system. 
(3)	Limits on the rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulation or equalization. 
(4)	Regulations for installation of inspection and sampling facilities which allow the city access to such facilities at the user's expense. 
(5)	Regulations relating to pretreatment requirements. 
(6)	Regulations for monitoring programs, which may include sampling locations, frequency and method of sampling, number, types and standards of tests, and reporting schedule. 
(7)	Requirements for the submission of technical reports or discharge reports. 
(8)	Requirements for the maintenance of the user's records relating to wastewater discharge and affording the city access thereto. 
(9)	Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this article. 
(e)	Permit compliance. 
(1)	Annual report. A report shall be filed annually by all industrial waste permittees. The report, to be made upon a form provided by the city, shall state that the permittee has not made any change in the operation of its business which will, within the term of the permit, increase the strength, volume or any other characteristic of the permittee's discharge into the sanitary sewer system. If the permittee has made any changes in its operations, then the permittee shall describe the changes in the annual report. 
(2)	Notification to city of change in discharge. A permittee which proposes to change its industrial process in such a manner as to cause any change in the quantity or quality of its discharge into the sanitary sewer system shall notify the city at least 60 days prior to such change. 
(3)	Accidental discharge. Each permittee shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this article. The permittee shall make available copies of this article and other wastewater information and notices furnished by the city to all employees and agents. A notice shall be displayed in clear view for all employees and agents of the permittee regarding who to call in case of an accidental discharge in excess of the limits authorized by the permit. The permittee or its employees or agents shall immediately notify the city upon accidental discharge into the sanitary sewer system. This notification shall be followed within 15 days of the date of the occurrence by a detailed written statement describing the causes of the accidental discharge, the duration of the discharge, the estimated quantity in gallons that was accidentally discharged, the action taken by the permittee and the measures being taken to prevent future occurrence. Such notification will not relieve the permittee of liability for any expense, loss, or damage to the sanitary sewer system, or for any fines imposed on enforcement action pursuant to this occurrence. 
(4)	Change of ownership or location of discharge. Industrial waste permits may neither be assigned nor transferred to a new discharge location. Whenever a person other than the permittee becomes the user at a permitted establishment, or whenever there is a change in discharge location, a new application for a permit shall be made. A violation of this subsection shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the permit. 
(5)	Renewal of permit. The permittee shall file an application for renewal 60 days prior to the annual expiration date. A fee as provided for in the fee schedule shall accompany the permit renewal application. All testing, as may be required as part of the permit application, shall be at the expense of the applicant. Any such renewal shall be valid for a period of one year. 
(6)	Change in permit conditions. The city may change the conditions or user charges of any permit from time to time, as circumstances or laws or regulations enacted by the state or governmental agency may require. 
(f)	Permit denial. Upon receipt of an application for an industrial waste permit, the city shall issue or deny such permit. If such permit is denied, the city shall, within 45 days, notify the applicant of such denial and state the reasons for such denial in writing by certified mail. If the applicant still desires to obtain a permit, the applicant shall, within 30 days of such notice, revise the application to comply with the reasons for the denial as stated in the city's letter of denial. 
(g)	Violations and penalties. The following are considered violators of this article: 
(1)	An industrial user who is required by this article to obtain an industrial waste permit to be connected to the sanitary sewer system, but connects to the sanitary sewer system without obtaining a valid industrial waste permit; or 
(2)	A permittee who violates any provision included in its industrial waste permit or this article. 
(Code 1996, § 11.605; Ord. No. 2006-01, 4-18-2006)  
Sec. 58-115. - Pretreatment. 
(a)	The owner of premises from which industrial waste is discharged shall provide grease and sand traps for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease or sand. The traps must be of a type and capacity approved by the city to adequately handle the waste and must be located so that they are easily accessible for cleaning, inspection and monitoring by the city. 
(b)	When pretreatment of waste is required by the city as a condition for acceptance of the waste into the city's sanitary sewer, the owner of the premises from which the waste is discharged shall plan, construct, operate and maintain waste treatment facilities in an efficient manner at his sole cost and expense. In the event that the installation of pretreatment facilities is necessary for a user to meet applicable federal and state standards, the city shall establish and enforce deadlines for the installation of such facilities. The city and other authorized representatives or employees of the city may conduct an inspection of such facilities as hereinafter set forth. When pretreatment of waste is required by the city as a condition for acceptance of the waste into the city's sanitary sewer, the owner of the premises from which the waste is discharged shall not allow waste to bypass the waste treatment facilities. 
(c)	No owner or operator of premises from which industrial waste is discharged shall allow the use of extraneous water intermixed for the purpose of diluting the concentration of waste. 
(Code 1996, § 11.606; Ord. No. 2006-01, 4-18-2006)  
Sec. 58-116. - Inspection chambers. 
(a)	An industrial user that discharges waste into the city's sanitary sewer or wastewater facilities shall provide, at his sole cost and expense, an inspection manhole or chamber in an accessible location on the premises from which such waste is discharged. 
(b)	An inspection manhole or chamber must be: 
(1)	Located reasonably near the outlet of each sewer, drain, pipe, or channel that connects with the sanitary sewer or wastewater facility; 
(2)	Designed and constructed to prevent infiltration by groundwater and surface water; and 
(3)	Maintained so that a person may easily and safely measure volume and obtain flow samples. 
(c)	Before beginning construction of an inspection manhole or chamber, an industrial user shall submit plans to the city for review and approval to ensure compliance with this section. Plans must include the sewage metering device if one is to be installed. 
(Code 1996, § 11.607; Ord. No. 2006-01, 4-18-2006)  
Sec. 58-117. - Sampling of waste. 
(a)	The city is authorized to obtain or require routinely scheduled samples of waste discharges from users as often as necessary to adequately monitor and control the discharges. In the event the city obtains or requires such samples, the city or the user, as appropriate, in order to determine and report the wastewater characteristics of the samples, shall retain the services of a commercial laboratory to perform such services in accordance with analytical methods found in 40 CFR 136, or any other analytical method approved or accepted by the Environmental Protection Agency for wastewater analysis. The user shall pay all costs associated with sample collection and laboratory services. Should the user's discharge be in violation of this article, the user shall pay all costs, including, but not limited to, legal and engineering fees associated with sample collection and laboratory services and the enforcement of this article. These costs shall be in addition to any fees assessed in connection with the normal inspection of grease and sand traps conducted by the city. 
(b)	Each user subject to federal categorical pretreatment standards shall submit a copy of any self-monitoring reports as required by 40 CFR 403.12 to the city. 
(c)	The city may take samples of waste discharges from users as often as is necessary to adequately monitor and control the discharges. The cost of such sampling and laboratory analysis shall be paid as set forth in section 58-121. 
(d)	Samples may be taken manually or by use of mechanical equipment at the city's discretion. Analytical methods found in 40 CFR 136, or any other analytical method approved or accepted by the Environmental Protection Agency for wastewater analysis laboratory procedures shall be used for determining concentrations of industrial waste. The user may be requested by the city to install and maintain monitoring equipment, and shall be required to pay all costs of same. 
(Code 1996, § 11.608; Ord. No. 2006-01, 4-18-2006)  
Sec. 58-118. - Flow metering equipment. 
The city may require installation of flow meters for industrial users at the user's expense. The user shall be responsible for the operation, maintenance and accuracy of the flow meters. 
(Code 1996, § 11.609; Ord. No. 2006-01, 4-18-2006)  
Sec. 58-119. - Right of entry. 
The city and other authorized representatives or employees of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter immediately upon any premises in which a wastewater source is located, or in which any records required to be maintained pursuant to this article are located, and may at reasonable times have access to and copy any records, and conduct any inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, or testing necessary to enforce this article. Reasonable times shall mean any time when waste is being discharged or any time during normal operating hours. 
(Code 1996, § 11.610; Ord. No. 2006-01, 4-18-2006)  
Sec. 58-120. - Trade secrets. 
All information and data relating to a user which is obtained from reports, questionnaires, monitoring programs or inspection shall be available to the public without restriction unless the user specifically requests that specific information be withheld and such user is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information to the general public would give a business advantage to competitors who do not otherwise have this information. In such case, the city will use its best efforts to prevent the release of such information to the general public. 
(Code 1996, § 11.611; Ord. No. 2006-01, 4-18-2006)  
Sec. 58-121. - Fees. 
(a)	It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the city's wastewater facilities related to the implementation of the programs established herein. The applicable charges or fees shall be set forth by the city and may be revised from time to time. 
(b)	The city may adopt any one or more of the following charges and fees: 
(1)	Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program; 
(2)	Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures; 
(3)	Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(4)	Fees for removal (by the city) of pollutants otherwise subject to national categorical pretreatment standards; and 
(5)	Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. 
(Code 1996, § 11.612; Ord. No. 2006-01, 4-18-2006)  
Sec. 58-122. - Notification of violation. 
Whenever the city finds that any user has violated or is violating this article, the city shall serve notice, either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, upon such person stating the nature of the violation. Within 15 days of service of such notice, a plan for satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the city by such user; provided, however, upon notification of the violation user shall use its best efforts to immediately cease all activities which cause or contribute to the violation. If such a plan is not submitted, or if such violation is not corrected within such 15-day period, unless the user has perfected his right to review pursuant to section 58-123, the city shall proceed with enforcement pursuant to section 58-127; provided, however, nothing contained in this section or any other section of this article shall prevent the city or the commission from taking action in an emergency situation pursuant to section 58-124. No prior notice shall be required for the imposition of the fine described in section 58-126, if such fine is assessed for a violation of this section. 
(Code 1996, § 11.613; Ord. No. 2006-01, 4-18-2006)  
Sec. 58-123. - Review. 
Any user objecting to a finding by the city of a violation of this article shall have the right as set forth herein to a hearing before the city. In the event such user disagrees with the city's finding of such violation, the user shall, within 15 days of service of such notice by the city, serve notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, on the city, that such user disagrees with the city's finding and, further, that such user requests a hearing before the city. Such hearing shall be scheduled and conducted within 45 calendar days following the date of user's service of notice on the city. At such hearing, both sides will be allowed to present such testimony as is reasonably necessary to present a clear understanding of the contested issues. The mayor, or other designated city representative in the absence of the mayor, shall be the presiding officer and may at his discretion request other professional opinions prior to the city's rendering a decision on the matter of review. 
(Code 1996, § 11.614; Ord. No. 2006-01, 4-18-2006)  
Sec. 58-124. - Emergency relief. 
Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the city may immediately suspend water supply and wastewater treatment service to a user when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the city, in order to stop or prevent an actual or threatened discharge that presents an imminent and/or substantial danger to the health or welfare of persons, the environment, or the city's wastewater facilities or the water treatment plant that causes, or would cause, the city to violate any of the terms of the NPDES permit or state commission on environmental quality permit. The city may immediately suspend the water supply and wastewater service of a user when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the city, to prevent contamination of sludge and effluent from the wastewater treatment plant. The city shall reinstate the water supply and wastewater service upon clear and convincing proof by the user of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. Such disconnection and reconnection shall be at the expense of the user. The city may permanently disconnect any user who, in the city's sole discretion, exhibits a history of flagrant or habitual violation of this article. 
(Code 1996, § 11.615; Ord. No. 2006-01, 4-18-2006)  
Sec. 58-125. - Notice. 
Notice to the city required in this article shall be served at the following address: 
City of Galena Park 
2000 Clinton Drive 
Galena Park, Texas 77547 
(Code 1996, § 11.616; Ord. No. 2006-01, 4-18-2006)  
Sec. 58-126. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation. 
(Code 1996, § 11.617; Ord. No. 2006-01, 4-18-2006)  
Sec. 58-127. - Enforcement. 
Any one or more of the following remedies may be utilized by the city to abate or prevent any violation of this article: 
(1)	Disconnection and sealing of sanitary sewer connection and termination of water supply to the user. 
(2)	Suspension or revocation of a user's industrial waste permit. 
(3)	The city may and is hereby authorized to: 
a.	File suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to secure appropriate judicial relief, including, but not limited to, injunctive relief and/or the penalty provided in section 58-126 for the violation by such user of the provisions of this article. 
b.	Seek a resolution of the city authorizing the filing of a lawsuit under the provision of the Texas Water Code § 26.124 or pursuant to other valid authority. 
(4)	A user found in violation of this article shall be liable to the city for all expenses incurred by the city, including, but not limited to, legal and engineering fees, in establishing the violation and resolving the cause of the violation. These costs shall be in addition to any fees assessed in connection with the normal inspection of grease and sand traps conducted by the city. 
(5)	A user found in violation of this article that causes or contributes to a violation of the wastewater treatment plant of effluent parameters shall be liable to the city for all fines and expenses borne by the city, including, but not limited to, any administrative fines, legal fees, and engineering fees related to any lawsuit filed by federal, state or local authorities regarding violations by the city of effluent parameters applicable to the wastewater treatment plant. 
(6)	Where a user discharges wastewater to the sanitary sewer system leading to the wastewater treatment plant in violation of this article and such discharge causes or contributes to contamination of sludge from the wastewater treatment plant, the user shall be liable for all costs incurred by the city in disposing of the contaminated sludge over and above costs regularly incurred in sludge disposal. 
(Code 1996, § 11.618; Ord. No. 2006-01, 4-18-2006)  
Sec. 58-128. - Conflicting provisions. 
Whenever any applicable statute, regulation or permit of any state, federal or other agency having jurisdiction over the subject matter of this article is in conflict with this article, the stricter requirement shall apply, unless mandated otherwise. 
(Code 1996, § 11.619; Ord. No. 2006-01, 4-18-2006)  
Secs. 58-129—58-154. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - WATER CONSERVATION AND DROUGHT CONTINGENCY[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Drought contingency plans generally, Texas Water Code § 11.1272. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 58-155—58-176. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - WATER CONSERVATION PLAN 
 
Sec. 58-177. - Introduction. 
(a)	The city adopted its city Charter on April 12, 1946. The city is primarily a residential community with few commercial and industrial customers. The city has an efficient "mayor/commission form of government." The mayor is responsible to the city commission. 
(b)	The mayor has authorization to manage and control the city departments and other city functions. The water and wastewater superintendent is responsible for the operations and maintenance of the water and wastewater systems for the city. 
(c)	The city is located in the county and has the following approximate boundaries: Turkey Run Creek to the north, Federal Road to the east, Fidelity Road to the west, and the Houston Ship Channel to the south. 
(d)	The city's mission is to effectively manage the city's water supply, production and distribution system in order to meet water supply needs and to provide safe drinking water that meets or exceeds state and federal regulations; to review the design and construction of water facilities to ensure the adequacy of the water system; to meet projected growth requirements; and to identify and meet consumer needs and expectations. The city plans and executes activities necessary to provide expected quality services to the citizens, so that the opportunity to enjoy a high quality of life is afforded to all. 
(e)	The 2000 census reflected a population of 10,591, and the estimated 2008 population is 10,998 (TWDB population projection) and serves an area of 2.9 square miles (1,856 acres). The city experienced very slow growth as only 28 residential meters were installed during the last three years. The city is built out and has very limited land remaining for residential and commercial growth. 
(f)	The city serves 10,988 water and wastewater customers. 
(g)	The city receives treated surface water from the City of Houston's East Surface Water Treatment Plant located at Federal Road and Clinton Drive. The city has a ten-inch tap on the City of Houston's 96-inch distribution line which transverses Clinton Drive, the main street in the city. 
(h)	The city also has two groundwater plants with a well and booster pumps at each location. The wells are on standby and are used for emergencies and peak demands. Total capacity of both water wells is 3.67 mgd. 
(i)	The city is committed to maintaining and improving the city's water conservation plan by expanding the existing plan, expanding the educational program and following the guidelines and information provided by the Texas Water Development Board (TWDB). 
(j)	The best management practices (BMPs), all or part, that will be included in the city's water conservation plan includes mandatory elements, such as metering, system water audit, retro-fit BMPs, school educational programs and prohibition of wasting water. 
(Code 1996, § 11.721; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 58-178. - Goals. 
(a)	The city's water conservation plan objectives are to improve the efficiency of water use through practices and techniques that will reduce water consumption, reduce summertime usage, especially during dry weather, reduce water loss and increase water reuse. 
(b)	It is also the goal of the city to expand and improve the water conservation plan to achieve a one percent reduction per year in total gallons per capita per day (gpcd) over the next five- and ten-year periods. The one percent reduction per year is recommended by the state water conservation implementation task force. 
(c)	The city has been proactive in water conservation, as the city's consumption of 82 gpcd in 2006, 77 gpcd in 2007 and 73 gpcd in 2008 reflected a reduction of nine gpcd. This reduction exceeds the one percent recommended reduction. 
(d)	The reduction in per capita consumption is a result of a combination of conservation efforts, including the city's accounting program, water system inspection program, the water meter program, system repairs and public education. 
(e)	The five- and ten-year gpcd target goals are shown in Table 1. 
Table 1. Water Consumption Goals Based on Gallons Per Capita Per Day (gpcd) 
	Actual 	Target Goals 
Year 	2004 	2008 	2008 	2013 	2018 
Total gpcd 	85 	73 	73 	72 	70 
 
(f)	The above calculations were made by dividing the water diverted or pumped for treatment for potable use by population served. 
(Code 1996, § 11.722)  
Sec. 58-179. - Water loss. 
(a)	Water loss is a primary concern for the city and percent water losses and losses in gallons per capita per day (gpcd) for the last three years (2006 through 2008) are shown in Table 2. 
Table 2. Water Loss Percentage and Gallons Per Capita Per Day (gpcd) 
Year 	Population 	Water Loss (1,000 gals) 	Percent Loss 	gpcd 
2006 	10,894 	29,133 	8.9 	7.3 
2007 	10,945 	30,686 	10.0 	7.6 
2008 	10,998 	339,505 	9.6 	7.0 
 
(b)	The goal/target of the city is to reduce water loss by six percent per year over five- and ten-year periods. 
(c)	The water loss projected goals/targets expressed in gallons per capita per day (gpcd) for five- and ten-year periods are reflected in Tables 3 and 4. 
Table 3. Five-Year Water Loss Goals/Targets (gpcd) 
Year 	Population Estimate 	Water Loss Estimate (1,000 gals) 	gpcd Loss 
2009 	11,045 	42,135 	10.4 
2010 	11,099 	93,442 	23.0 
2011 	11,149 	29,133 	7.2 
2012 	11,200 	30,686 	7.5 
2013 	11,250 	28,377 	6.9 
 
Table 4. Ten-Year Water Loss Goals/Targets (gpcd) 
Year 	Population Estimate 	Water Loss Estimate (1,000 gals) 	gpcd Loss 
2014 	11,351 	26,675 	6.4 
2015 	11,390 	25,075 	6.0 
2016 	11,425 	23,571 	5.6 
2017 	11,440 	22,151 	5.3 
2018 	11,500 	20,848 	4.9 
 
(Code 1996, § 11.723)  
Sec. 58-180. - Best management practices. 
(a)	Water consumption in the city is driven by a wide variety of domestic, commercial, industrial and institutional needs. BMPs, as recommended by the TWDB, have been developed and utilized by the city to improve water use efficiency and for programs to assist and improve the city's water customers in the efficient use of water. 
(b)	BMPs that are presently in effect and some that will be considered for implementation are described in this section and in greater detail in this article. 
(c)	The system water audits and water loss BMP allows the city's utility section to reliably track water use and provide the information needed to address unnecessary water and revenue losses. The metering of all new connections BMP has established to create equity among customers, reduce water waste, and reduce flows to wastewater facilities. The city currently does not have a retrofit program in place at this time, but will work toward establishing a retrofit program. The city is responsible for the inside inspection of all residential and commercial structures. The water conservation pricing BMP is designed to discourage the wasting of water while ensuring the fiscal obligations of the system are met. The prohibition of wasting water BMP is aimed at customers who continue to waste water despite water utility efforts to educate customers to reduce the wasting of water. 
(d)	The public information BMP affects water consumption through changes in behavior as customers learn about water resources, the wise use of water, and the conservation program. The water-wise landscape design program BMP saves water through the installation of water-wise landscape material supplemented with education to ensure efficient irrigation of new and existing landscapes. 
(Code 1996, § 11.724)  
Sec. 58-181. - System water audit and water loss. 
(a)	To maximize the benefits of this BMP, the city uses the information from the water audit to revise meter testing and repair practices, reduce unauthorized water use, improve accounting for authorized but unbilled water and implement effective water loss management strategies. State law requires a retail public utility providing potable water to perform and file with the TWDB every five years a water audit computing its most recent annual audit system water lost. The city will explore the implementation of a more frequent water auditing and loss reduction by conducting an annual audit of the system. 
(b)	The city already tracks water loss by their leak detection program, leak repair, meter change out and water use by the city. Except for the tennis court, all city facilities are presently being metered. Leak detection consists of utilizing the city's leak detection crews to monitor older water mains and connections and to continuously monitor water mains, especially in areas of heavy traffic, constant monitoring of storage tank levels, daily visual inspection, monitoring distribution pressure and flows, monitoring for illegal connections and educate and inform water customers to report any and all leaks promptly. 
(c)	The city has completed the Texas Water Development Board's Utility Profile Form WRD-264 and will utilize this information in the completion of their annual water audit. 
(d)	In accordance with state law, the city will improve and refine their system water audit and water loss by utilizing information and assistance from the TWDB. 
(1)	Monthly water pumpage records from the City of Houston's 96-inch distribution line, water well plants and monthly total water billing records will be compiled for each water service area. Wastewater flow records from the wastewater treatment plant will be maintained on a monthly basis. 
(2)	Existing maintenance and repair records will be compiled and improved; this information may be used to track water loss from water leaks. 
(3)	Comparisons of the pumpage versus billed water will be made to identify potential water loss or accountability. 
(4)	Potential ideas for water reuse will be evaluated. The city does not have a golf course, but the wastewater treatment plant uses the plant effluent to operate the chlorinators and for plant washdown. 
(e)	The city will provide a more detailed overall picture of water losses by using existing records, by improving overall accountability. 
(f)	To track this BMP, the city will collect, assemble and maintain the following: 
(1)	Prepare an annual audit reflecting percentage water losses and actions implemented to address data and recommendations generated by the annual audit. 
(2)	Leak detection. Work orders will be maintained, reflecting all leak repairs as to location, number of leaks repaired, size of line and estimated water loss. The city can take advantage of the TWDB's leak detection equipment. 
(3)	Number of customer service line leaks, line size, estimated water loss, and actions taken to repair these leaks. 
(4)	Additional revenue generated by initiating this BMP. 
(Code 1996, § 11.725)  
Sec. 58-182. - Metering (BMP). 
(a)	The city has a meter replacement program in place and in addition to the meter section, the city also employs the services of an outside meter contractor each year, or more often if necessary. The contractor checks and calibrates the meters at plants 1 and 2 which meters the surface water from the City of Houston's 96-inch surface water distribution line, and the water well meters. Meter calibration ensures that the city will receive the maximum savings on water received from the City of Houston and water pumped from the wells. 
(b)	All metering and meter calibrations are within an accuracy of plus or minus five percent 
(c)	The city's metering program consists of the following: 
(1)	The city's present goal is to replace 100 meters each year. In some cases it is more economical to replace meters than to repair them. 
(2)	An effective monthly meter-reading program in which readings are estimated only in cases of an inoperable meter or other extenuating circumstances; broken or inaccurate meters are replaced as soon as possible depending on available staff. 
(3)	Meter readers fill out work orders on meters that appear to have irregularities or are broken or damaged. 
(4)	The water accounting section flags water bills that appear to be too high or too low. 
(5)	Construction meters are used to track water usage in the construction industry. 
(6)	All city facilities are presently being metered except for one tennis court. 
(7)	Implementation of the state requirements in Texas Water Code § 13.502, which requires all new townhouses and apartments be either directly metered by the utility or sub-metered by the owner. 
(8)	An accounting of water savings and revenue gains through the implementation of the city's water meter repair and replacement procedures. 
(d)	The city will ensure that the meter program is maintained through the regular review of metered data and revision of metering policies to ensure that the maximum amount of water consumption is accounted for. 
(e)	To track the effectiveness of the metering BMP the city will provide the following: 
(1)	Number and size of water meters replaced on an annual basis. 
(2)	Number and size of water meter repaired annually. 
(3)	Number of meters tested and results of each. 
(4)	Estimate of water savings achieved through meter repair and replacement program. 
(5)	Number of work orders generated for meter repair/replacement. 
(f)	Every year the city will estimate its annual water saving from the meter BMP and from records generated by the water accounting section and meter replacement section. The city will look into the monitoring water accountability on a monthly basis and maintain a running 12-month average for water loss. 
(Code 1996, § 11.726)  
Sec. 58-183. - Water conservation pricing. 
(a)	This BMP is intended for all utilities wishing to send price signals to customers to encourage water conservation. Water conservation pricing discourages the inefficient use or waste of water. The goal of conservation pricing is to develop long-term consumption patterns consistent with cost. The city will educate their customers on the type of rate structure that the utility uses and can be provided feedback through the water bill on their monthly water use. 
(b)	The city has a water and sewer rate structure that includes a progressive scale for one through four family units and for increases in meter sizes up to six inches, which provides for service and billing for water and wastewater service based on the actual metered water use. The rates include a consumption charge based on actual gallons metered so that increasing water consumption results in a larger bill for the customer. 
(c)	The city raised water rates and anticipates that conservation pricing will have the advantage of providing stronger feedback to the customers, who will see a larger percent increase in their water bill than the increase in water use. The rate structure is not presently shown on the customer's water bill, but the city will explore this option. 
(d)	The increase in water rates has shown that conservation pricing has provided incentives to customers to reduce average and/or peak use. 
(e)	The city will consider requiring new commercial and industrial customers to install separate irrigation meters, and the feasibility of retrofitting current commercial and industrial customers with irrigation meters. 
(f)	The city will review the consumption patterns (including seasonal use) and its income and expense levels to determine if the conservation rates are effective and make appropriate, regular rate structure adjustments as needed. 
(g)	To track this BMP, the city should maintain the following documentation: 
(1)	A copy of the city's water and wastewater rate ordinance. 
(2)	Customer numbers and water consumption by customer class at the beginning and end of the reporting period. 
(3)	A copy of the education materials sent to customers for each calendar year. 
(4)	A utility bill as stated above. 
(5)	A utility bill reflecting water conservation information. 
(h)	Elasticity studies have shown an average reduction in water use of one to three percent for every ten percent increase in the average monthly water bill. In implementing a conservation pricing structure, consideration will be given to the factors that influence whether the new structure results in a reduction in water use. The Water Price Elasticities for Single-Family Homes in Texas Study included several findings which suggest some water savings can be expected, as follows: 
(1)	Average price is better than marginal price in explaining the quantity of water demanded by customers. 
(2)	Customers do not understand the link between water use and sewer billing and therefore do not tend to factor sewer prices into their water use decisions. 
(3)	The study found that for a ten percent increase in price there was a two percent reduction in water use. 
(Code 1996, § 11.727)  
Sec. 58-184. - Prohibition on wasting water. 
(a)	This BMP should be considered by utilities that have customers who continue to waste water despite the efforts of the utility to educate customers to reduce the waste of water. Water waste prohibition measures are enforceable actions and measures that prohibit specific wasteful activities. Under this BMP, the city has enforcement powers to prohibit wasteful activities including: 
(1)	Failure to fix outside faucet leaks. 
(2)	Failure to repair service line leaks (customer's side). 
(3)	Failure to repair personal water lines, faucets, water closets, and water heaters. 
(4)	Allowing sprinklers and water hoses to run during rainy conditions. 
(5)	Operating irrigation systems with missing heads and leaks. 
(6)	Leaks and water loss from car washes and commercial laundry systems. 
(b)	The BMP is implemented by the regular maintenance and operating personnel of the city and work orders are written on all leaks and repaired by work crews who are available on a 24-hour basis. 
(c)	To track this BMP the city will maintain the following documentation: 
(1)	Copy of water waste prohibition ordinances enacted in the service area. 
(2)	Copy of compliance or enforcement procedures implemented by the city. 
(3)	Records of enforcement actions including public complaints of violations and utility response. 
(4)	Records of all work orders. 
(5)	Record estimated water loss from each area. 
(d)	Total water savings for this BMP can be estimated from each water-wasting measure eliminated through the actions taken under this BMP. There will be additional savings from the education of customers who may change some of their inefficient water usage practices. The city will explore other avenues and additional methods to improve this program. 
(Code 1996, § 11.728)  
Sec. 58-185. - Residential toilet replacement program. 
(a)	This BMP is intended for a municipal water utility that has at least 20 percent of homes and apartment units in the service area constructed prior to 1995 and for which there has not been an active retrofit program to replace high flush volume toilets with 1.6 gallons per flush (gpf) toilets. 
(b)	State and federal requirements prohibit installation of new toilets using more than 1.6 gpf in single-family and multifamily residences. The implementation of this BMP will consist of the following: 
(1)	A retrofit mandate for all new structures and existing structures undergoing substantial modification or additions. The buyer and seller certify that the plumbing fixtures meet the efficiency standards of the most recent plumbing code. 
(2)	The city's water and wastewater department has its own inspector and can expand on the retrofit program. 
(3)	A retrofit requirement and/or ordinance triggered when ownership of the property changes. The city will require all plumbing fixtures in the single-family or multifamily unit, leased property and rental property to meet current plumbing standards when new structures and existing structures undergo substantial modification or additions. 
(4)	As time permits, the city could set up a system to inspect all single-family and multifamily units and ensure that all conform to the current plumbing codes. 
(c)	The following proposed schedule will be implemented: 
(1)	The inspectors will prepare documentation on all inspections on all single-family residences and multifamily units that are rented, leased or if ownership of the property changes; the documentation will reflect the kind and number of units replaced, and installation completion date. 
(2)	A plan will be developed to educate homeowners, apartment owners and managers, plumbers, and realtors about this program. 
(3)	The city will strive to improve the implementation and expansion of the retrofit program. 
(d)	To track this BMP, the city should gather the following: 
(1)	The number of ultra low flushing toilet (ULFT) installations credited to the participant's replacement program, by year, including brand and model of toilets installed. 
(2)	The average persons per household for single-family residences and the average person per household for multifamily units. 
(3)	Description of ULFT replacement program. 
(4)	Estimated water savings per ULFT replacement. 
(e)	The city will continue to educate homeowners, multiunit owners, managers, plumbers and realtors about this program and work toward developing a compliance program. 
(Code 1996, § 11.729)  
Sec. 58-186. - Public information. 
(a)	A program for providing water conservation information to the public is an effective means of both promoting specific water conservation programs and practices and educating the public about the importance of using water efficiently. 
(b)	Public information programs can result in both short- and long-term water savings, though they may not be directly related to any equipment or operational change. Behavioral changes by customers will only occur if a reasonable yet compelling case can be presented with sufficient frequency to be recognized and absorbed by customers. 
(c)	One of the goals is to educate customers of the overall picture of water resources in the community and how conservation is needed to meet the goals of managing and sustaining existing water supplies and to avoid or delay building new facilities. An equally important part of the program is to provide data and information on specific actions and measures the customers should take to implement these community goals. When customers know the results of their actions have made a difference they are encouraged to continue participation in conservation efforts. 
(d)	There are a variety of tools that can be effectively used to communicate water conservation by means of public education. These include use of print, radio, television, billboards, board meetings, schools, direct distribution of materials and facility tours. 
(e)	School education will be addressed in the school education section. 
(f)	The city utilizes the following to inform the public the importance of water conservation and the value of water in sustaining and enhancing life: 
(1)	Public at large . The city holds regular meetings of the commission every month, which are open to the public; anyone is free to speak to the commission, and the commission can inform the public about water conservation and make recommendations and decisions regarding conservation. 
(2)	Posted at city hall. Water conservation information available and posted at city hall. 
(3)	Printed brochures . State water development board water conservation literature and pamphlets will be part of the basis for information to the public, as well as preprinted brochures available from the Water-Wise Council of Texas. There are many publications, brochures, videos, DVDs, etc., already available on water conservation that can be used as published or modified to meet the goals of the utility, such as: "Water IQ, Know Your Water"; the following brochures were developed by the Water Conservation Task Force: "Be Water Smart Indoors," "Be Water-wise Outdoors" and "Top Water Smart Tips In and Around the Home." Other TWDB brochures are: "Water Conserving Tips," "Conserving Water Outdoors," and "Conserving Water Indoors." The Water Lily Press, Inc. (local) has a wide variety of brochures and material on water conservation. Brochures also available are published by the Texas Water-Wise Council, a public/private partnership that fosters awareness and implementation of sound water management. A few of the brochures that are available are: "Irrigation-Best Management Practices," "Lawn Maintenance-Best Management Practice" and "Landscape-Best Management Practice." 
(4)	Inserts in utility bills and local papers. The city will begin using inserts and messages with utility billing on a regular basis and can also publish water conservation messages in the local paper. 
(5)	Leak detection kits. The city will order leak detection kits along with other information and make them available at city hall. 
(6)	Tours of water utilities facilities. Tours of the water utilities facilities are also available to the public. 
(g)	The goal of the city, at a minimum, is to provide information to each customer at least twice each year, on each action that the utility would like the customer to take. To track the progress of this BMP, the city gathers the following data: 
(1)	The number of brochures and information distributed to the public. 
(2)	Number of dye kits distributed to the public. 
(3)	Number of water bills with water conservation information included. 
(4)	Number of public school children who received information on water conservation. 
(5)	Number of persons who toured the city's utilities. 
(6)	The total population of the city is 10,998 (2008) per TWDB projection. 
(7)	Results of an annual or biannual customer survey. 
(h)	Water savings due to public information efforts are difficult to quantify. Water savings for other public information programs that result in specific actions by customers such as changes in irrigation scheduling or reduction in water waste occurrences could also be quantified through surveys or analysis of water waste reporting. 
(Code 1996, § 11.730)  
Sec. 58-187. - School education. 
(a)	Lessons learned by students about good water use habits are often shared with the whole family. 
(b)	School education programs, which may not result in quantifiable water savings, will improve and enhance a utility's public image, increase customer good will, and increase the viability of its overall water conservation efforts. The message conveyed by students to their families is based upon greater knowledge that water sources and conservation can result in behavioral changes resulting in both short- and long-term water savings. 
(c)	The city will explore the possibility of sponsoring the water-wise program, which educates the students in the fourth through sixth grade, on water conservation and supply. The water-wise program is a product of the Harris Galveston Subsidence District and information and materials are available through the district. The water conservations kits furnished to the students consist of toilet leak detection tablets, showerhead and faucet aerators, water displacement bags and instructions on repairing toilet leaks and other common water leaks. 
(d)	The city can purchase the water conservation kits through the subsidence district and receive credit for 84,000 gallons of well water for each kit purchased. The subsidence district will assist the city in initiating this program at the local schools. 
(e)	A study by the Harris Galveston Subsidence District found an average savings of 18 percent or 1,400 gallons per month in homes where parents of students had installed efficient showerheads and aerators on bathroom and kitchen sinks. 
(f)	The city will strive to improve their school education program by obtaining water conservation education literature from the state water development board, such as their sixth grade curriculum called, "Raising Your Water IQ," as well as water conservation lesson plans. 
(g)	The program will require utility staff oversight and outreach efforts to schools and students. The city will track this BMP by: 
(1)	Number of students participating in the water conservation plan. 
(2)	Number of water conservation kits furnished to the classrooms. 
(3)	Number of presentations made during the year. 
(4)	Grade level and data the program expanded. 
(h)	A true cost-effectiveness analysis cannot be determined without a measure of water savings. The program conducted by the Harris Galveston Subsidence District found that 1,400 gallons per month were saved by installing water savings devices in the home. 
(Code 1996, § 11.731)  
Sec. 58-188. - Water-wise landscape design and conservation program. 
(a)	This BMP is intended for utility customers who have high water use landscapes which consume more than twice as much water in the summer as in the winter. A utility impacted by repeated drought may also consider this BMP as a means of reducing outdoor water demand overall in their service area as a step toward long-term change of water use patterns. 
(b)	The city will realize a decrease in summertime water consumption, peak pumpage and overall use by the installation of water-wise landscapes at residential properties, city properties and subsequent education to ensure efficient irrigation of the new landscapes. Water-wise landscaping involves not only plant selection, but continued attention to appropriate irrigation and landscape maintenance. 
(c)	In addition, a public education and outreach program through water-wise brochures, local media, water bills, civic groups, garden clubs and nurseries will help create a program that will bring water-wise landscape design to residential and commercial customers. 
(d)	The city will explore the feasibility of initiating a landscape program which would require the use of drought-tolerant and low-water use landscaping species on all new homes. 
(e)	In the typical landscape, turf grass occupies the largest area and, when managed incorrectly, receives the largest amount of irrigation. Water savings can be achieved by installation of practical turf areas and irrigation of only the turf in high impact, highly visible areas of the landscape. Irrigated turf areas should be reduced or eliminated as part of the conservation program. 
(f)	The city and the city's parks department are committed to installing water-wise plants and landscapes at all city facilities. 
(g)	Water-wise landscape programs follow the seven principles of xeriscape from the Texas A&M Horticulture Department, which are: planning and design, soil analysis and improvement, appropriate plant selection, practical turf areas, efficient irrigation, use of mulches and appropriated maintenance. 
(h)	The implementation of this BMP involves continual public education campaigns, including public-private partnerships with gardening clubs, landscape designers and nurseries. 
(i)	The city will try to establish and continue with an on-going public outreach and educational campaign and the following information would be provided: 
(1)	Landscape Improvement-Best Management Practices. A brochure developed by the Water-Wise Council of Texas covers soil improvement, mulch, maintenance, mowing and efficient irrigation. 
(2)	Water IQ-Be Water-Wise Outdoors. A brochure available from the state water development board that details water-wise steps to follow, water-wise landscape watering, water-wise landscape maintenance, water-wise irrigation equipment and design a water-wise landscape. 
(3)	Xeriscape-Landscape with Less Water. A brochure that details the seven principles of xeriscaping. 
(4)	Outreach. Continue implementation and outreach program to the public, nurseries, realtors and landscape companies. 
(5)	Rain sensors. The city will explore the requirement of rain sensors on all automated irrigation systems and the potential to save water. 
(6)	Evapotranspiration controllers (ETs). The city will explore the feasibility of requiring ET controllers on all new and reconditioned irrigation systems. 
(j)	To track this BMP, the city will gather the following documentation: 
(1)	Number of dedicated irrigation meter accounts. 
(2)	Estimated water savings based on customer billing records. 
(3)	Customer water use records prior to and after conversion of the landscape; this data is best compared in years of similar rainfall and after the landscape has been installed a sufficient time to establish itself. 
(4)	Number of rain sensors and ET controllers on automatic sprinkler systems and customer records prior to and after installation of such devices; this data is best compared in years of similar rainfall and after the landscape has been installed a sufficient time to establish itself. 
(k)	Water savings will be determined from analysis of actual customer-metered water use before and after landscape conversion and after installation of rain sensors or ET controllers. 
(Code 1996, § 11.732)  
Sec. 58-189. - Park conservation. 
(a)	This BMP is intended for all utilities which manage parks or serve customers with parks which consume water. The visible use of water often comes under scrutiny by the public and water utility staff because of large water demand to maintain a park and because of the perception that the water use may be excessive. 
(b)	The city has six public parks, five athletic fields and one tennis court that require water. The city also has one public swimming pool. 
(c)	Park irrigation conservation practices, as well as the careful use of water in operation and maintenance of park facilities, can effectively reduce water demands. Under this BMP, the city will require the management of the parks to comply with the water conservation programs on prohibition of wasting water and water-wise landscape design. 
(d)	Under the plan, the park supervisor will implement a watering regiment that uses only the amounts of water necessary to maintain the viability of turf and landscape material appropriate for the use of the park. Water should only be applied to areas that are essential to the use of the park. 
(e)	Conservation of water for the parks will be achieved through BMPs on prohibition of wasting water, water-wise landscape design and system water audit and loss program. 
(f)	Four of the athletic fields are on one meter, and the fifth field is metered individually, which gives the city a good way to track water loss. The city will explore the metering of each athletic field. 
(g)	One of the six parks is metered and has water service; the other five parks do not have water service. 
(h)	As a minimum, compliance with this BMP will require the replacement of all manually controlled or quick couple irrigation systems with automatic irrigation systems and controllers. 
(i)	Water wasting practices during ball field irrigation will be eliminated, including water running in gutters, irrigation heads or sprinkler spraying directly on paved surfaces, operation of automatic irrigation systems without a functioning rain shut-off device, operation of an irrigation system with missing or broken heads and irrigation during summer months should be restricted to special times. 
(j)	To accomplish this BMP, the city will: 
(1)	Ensure that the landscapes of all park properties are planted and irrigated in compliance with water-wise landscape design requirements. 
(2)	Offer training for park irrigation management and as part of this training should include workshops on pesticides, soil and nutrient management for optimal water use efficiency. 
(3)	The water usage for the parks is metered and included in the system audit and loss program. 
(k)	To track the progress of this BMP, the city will gather the following documentation: 
(1)	Metered water readings before and after any changes are implemented. 
(2)	Changes to irrigation systems, retrofits, or upgrades, regular leak detections and maintenance policies, and estimated water savings from conservation practices. 
(3)	Cost of repairs, equipment upgrades, or new equipment installed. 
(l)	Estimating total water savings for this BMP may be difficult; however, water savings can be estimated from each water-wasting measure eliminated through the actions taken under this BMP. 
(1)	Swimming pool facilities. 
a.	All swimming pool facilities should be equipped with recirculation and chlorination equipment. While not common, there are pools that are filled and drained everyday with potable water, which practice should be discontinued. Overflow drains should be pumped back to the recirculation system. Swimming pools should be managed to minimize operational losses due to evaporation, splashing and filter backwashing. Proper design, optimal backwash scheduling, and use of a pool cover can help limit all of these losses. Regular maintenance during the off season should include testing for water loss and leak repair. 
b.	Pool facilities and buildings should be swept for regular sanitary purposes and only cleaned with the amounts of water needed for human health and safety purposes. Showerheads, faucets and toilets in the swimming pool facilities should be retrofitted with efficient fixtures. 
(2)	Implementation. 
a.	The city will ensure that the swimming pool facility supervisor is well trained in the operation and maintenance of the facility, as well as the water conservation plan. 
b.	The swimming pool facility supervisor should develop written water conservation policies and procedures that cover the operation and maintenance of the pool and related facilities. The policy and procedures will include employees. 
c.	The swimming pool and related facilities will be metered to track water use, water loss and to reinforce the importance of water use efficiency. 
d.	The city will follow and track the recommendations and water conservation items listed in subsection (l)(1) of this section. 
(Code 1996, § 11.733)  
Sec. 58-190. - Reuse of reclaimed water. 
(a)	Generally. The direct use of reclaimed water is an effective method of reducing potable water usage. The term "reclaimed water" is defined in the Texas Administrative Code (TAC) as domestic or municipal wastewater which has been treated to a quality suitable for a beneficial use, pursuant to the provisions of this article and other applicable rules and permits. Direct use of reclaimed water is appropriated for a number of domestic, industrial and irrigation needs where the potential for human contact is limited. 
(b)	Direct use of reclaimed water. Direct use of reclaimed water is regulated by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) and Safe Drinking Water Act Standards. Included in these rules are provisions that require permission from that agency before providing reclaimed water for beneficial use and design guidelines for reclaimed water systems. 
(c)	Implementation. Implementation consists of the following: 
(1)	The city is presently using the wastewater effluent to operate the plant chlorination equipment and for plant washdown. 
(2)	The city does not have the industrial or commercial customer base to consider the expense of installing a separate water reuse water system; however, the city will explore the long range possibilities of additional water reuse as the costs and demand for potable water continues to increase. 
(d)	Documentation . 
(1)	The wastewater treatment plant is a 0.95 mgd complete mix, activated sludge treatment process. 
(2)	The wastewater effluent is being used in the operation of the chlorination equipment and for plant washdown. The plant effluent usage is being estimated, but escape accountability will be refined. 
(3)	Number of gallons or acre-feet of previous potable water use replaced by reuse water since the implementation of the BMP. 
(e)	Determination of water savings . Water savings are estimated at up to 100 percent of the total amount of potable water replaced by reclaimed water. Changes in operating parameters or water balance calculations which depend upon water quality parameters, such as the impact of total dissolved solids (TDS) in irrigation water, require different quantities of reused water to be applied for same-end uses. 
(Code 1996, § 11.734)  
Sec. 58-191. - Coordination with regional water planning group. 
The service area of the city is located within the Houston Region (H), and the city has provided a copy of this plan to the Houston Region (H), Regional Water Planning Group. 
(Code 1996, § 11.735)  
Secs. 58-192—58-220. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN 
 
Sec. 58-221. - Declaration of policy, purpose and intent. 
(a)	In order to conserve the available water supply and protect the integrity of the water supply facilities, with particular regard for domestic water use, sanitation and fire protection, and to protect and preserve public health, welfare and safety, and to minimize the adverse impacts of water supply shortage or other water supply emergency conditions, the city hereby adopts the following regulations and restrictions on the delivery and consumption of water. 
(b)	Water uses regulated or prohibited under this drought contingency plan ("plan") are considered to be nonessential and continuation of such uses during times of water shortage, or other emergency water supply conditions, and are deemed to constitute a waste of water which subjects the offender to penalties as defined in section 58-230. 
(Code 1996, § 11.751)  
Sec. 58-222. - Public involvement. 
Opportunity for the public to provide input into the preparation of the plan was provided by the city by means of scheduling a meeting to receive comments, input, notifying the public by notices in the local paper, postings at city hall, and by utilizing the local radio stations. 
(Code 1996, § 11.752)  
Sec. 58-223. - Public education. 
The city will periodically provide the public with information about the plan, including information about the conditions under which each stage of the plan is to be initiated or terminated and the drought response measures to be implemented in each stage. This information will be provided by means of: 
(1)	Utility bill inserts. 
(2)	Direct mailing. 
(3)	Sponsor school programs to promote water conservation education. 
(4)	Newspaper advertisement/school function directories (i.e., football programs, ads-yearbook, ads-FFA and 4-H programs). 
(5)	Distribute and have available brochures on water conservation. 
(Code 1996, § 11.753)  
Sec. 58-224. - Coordination with regional water planning groups. 
The service area of the city is located within the Houston Region (H), and the city has provided a copy of this plan to the Houston Region (H), Regional Water Planning Group. 
(Code 1996, § 11.754)  
Sec. 58-225. - Authorization. 
The city's mayor or his designee is hereby authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions of this plan upon determination that such implementation is necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare. The city's mayor or his designee shall have the authority to initiate or terminate drought or other water supply emergency response measures as described in this plan. 
(Code 1996, § 11.755)  
Sec. 58-226. - Application. 
The provisions of this plan shall apply to all persons, customers and property utilizing water provided by the city. The terms "persons" and "customers," as used in the plan, include individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations and all other legal entities. 
(Code 1996, § 11.756)  
Sec. 58-227. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aesthetic water use means water use for ornamental or decorative purposes such as fountains, reflecting pools and water gardens. 
Commercial and institutional water use means water use which is integral to the operations of commercial and nonprofit establishments and governmental entities such as retail establishments, hotels and motels, restaurants and office buildings. 
Conservation means those practices, techniques and technologies that reduce the consumption of water, reduce the loss or waste of water, improve the efficiency in the use of water or increase the recycling and reuse of water so that a supply is conserved and made available for future or alternative uses. 
Customer means any person, company or organization using water supplied by the city. 
Domestic water use means water use for personal needs or for household or sanitary purposes such as drinking, bathing, heating, cooking, sanitation or for cleaning a residence, business, industry or institution. 
Even number address means street addresses, box numbers or rural postal route numbers ending in 0, 2, 4, 6 or 8 and locations without addresses. 
Industrial water use means the use of water in processes designed to convert materials of lower value into forms having greater usability and value. 
Landscaping irrigation use means water used for the irrigation and maintenance of landscaped areas, whether publicly or privately owned, including residential and commercial lawns, gardens, golf courses, parks and rights-of-way and medians. 
Nonessential water use means water uses that are not essential or required for the protection of public health, safety and welfare, including: 
(1)	Irrigation of landscape areas, including parks, athletic fields and golf courses, except where otherwise provided under the plan; 
(2)	Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle; 
(3)	Use of water to wash down any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts or other hard-surfaced areas; 
(4)	Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire protection; 
(5)	Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street; 
(6)	Use of water to fill, refill or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools or Jacuzzi-type pools; 
(7)	Use of water in a fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes except where necessary to support aquatic life; 
(8)	Failure to repair a controllable leak within a reasonable period after having been given notice directing the repair of such leak; and 
(9)	Use of water from hydrants for construction purposes or any other purposes than fire fighting. 
Odd number address means street addresses, box numbers or rural postal route numbers ending in 1, 3, 5, 7 or 9. 
(Code 1996, § 11.757)  
Sec. 58-228. - Criteria for initiation and termination of drought response stages. 
The city's mayor and his designee shall monitor water supply and/or demand conditions on a daily basis and shall determine when conditions warrant initiation or termination of each stage of the plan, that is, when the specified triggers are reached. 
(1)	Stage 1 triggers: mild water shortage conditions. 
a.	Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be requested to voluntarily conserve water and adhere to the prescribed restrictions on certain water uses when: 
1.	The City of Houston's surface water treatment plants curtail production and/or delivery or if the distribution system is compromised. 
2.	Average daily water consumption reaches 85 percent of production capacity for three days. 
3.	The static level of the water wells begin to fall below normal operating conditions. 
4.	Weather conditions are to be considered in drought classification determinations. Predicted long cold or dry periods and conditions are to be considered in impact analysis. 
b.	Requirements for termination. Stage 1 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of three consecutive days. 
(2)	Stage 2 triggers: moderate water shortage conditions. 
a.	Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions on certain nonessential water uses provided in section 58-229 when: 
1.	The City of Houston's surface water treatment plants curtail production and/or delivery. 
2.	The static water level in the wells continues to decline. 
3.	Average daily water consumption reaches 100 percent of rated production capacity for a three-day period. 
4.	Storage capacity (water level) is not being maintained during period of 100 percent rated production period. 
5.	Weather conditions indicate that a mild drought will exist for several days. 
b.	Requirements for termination. Stage 2 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of three consecutive days. Upon termination of stage 2, stage 1 becomes operative. 
(3)	Stage 3 triggers: severe water shortage conditions. 
a.	Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions on certain nonessential water uses for stage 3 of the plan when: 
1.	The City of Houston's surface water treatment plants curtail production and/or delivery. 
2.	The average daily water consumption exceeds the systems capacity. 
3.	The average daily water consumption will not enable storage levels to be maintained. 
4.	System demand exceeds high service pump capacity. 
5.	Failure of the water well system or distribution system. 
6.	Water system is contaminated either accidentally or intentionally. 
7.	Water system fails from acts of God (tornados, hurricanes) or man. Severe condition is reached immediately upon detection. 
b.	Requirements for termination. Stage 3 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of three consecutive days. Upon termination of stage 3, stage 2 becomes operative. 
(4)	Stage 4 triggers: emergency water shortage conditions. 
a.	Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements and restrictions for stage 4 of the plan when the mayor or his designee determines that a water supply emergency exists based on: 
1.	Raw water from Lake Houston or Lake Livingston via the Coastal Water Authority (CWA) is contaminated and/or the raw water conveyance system is compromised. 
2.	City of Houston's surface water treatment plants are rendered inoperable due to acts of God such as hurricanes, tornadoes and major storms. 
3.	Major water main breaks or system failures occur, which causes unprecedented loss of capability to provide adequate water service. 
4.	Water system is contaminated either accidentally or intentionally (biologically or chemically). 
5.	Water system is rendered inoperable or unreliable due to terrorist activity. 
b.	Requirements for termination. Stage 4 of the plan may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of three consecutive days. 
(Code 1996, § 11.758)  
Sec. 58-229. - Drought response stages. 
The city's mayor or his designee shall monitor water supply and/or demand conditions on a daily basis and in accordance with the triggering criteria set forth in section 58-228, shall determine that a mild, moderate, severe or emergency water shortage condition exists and shall implement the following notification procedures: 
(1)	Notification. 
a.	Notification of the public. The city's mayor or his designee shall notify the public by means of: 
1.	Publication in a newspaper of general circulation. 
2.	Direct mail to each customer. 
3.	Public service announcements. 
4.	Signs posted in public places. 
5.	Take-home fliers from schools. 
b.	Additional notification. The city's mayor or his designee shall notify directly, or cause to be notified directly, the following individuals and entities based upon the respective drought stages: 
1.	Fire chief. 
2.	TCEQ (required when mandatory restrictions are imposed). 
3.	Major water users. 
4.	Critical water users, i.e., hospitals and schools. 
5.	Parks/street superintendents and public facilities managers. 
6.	City and/or county emergency management coordinators. 
(2)	Stage 1 response: mild water shortage conditions. 
a.	Goal. The goal of this stage is to achieve a voluntary ten percent reduction in total daily water consumption. 
b.	Supply management measures. Additional measures to be implemented by the city are: 
1.	Develop information center and designate information person. 
2.	Advise public of condition and publicize availability of information from center. 
3.	Encourage voluntary reduction of water use. 
4.	Contact commercial and industrial users and explain necessity for initiation of strict conservation methods. 
5.	Implementation of system oversight and make adjustments as required to meet changing conditions. 
6.	Discontinue flushing of water mains. 
c.	Voluntary water use restrictions. 
1.	Water customers are requested to voluntarily limit the irrigations of landscaped areas to Sundays and Thursdays for customers with an even number address, and Saturdays and Wednesdays for customers with an odd number address, and to irrigate landscapes only between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight on designated watering days. 
2.	All operations of the city shall adhere to water use restrictions prescribed in stage 2 of the plan. 
3.	Water customers are requested to practice water conservation and to minimize or discontinue water use for nonessential purposes. Water conservation information is available at the city hall. 
(3)	Stage 2 response: moderate water shortage conditions. 
a.	Goal. The goal of this stage is to achieve a 15 percent reduction in total daily water demand. 
b.	Supply management measures. Additional measures to be implemented by the city are: 
1.	City will reduce or discontinue flushing water mains. 
2.	Reduce or discontinue irrigation of landscape areas. 
3.	During winter months, request that customers insulate pipes rather than running their water to prevent freezing. 
c.	Water use restrictions. Under threat of penalty for violation, the following water use restrictions shall apply to all persons: 
1.	Irrigation of landscaped areas with hose-end sprinklers or automatic irrigation systems shall be limited to Sundays and Thursdays for customers with an even number street address, and Saturdays and Wednesdays for customers with an odd number street address, and irrigation of landscaped areas is further limited to the hours of 12:00 midnight until 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight on designated watering days. However, irrigation of landscaped areas is permitted at anytime if it is by means of a handheld hose, a faucet filled bucket or watering can of five gallons or less, or drip irrigation system. 
2.	Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle is prohibited except on designated watering days between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. Such washing, when allowed, shall be done with a handheld bucket or a handheld hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle for quick rinses. Vehicle washing may be done at any time on the immediate premises of a commercial car wash or commercial service station. Further, such washing may be exempted from these regulations if the health, safety and welfare of the public is contingent upon frequent vehicle cleansing, such as garbage trucks and vehicles used to transport food and perishables. 
3.	Use of water to fill, refill or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools, wading pools or Jacuzzi-type pools is prohibited except on designated watering days between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight. 
4.	Operation of any ornamental fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes is prohibited except where necessary to support aquatic life or where such fountains or ponds are equipped with a recirculation system. 
5.	Use of water from hydrants shall be limited to fire fighting, related activities or other activities necessary to maintain public health, safety and welfare, except that use of water from designated fire hydrants for construction purposes may be allowed under special permit from the city. 
6.	The following uses of water are defined as nonessential and are prohibited: 
(i)	Wash down of any sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, or other hard-surfaced areas. 
(ii)	Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire protection. 
(iii)	Use of water for dust control. 
(iv)	Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street. 
(v)	Failure to repair a controllable leak within a reasonable period after having been given notice directing the repair of such leak. 
(4)	Stage 3 response: severe water shortage conditions. 
a.	Goal. The goal of this stage is to achieve a 25 percent reduction in total daily consumption. 
b.	Supply management measures. Additional measures to be implemented by the city are: 
1.	Reduce or discontinue flushing water mains. 
2.	Reduce or discontinue irrigation of landscape areas. 
3.	During winter months, request that customers insulate pipes rather than running their water to prevent freezing. 
c.	Water use restrictions. All requirements of stage 2 shall remain in effect during stage 3 except: 
1.	Irrigation of landscaped areas shall be limited to designated watering days between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight and shall be by means of handheld hoses, handheld buckets, drip irrigation or permanently installed automatic sprinkler system only. The use of hose-end sprinklers is prohibited at all times. 
2.	Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle not occurring on the premises of a commercial car wash and commercial service stations and not in the immediate interest of public health, safety and welfare is prohibited. Further, such vehicle washing at commercial car washes and commercial service stations shall occur only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. and between 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
3.	The filling, refilling or adding of water to swimming pools, wading pools and Jacuzzi-type pools is prohibited. 
4.	No application for new, additional, expanded or increased-in-size water service connections, meters, service lines, pipeline extensions, mains or water service facilities of any kind shall be approved, and time limits for approval of such applications are hereby suspended for such time as this drought response stage or a higher-numbered stage shall be in effect. 
5.	The use of water for construction purposes from designated fire hydrants under special permit is to be discontinued. 
6.	All restaurants are prohibited from serving water to patrons except upon request. 
(5)	Stage 4 response: critical water shortage conditions. 
a.	Goal. The goal of this stage is to achieve a 35 percent reduction in total daily consumption. 
b.	Best management practices for supply management. Additional measures to be implemented by the city are: 
1.	Reduce or discontinue flushing water mains. 
2.	Reduce or discontinue irrigation of landscape areas. 
3.	During winter months, request that customers insulate pipes rather than running their water to prevent freezing. 
c.	Water use restrictions for reducing demand. All requirements of stage 2 and 3 shall remain in effect during stage 4 except: 
1.	Irrigation of landscaped areas shall be limited to designated watering days between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. and between 8:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight and shall be by means of handheld hoses, handheld buckets, or drip irrigation only. The use of hose-end sprinklers or permanently installed automatic sprinkler systems are prohibited at all times. 
2.	Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle not occurring on the premises of a commercial car wash and commercial service stations and not in the immediate interest of public health, safety, and welfare is prohibited. Further, such vehicle washing at commercial car washes and commercial service stations shall occur only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. and between 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
3.	The filling, refilling, or adding of water to swimming pools, wading pools, and Jacuzzi-type pools is prohibited. 
4.	Operation of any ornamental fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes is prohibited except where necessary to support aquatic life or where such fountains or ponds are equipped with a recirculation system. 
5.	No application for new, additional, expanded or increased-in-size water service connections, meters, service lines, pipeline extensions, mains or water service facilities of any kind shall be approved, and time limits for approval of such applications are hereby suspended for such time as this drought response stage or a higher-numbered stage shall be in effect. 
(6)	Stage 5 response: emergency water shortage conditions. 
a.	Goal. The goal of this stage is to achieve a 45 percent reduction in total daily water demand. 
b.	Best management practices for supply management. Additional measures to be implemented directly by the city are: 
1.	Reduced or discontinued flushing of water mains. 
2.	Reduced or discontinued irrigation of public landscaped areas. 
3.	Use of well water. 
4.	Use of wastewater effluent for washdown. 
c.	Water use restrictions for reducing demand. All requirements of stage 2, 3, and 4 shall remain in effect during stage 5 except: 
1.	Irrigation of landscaped areas is absolutely prohibited. 
2.	Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle is absolutely prohibited. 
(7)	Stage 6 response: water allocation. In the event that water shortage conditions threaten public health, safety and welfare, the mayor or his designee is hereby authorized to allocate water according to the following water allocation plan. 
a.	Single-family residential customers. 
1.	The allocation to residential water customers residing in a single-family dwelling shall be as follows: 
Persons per Household 	Gallons per Month 
1 or 2 	6,000 
3 or 4 	7,000 
5 or 6 	8,000 
7 or 8 	9,000 
9 or 10 	10,000 
11 or more 	12,000 
 
2.	The term "household" means the residential premises served by the customer's meter. The term "persons per household" includes only those persons currently physically residing at the premises and expected to reside there for the entire billing period. It shall be assumed that a particular customer's household is comprised of two persons unless the customer notifies the city of a greater number of persons per household on a form prescribed by the mayor. The mayor shall give his best effort to see that such forms are mailed, otherwise provided, or made available to every residential customer. If, however, a customer does not receive such a form, it shall be the customer's responsibility to go the city offices to complete and sign the form claiming more than two persons per household. New customers may claim more persons per household at the time of applying for water service on the form prescribed by the mayor. When the number of persons per household increases so as to place the customer in a different allocation category, the customer may notify the city on such form and the change will be implemented in the next practicable billing period. If the number of persons in a household is reduced, the customer shall notify the city in writing within two days. In prescribing the method for claiming more than two persons per household, the mayor shall adopt methods to ensure the accuracy of the claim. Any person who knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence falsely reports the number of persons in a household or fails to timely notify the city of a reduction in the number of persons in the household shall be fined not less than $200.00. 
3.	Residential water customers shall pay the following surcharges: 
(i)	$50.00 for the first 1,000 gallons over allocation. 
(ii)	$100.00 for the second 1,000 gallons over allocation. 
(iii)	$200.00 for the third 1,000 gallons over allocation. 
(iv)	$300.00 for each additional 1,000 gallons over allocation. 
4.	Surcharges shall be cumulative. 
b.	Master-metered multifamily residential customers. 
1.	The allocation to a customer billed from a master meter which jointly measures water to multiple permanent residential dwelling units (example: apartments, mobile homes) shall be allocated 6,000 gallons per month for each dwelling unit. It shall be assumed that such a customer's meter serves two dwelling units unless the customer notifies the city (COGP) (name of your water supplier) of a greater number on a form prescribed by the mayor (designated official). The mayor (designated official) shall give his best effort to see that such forms are mailed, otherwise provided, or made available to every such customer. If, however, a customer does not receive such a form, it shall be the customer's responsibility to go to the COGP (name of your water supplier) offices to complete and sign the form claiming more than two dwellings. A dwelling unit may be claimed under this provision whether it is occupied or not. New customers may claim more dwelling units at the time of applying for water service on the form prescribed the mayor (designated official). If the number of dwelling units served by a master meter is reduced, the customer shall notify the COGP (name of your water supplier) in writing within two dwelling units. The mayor (designated official) shall adopt methods to ensure the accuracy of the claim. Any person who knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence falsely reports the number of dwelling units served by a master meter or fails to timely notify the COGP (name of your water supplier) of a reduction in the number of person in a households shall be fined not less than $200.00. Customers billed from a master meter under this provision shall pay the following monthly surcharges: 
(i)	$50.00 for 1,000 gallons over allocation up through 1,000 gallons for each dwelling unit. 
(ii)	$100.00, thereafter for each additional $1,000.00 gallons over allocation up through a second 1,000 gallons for each dwelling unit. 
(iii)	$200.00, thereafter for each additional $1,000.00 gallons over allocation up through a third 1,000 gallons for each dwelling unit. 
(iv)	$300.00, thereafter for each additional 1,000 gallons over allocation. 
2.	Surcharges shall be cumulative. 
c.	Commercial customers. 
1.	A monthly water allocation shall be established by the mayor or his designee, for each nonresidential commercial customer other than an industrial customer who uses water for processing purposes. The nonresidential customer's allocation shall be approximately 75 percent of the customer's usage for corresponding month's billing period for the previous 12 months. If the customer's billing history is shorter than 12 months, the monthly average for the period for which there is a record shall be used for any monthly period for which no history exists. However, a customer, 75 percent of whose monthly usage is less than 6,000 gallons, shall be allocated 6,000 gallons. The mayor shall give his best effort to see that notice of each nonresidential customer's allocation is mailed to such customer. If, however, a customer does not receive such notice, it shall be the customer's responsibility to contact the city to determine the allocation. Upon request of the customer or at the initiative of the mayor, the allocation may be reduced or increased if: 
(i)	The designated period does not accurately reflect the customer's normal water usage; 
(ii)	One nonresidential customer agrees to transfer part of its allocation to another nonresidential customer; or 
(iii)	Other objective evidence demonstrates that the designated allocation is inaccurate under present conditions. 
2.	A customer may appeal an allocation established hereunder to the mayor and/or his designee. Nonresidential commercial customers shall pay the following surcharges. 
(i)	Customers whose allocation is 6,000 gallons through 10,000 gallons per month shall pay: 
A.	$100.00 per 1,000 gallons for the first 1,000 gallons over allocation. 
B.	$200.00 per 1,000 gallons for the second 1,000 gallons over allocation. 
C.	$300.00 per 1,000 gallons for the third 1,000 gallons over allocation. 
D.	$400.00 per 1,000 gallons for each additional 1,000 gallons over allocation. 
(ii)	Customers whose allocation is 10,001 gallons per month or more shall pay: 
A.	Five times the block rate for each 1,000 gallons in excess of the allocation up through five percent above allocation. 
B.	Ten times the block rate for each 1,000 gallons from five percent through ten percent above allocation. 
C.	15 times the block rate for each 1,000 gallons from ten percent through 15 percent above allocation. 
D.	20 times the block rate for each 1,000 gallons more than 15 percent above allocation. 
(iii)	The surcharges shall be cumulative. As used in this section, the term "block rate" means the charge to the customer per 1,000 gallons at the regular water rate schedule at the level of the customer's allocation. 
d.	Industrial customers. 
1.	A monthly water allocation shall be established by the mayor or his designee, for each industrial customer, which uses water for processing purposes. The industrial customer's allocation shall be approximately 90 percent of the customer's water usage baseline. 90 days after the initial imposition of the allocation for industrial customers, the industrial customer's allocation shall be further reduced to 85 percent of the customer's water usage baseline. The industrial customer's water use baseline will be computed on the average water use for the 12 month period ending prior to the date of implementation of stage 2 of the plan. If the industrial water customer's billing history is shorter than 12 months, the monthly average for the period for which there is a record shall be used for any monthly period for which no billing history exists. The mayor shall give his best effort to see that notice of each industrial customer's allocation is mailed to such customer. If, however, a customer does not receive such notice, it shall be the customer's responsibility to contact the city to determine the allocation. Upon request of the customer, or at the initiative of the mayor, the allocation may be reduced or increased if: 
(i)	The designated period does not accurately reflect the customer's normal water use because the customer had shutdown a major processing unit for repair or overhaul during the period; 
(ii)	The customer has added or is in the process of adding significant additional processing capacity; 
(iii)	The customer has previously implemented significant permanent water conservation measures such that the ability to further reduce water use is limited; 
(iv)	The customer agrees to transfer part of its allocation to another industrial customer; or 
(v)	Other objective evidence demonstrates that the designated allocation is inaccurate under present conditions. 
2.	A customer may appeal an allocation established hereunder to the mayor and/or his designee. Industrial customers shall pay the following surcharges. 
(i)	Customers whose allocation is 6,000 gallons through 10,000 gallons per month shall pay: 
A.	$100.00 per 1,000 gallons for the first 1,000 gallons over allocation. 
B.	$200.00 per 1,000 gallons for the second 1,000 gallons over allocation. 
C.	$300.00 per 1,000 gallons for the third 1,000 gallons over allocation. 
D.	$400.00 per 1,000 gallons for each additional 1,000 gallons over allocation. 
(ii)	Customers whose allocation is 10,001 gallons per month or more shall pay: 
A.	Five times the block rate for each 1,000 gallons in excess of the allocation up through five percent above allocation. 
B.	Ten times the block rate for each 1,000 gallons from five percent through ten percent above allocation. 
C.	15 times the block rate for each 1,000 gallons from ten percent through 15 percent above allocation. 
D.	20 times the block rate for each 1,000 gallons more than 15 percent above allocation. 
(iii)	The surcharges shall be cumulative. As used in this subsection (7)d, the term "block rate" means the charge to the customer per 1,000 gallons at the regular water rate schedule at the level of the customer's allocation. 
(Code 1996, § 11.759; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 58-230. - Enforcement. 
(a)	No person shall knowingly or intentionally allow the use of water from the city for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, governmental or any other purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of the plan, or in an amount in excess of that permitted by the drought response stage in effect at the time pursuant to action taken by the city's mayor or his designee, in accordance with provisions of the plan. 
(b)	Any person who violates the plan is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $200.00 each day that one or more of the provisions in the plan is violated. Each violation shall constitute a separate offense. If a person is convicted of three or more distinct violations of the plan, the mayor shall, upon due notice to the customer, be authorized to discontinue water service to the premises where such violations occurred. Services discontinued under such circumstances shall be restored only upon payment of a re-connection charge, hereby established at $200.00, and any other costs incurred by the city in discontinuing a service. In addition, suitable assurance must be given to the city's mayor that the same action shall not be repeated while the plan is in effect. Compliance with the plan may also be sought through injunctive relief in the city court. 
(c)	Any person, including a person classified as a water customer of the city, in apparent control of the property where a violation occurs or originates shall be presumed to be the violator, and proof that the violation occurred on the person's property shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the person in apparent control of the property committed the violation, but any such person shall have the right to show that he did not commit the violation. Parents shall be presumed to be responsible for violations of their minor children and proof that a violation committed by a child occurred on property within the parent's control shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that the parent committed the violation, but any such parent may be excused if he proves that he had previously directed the child not to use the water as it was used in violation of the plan and that the parent could not have reasonably known of the violation. 
(d)	Any employee of the city, police officer, or other city employee designated by the city's mayor may issue a citation to a person he reasonably believes to be in violation of this article. The citation shall be prepared in duplicate and shall contain the name and address of the alleged violator, if known, the offense charged, and shall direct him to appear in the designated municipal court on the date shown on the citation, which date shall not be less than three days or more than five days from the date the citation was issued. The alleged violator shall be served a copy of the citation. Service of the citation shall be complete upon delivery of the citation to the alleged violator, to an agent or employee of a violator, or to a person over 14 years of age who is a member of the violator's residence. The alleged violator shall appear in the municipal court designated on the citation to enter a plea of guilty or not guilty for the violation of the plan. If the alleged violator fails to appear in the municipal court, a warrant for his arrest may be issued. A summons to appear may be issued in lieu of an arrest warrant. These cases shall be expedited and given preferential setting in municipal court before all other cases. 
(Code 1996, § 11.760)  
Sec. 58-231. - Variances. 
(a)	The city's mayor or his designee may, in writing, grant temporary variance for existing water uses otherwise prohibited under the plan if it is determined that failure to grant such variance would cause an emergency condition adversely affecting the health, sanitation or fire protection for the public or the person requesting such variance and if one or more of the following conditions are met: 
(1)	Compliance with the plan cannot be technically accomplished during the duration of the water supply shortage or other condition for which the plan is in effect. 
(2)	Alternative methods can be implemented which will achieve the same level of reduction in water use. 
(b)	Persons requesting an exemption from the provisions of this article shall file a petition for variance with the city within five days after the plan or a particular drought response stage has been invoked. All petitions for variances shall be reviewed by the city's mayor or his designee and shall include the following: 
(1)	Name and address of the petitioner. 
(2)	Purpose of water use. 
(3)	Specific provisions of the plan from which the petitioner is requesting relief. 
(4)	Detailed statement as to how the specific provision of the plan adversely affects the petitioner or what damage or harm will occur to the petitioner or others if petitioner complies with this article. 
(5)	Description of the relief requested. 
(6)	Period of time for which the variance is sought. 
(7)	Alternative water use restrictions or other measures the petitioner is taking or proposes to take to meet the intent of the plan and the compliance date. 
(8)	Other pertinent information. 
(c)	Variances granted by the city shall be subject to the following conditions, unless waived or modified by the city's mayor or his designee: 
(1)	Variances granted shall include a timetable for compliance. 
(2)	Variances granted shall expire when the plan is no longer in effect, unless the petitioner has failed to meet specified requirements. 
(d)	No variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any violation of the plan occurring prior to the issuance of the variance. 
(Code 1996, § 11.761; Ord. No. 2009-02, 5-5-2009)  
Secs. 58-232—58-255. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FEE SYSTEM[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal Drainage Utility Systems Act, Texas Local Government Code § 552.041 et seq. 
 
Sec. 58-256. - City commission findings. 
The city commission has found and does find that: 
(1)	The city will establish a schedule of stormwater management fee against all real property in the proposed service area subject to charges under Texas Local Government Code ch. 552; 
(2)	The city will provide drainage for all real property in the proposed service area on payment of stormwater management fees, except real property exempted under Texas Local Government Code ch. 552; 
(3)	The city will offer drainage service on nondiscriminatory, reasonable and equitable terms; and 
(4)	As it relates to the requirements of Texas Local Government Code § 552.053, the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for residential structures in the city shall be defined as the installation of the initial tie-in to water or waste water service for the residential parcel. 
(Code 1996, § 11.801)  
Sec. 58-257. - Adoption of state law; creation of utility. 
The provisions of ch. 552, subch. C of the Texas Local Government Code are hereby adopted by the city. The city shall have full authority to operate a municipal drainage utility system pursuant to Subchapter C, Chapter 552, Texas Local Government Code; Article 11, section 5, of the Texas Constitution; and the Charter of the city. The drainage of the city is hereby declared to be a public utility. 
(Code 1996, § 11.802)  
Sec. 58-258. - Deposit not required. 
The city shall not require a deposit for stormwater management fees as a precondition to accepting surface flow into the drainage system. 
(Code 1996, § 11.803)  
Sec. 58-259. - Billing; delinquent charges. 
All billings, credits, exemptions and other procedures, including penalties for delinquent payments shall be as specified in Subchapter C of Chapter 552, Texas Local Government Code. In addition, such penalties and procedures for collection as are used for other utility billings by the city, where not in conflict with ch. 552, subch. C, Texas Local Government Code, are hereby adopted for use as rules of the stormwater management utility. 
(Code 1996, § 11.804)  
Sec. 58-260. - Schedule of stormwater management fees. 
Stormwater management fees shall be in accordance with a schedule of charges adopted by resolution of the city commission following a public hearing as required by Texas Local Government Code § 552.045. Said resolution shall be placed on file at the office of the city secretary following passage and made available upon request to the public. Such charges may be changed, adjusted or readjusted by city commission resolution as required and a current copy of such drainage charges shall be kept available at the office of the city secretary. 
(Code 1996, § 11.805)  
Sec. 58-261. - Appeals. 
(a)	Ordinary billing and payment disputes shall be subject to informal hearing and dispute resolution procedures used for other utility billing disputes by the city. Certain other matters may be appealed to the mayor or his designee as follows: 
(1)	Residential property billing can be appealed when the owner can offer proof that the property is unimproved and therefore not subject to the stormwater management. 
(2)	Any owner of nonresidential property who can offer proof that an error was made with regard to the category of land development and/or the size of the developed property can appeal such matters. 
(b)	The mayor or his designee shall render a written decision on such appeals within 30 days after receiving a written notice of appeal from the landowner. The decision of the mayor shall be final. 
(Code 1996, § 11.806; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 58-262. - Injunction; penalty. 
Any violation of this article may be enjoined by a civil proceeding filed in the name of the city in a court of competent jurisdiction in addition to such violation being a Class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding such amount as is provided by the general laws of the state for such offenses. 
(Code 1996, § 11.807; Ord. No. 2002-08, 11-5-2002)  
Secs. 58-263—58-287. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION TO THE STORMWATER SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 58-288. - Purpose; intent. 
The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city through the regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the stormwater system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)	Regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user. 
(2)	Prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(3)	Establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Code 1996, § 11.901)  
Sec. 58-289. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Authorized enforcement agency means employees or designees of the director of the municipal agency designated to enforce this article. 
Best management practices (BMPs) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
Clean Water Act (CWA) means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act or Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972 (33 USC 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Construction activity means activities subject to TPDES construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre or more. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Hazardous materials means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
Illicit connection means: 
(1)	Any drain or conveyance connecting an illicit discharge directly to the stormwater system, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the stormwater system, including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and washwater to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)	Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the stormwater system, except as exempted in section 58-293. 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES or TPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14). 
Nonstormwater discharge means any discharge to the stormwater system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to, paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coli form and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
Stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Stormwater pollution prevention plan means a document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. 
Stormwater system means the system or network of stormwater and surface water management facilities, including, but not limited to, inlets, conduits, manholes, channels, ditches, drainage easements, retention and detention basin, infiltration facilities and other components as well as all natural waterways. 
Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. 
(Code 1996, § 11.902)  
Sec. 58-290. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all water entering the stormwater system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency. 
(Code 1996, § 11.903)  
Sec. 58-291. - Responsibility for administration. 
The mayor or his designee shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the mayor to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency. 
(Code 1996, § 11.904; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 58-292. - Ultimate responsibility. 
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are minimum standards; therefore, this article does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants. 
(Code 1996, § 11.905)  
Sec. 58-293. - Discharge prohibitions. 
(a)	Prohibition of illicit discharges. 
(1)	No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal stormwater system or watercourses any materials, including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. 
(2)	The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illicit discharge to the stormwater system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
a.	The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this article: water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater and springs, uncontaminated groundwater infiltration, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensate, individual residential vehicle washing, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, pavement and exterior building wash water conducted without the use of detergents or other chemicals, swimming pools (if dechlorinated, typically less than one PPM chlorine), fire fighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants. 
b.	Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
c.	Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of the test. 
d.	The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES or TPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency or the state commission on environmental quality, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the stormwater system. 
(b)	Prohibition of illicit connections. 
(1)	The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. 
(2)	This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(3)	A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(Code 1996, § 11.906)  
Sec. 58-294. - Suspension of MS4 access. 
(a)	Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The mayor or his designee may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons. 
(b)	Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and hearing. 
(c)	Offense to reinstate MS4 without approval. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section without the prior approval of the authorized enforcement agency. 
(Code 1996, § 11.907; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 58-295. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES or TPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the mayor or his designee prior to allowing discharges to the MS4. 
(Code 1996, § 11.908; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 58-296. - Monitoring of discharges. 
(a)	Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction activity. 
(b)	Access to facilities. 
(1)	The mayor or his designee shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency. 
(2)	Facility operators shall allow the mayor or his designee ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of a NPDES or TPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. 
(3)	The mayor or his designee shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
(4)	The mayor or his designee has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)	Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the mayor or his designee and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator. 
(6)	Unreasonable delays in allowing the mayor or his designee access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES or TPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this article. 
(7)	If the mayor or his designee has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1996, § 11.909; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 58-297. - Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants by the use of best management practices. 
The city will adopt requirements identifying best management practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the stormwater system, or waters of the U.S. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES or TPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed in compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES and/or TPDES permit. 
(Code 1996, § 11.910)  
Sec. 58-298. - Watercourse protection. 
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. 
(Code 1996, § 11.911)  
Sec. 58-299. - Notification of spills. 
Not withstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the stormwater system, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the mayor or his designee within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. 
(Code 1996, § 11.912; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 58-300. - Enforcement. 
(a)	Notice of violation. Whenever the mayor or his designee finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require, without limitation: 
(1)	The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
(2)	The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
(3)	That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
(4)	The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
(5)	Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and 
(6)	The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
(b)	Abatement. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property are required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
(Code 1996, § 11.913; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 58-301. - Appeal of notice of violation. 
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the authorized enforcement agency. The notice of appeal must be received within two days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the mayor or his designee shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the mayor or their designee shall be final. 
(Code 1996, § 11.914; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 58-302. - Enforcement measures after appeal. 
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within ten days of the decision of the mayor or his designee upholding the decision, then representatives of the authorized enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(Code 1996, § 11.915; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 58-303. - Cost of abatement of the violation. 
Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within ten days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the mayor or his designee or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than 12 equal payments. Interest at the rate of six percent per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the first day following discovery of the violation. 
(Code 1996, § 11.916; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 58-304. - Injunctive relief. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, the authorized enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
(Code 1996, § 11.917)  
Sec. 58-305. - Compensatory action. 
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this article, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc. 
(Code 1996, § 11.918)  
Sec. 58-306. - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. 
(Code 1996, § 11.919; Ord. No. 2008-09, 9-16-2008)  
Secs. 58-307—58-330. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - STORMWATER DISCHARGES ASSOCIATED WITH INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY 
 
Sec. 58-331. - Applicability. 
This article applies to all facilities located within the city that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1001)  
Sec. 58-332. - Access to facilities. 
(a)	Facility operators shall allow the city, mayor or his designee ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES or TPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. 
(b)	The mayor or his designee shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the mayor or his designee to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
(c)	Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the mayor or his designee and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator. 
(d)	Unreasonable delays in allowing the mayor or his designee access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES or TPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the mayor or his designee reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this article. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1002; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 58-333. - Unpermitted discharges prohibited. 
A person who is the operator of a facility commits an offense if the person discharges, or causes to be discharged, stormwater associated with industrial activity without first having obtained a NPDES or TPDES permit. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1003)  
Sec. 58-334. - Submission of NOI to city. 
(a)	The operator of a facility, including construction sites, required to have a NPDES or TPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity shall submit a copy of the notice of intent (NOI) to the mayor or his designee at the same time the operator submits the original notice of intent to the EPA or the TCEQ, as applicable. 
(b)	The copy of the notice of intent may be delivered to the mayor or his designee either in person or by mail. A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility that is discharging stormwater associated with industrial activity without having submitted a copy of the notice of intent to the mayor or his designee. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1004; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 58-335. - Compliance with permit. 
A facility shall be operated in strict compliance with the requirements of its NPDES or TPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity. A person commits an offense if the person operates a facility in violation of a requirement of the facility's NPDES or TPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1005)  
Sec. 58-336. - Modification of stormwater pollution prevention plans. 
(a)	The mayor or his designee may require any operator of a facility to modify the facility's stormwater pollution prevention plan if, in the best professional judgment of the mayor or his designee, the SWPPP does not comply with the requirements of the facility's NPDES or TPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity. 
(b)	The deficiencies in a facility's SWPPP will be made in writing, and the mayor or his designee will give the facility operator a reasonable amount of time to make the necessary changes in the SWPPP. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1006; Ord. No. 2008-08, 9-16-2008; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Secs. 58-337—58-360. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL 
 
Sec. 58-361. - Introduction; purpose. 
(a)	During the construction process, soil is the most vulnerable to erosion by wind and water. This eroded soil endangers water resources by reducing water quality, and causing the silting of aquatic habitat for fish and other desirable species. Eroded soil also necessitates repair of sewers and ditches, and the dredging of waterways. In addition, clearing grading during construction causes the loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and aquatic habitat, and to provide a healthy living environment for citizens of the city. 
(b)	As a result, the purpose of this local regulation is to safeguard persons, protect property, prevent damage to the environment and promote the public welfare by guiding, regulating, and controlling the design, construction, use, and maintenance of any development or other activity which disturbs or breaks the topsoil or results in the movement of earth on land in the city. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1101)  
Sec. 58-362. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Clearing means any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover. 
Commencement of construction means the initial disturbance of soils associated with clearing, grading, excavating activities, or other similar activities. 
Drainageway means any channel that conveys surface runoff throughout the site. 
Erosion and sediment control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during construction activities. 
Erosion control means measures that prevent erosion. 
Grading means excavation or fill of material, including the resulting conditions thereof. 
Perimeter control means a barrier that prevents sediment from leaving a site either by filtering sediment-laden runoff or diverting it to a sediment trap or basin. 
Phasing means clearing a parcel of land in distinct phases, with the stabilization of each phase before the clearing of the next. 
Sediment control means measures that prevent eroded sediment from leaving the site. 
Site means a parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where grading work is performed as a single unified operation. 
Site development permit means a permit issued by the city for the construction or alteration of ground improvements and structures for the control of erosion, runoff and grading. 
Stabilization means the use of practices that prevent exposed soil from eroding. 
Watercourse means any body of water, including, but not limited to, lakes, ponds, rivers, streams, and bodies of water which delineated by the city. 
Waterway means a channel that directs surface runoff to a watercourse, or to the public storm drain system. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1102)  
Sec. 58-363. - Permits. 
(a)	No person shall be granted a site development permit for land disturbing activity which would require the uncovering of one acre without the approval of an erosion and sediment control plan by the city, mayor or his designee. Any person subject to a construction activity NPDES or TPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the mayor or his designee prior to allowing discharges to the MS4. 
(b)	No site development permit is required for the following activities: 
(1)	Any emergency activity which is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property or natural resources. 
(2)	Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a permitted main or accessory use. 
(c)	Each application shall bear the name and address of the owner or developer of the site and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant, together with the name of the applicant's principal contact at such firm, and shall be accompanied by a filing fee. 
(d)	Each application shall include a statement that any land clearing, construction, or development involving the movement of earth shall be in accordance with the erosion and sediment control plan, and that a site operator shall be on site on all days where construction or grading activity takes place. 
(e)	The applicant will be required to file with the city, mayor or his designee a faithful performance bond, letter of credit, or other improvement security in an amount deemed sufficient by the city, mayor or his designee to cover all costs of improvements, landscaping, and maintenance of improvements for such period as specified by the city, mayor or his designee for engineering and inspection costs to cover the cost of failure or repair of improvements installed on the site. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1103; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 58-364. - Review and approval. 
(a)	The city, mayor or his designee will review each application for a site development permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this local regulation. Within ten days after receiving an application, the city, mayor or his designee shall, in writing: 
(1)	Approve the permit application; 
(2)	Approve the permit application subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this regulation, and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or 
(3)	Disapprove the permit application, indicating the deficiencies and the procedure for submitting a revised application and/or submission. 
(b)	Failure of the city, mayor or his designee to act on original or revised applications within 30 days of receipt shall authorize the applicant to proceed in accordance with the plans as filed unless such time is extended by agreement between the applicant and the city, mayor or his designee. Pending preparation and approval of a revised plan, development activities shall be allowed to proceed in accordance with conditions established by the city, mayor or his designee. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1104; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 58-365. - Erosion and sediment control plan. 
(a)	The erosion and sediment control plan shall include a natural resources map identifying soils and resources protected under other chapters of this Code. This map should be at a scale no smaller than one inch equals 100 feet. 
(b)	A sequence of construction of the development site, including stripping and clearing, rough grading, construction of utilities, infrastructure, and buildings, and final grading and landscaping. Sequencing shall identify the expected date on which clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, and the sequence of clearing, installation of temporary erosion and sediment measures, and establishment of permanent vegetation. 
(c)	All erosion and sediment control measures necessary to meet the objectives of this local regulation throughout all phases of construction and permanently, after completion of development of the site. Depending upon the complexity of the project, the drafting of intermediate plans may be required at the close of each season. 
(d)	Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and fertilizer application, and kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent vegetative control measures. 
(e)	Provisions for maintenance of control facilities, including easements and estimates of the cost of maintenance. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1105)  
Sec. 58-366. - Modifications to the plan. 
(a)	Major amendments of the erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted to the city, mayor or his designee and shall be processed and approved, or disapproved, in the same manner as the original plans. 
(b)	Field modifications of a minor nature may be authorized by the city, mayor or his designee by written authorization to the permittee. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1106; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 58-367. - Design requirements. 
Grading, erosion control practices, sediment control practices, and waterway crossings shall meet the design criteria set forth in the most recent version of the stormwater design manual, and shall be adequate to prevent transportation of sediment from the site to the satisfaction of the city, mayor or his designee. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1107; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 58-368. - Clearing and grading. 
(a)	Clearing and grading of natural resources and wetlands shall not be permitted except when in compliance with all other chapters of this Code. 
(b)	Clearing techniques that retain natural vegetation and retain natural drainage patterns, as described in the stormwater design manual shall be used to the satisfaction of the city, mayor or his designee. 
(c)	Phasing shall be required on all sites disturbing greater than 30 acres, with the size of each phase to be established at plan review and as approved by the city, mayor or his designee. 
(d)	Clearing, except that necessary to establish sediment control devices, shall not begin until all sediment control devices have been installed and have been stabilized. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1108; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 58-369. - Erosion control. 
(a)	Soil must be initiated as soon as practicable in portions of the site where clearing have temporarily or permanently ceased, but stabilized no more than 14 days after clearing or inactivity in construction. 
(b)	If vegetative erosion control methods, such as seeding, have not become established within two weeks, the city, mayor or his designee, may require that the site be reseeded, or that a nonvegetative option be employed. 
(c)	On steep slopes or in drainageways, special techniques that meet the design criteria outlined in the stormwater design manual, shall be used to ensure stabilization. 
(d)	Soil stockpiles must be stabilized or covered at the end of each work day. 
(e)	At the close of the construction season, the entire site must be stabilized, using a heavy mulch layer, or another method that does not require germination to control erosion. 
(f)	Techniques shall be employed to prevent the blowing of dust or sediment from the site. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1109; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 58-370. - Sediment controls. 
(a)	Sediment controls shall be provided in the form of settling basins or sediment traps or tanks, and perimeter controls. 
(b)	Where possible, settling basins shall be designed in a manner that allows adaptation to provide long-term stormwater management. 
(c)	Adjacent properties shall be protected by the use of a vegetated buffer strip, in combination with perimeter controls. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1110)  
Sec. 58-371. - Waterways and watercourses. 
(a)	When a wet watercourse must be crossed regularly during construction, a temporary stream crossing shall be provided, and an approval obtained from the proper regulatory agencies. 
(b)	When in-channel work is conducted, the channel shall be stabilized before, during and after work. 
(c)	All on-site stormwater conveyance channels shall be designed according to the criteria outlined in the stormwater design manual. 
(d)	Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion must be provided at the outlets of all pipes and paved channels. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1111)  
Sec. 58-372. - Construction site access. 
(a)	A temporary access road shall be provided at all sites. 
(b)	Other measures may be required at the discretion of the city, mayor or his designee in order to ensure that sediment is not tracked onto public streets by construction vehicles, or washed into storm drains. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1112; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 58-373. - Inspection. 
(a)	The city, mayor or his designee shall make inspections as hereinafter required and shall either approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee wherein the work fails to comply with the erosion and sediment control plan as approved. Plans for grading, stripping, excavating, and filling work bearing the stamp of approval of the city, mayor or his designee shall be maintained at the site during the progress of the work. In order to obtain inspections, the permittee shall notify the city, mayor or his designee at least two working days before the following: 
(1)	Start of construction. 
(2)	Erosion and sediment control measures are in place and stabilized. 
(3)	Site clearing has been completed. 
(4)	Rough grading has been completed. 
(5)	Final grading has been completed. 
(6)	Final landscaping. 
(b)	The permittee or his agent shall make regular inspections of all control measures in accordance with the inspection schedule outlined on the approved erosion and sediment control plan. The purpose of such inspections will be to determine the overall effectiveness of the control plan, and the need for additional control measures. All inspections shall be documented in written form and submitted to the city, mayor or his designee at the time interval specified in the approved permit. 
(c)	The city, mayor or his designee shall enter the property of the applicant as deemed necessary to make regular inspections to ensure the validity of the reports filed under this article. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1113; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Sec. 58-374. - Enforcement. 
(a)	Stop work order; revocation of permit. In the event that any person holding a site development permit pursuant to this article violates the terms of the permit, or implements site development in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety or persons residing or working in the neighborhood or development site so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the city, mayor or his designee may suspend or revoke the site development permit. 
(b)	Violation and penalties. No person shall construct, enlarge, alter, repair, or maintain any grading, excavation, or fill, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any terms of this article. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each day during which any violation of any of the provisions of this article is committed, continued or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense. Upon conviction of any such violation, such person, partnership, or corporation shall be punished by a fine for each offense. In addition to any other penalty authorized by this section, any person, partnership, or corporation convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article shall be required to bear the expense of such restoration. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1114; Ord. No. 2008-07, 9-16-2008; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Secs. 58-375—58-391. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - POST CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER RUNOFF 
 
Sec. 58-392. - Findings of fact. 
(a)	It is hereby determined that: 
(1)	Land development projects and associated increases in impervious cover alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition; 
(2)	This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of waterborne pollutants; and 
(3)	Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff from development sites. 
(b)	Therefore, the city establishes this set of water quality and quantity policies applicable to all surface waters to provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation. It is determined that the regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development projects and other construction activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1201)  
Sec. 58-393. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing in watersheds within this jurisdiction. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)	Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from any development in order to reduce flooding, silting, increases in stream temperature, and stream bank erosion and maintain the integrity of stream channels. 
(2)	Minimize increases in nonpoint source pollution caused by stormwater runoff from development which would otherwise degrade local water quality. 
(3)	Minimize the total annual volume of surface water runoff which flows from any specific site during and following development to not exceed the predevelopment hydrologic regime to the maximum extent practicable. 
(4)	Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management controls and to ensure that these management controls are properly maintained and pose no threat to public safety. 
(Code 1996, § 11. 1202)  
Sec. 58-394. - Applicability. 
(a)	This article shall be applicable to all subdivision or site plan applications, unless eligible for an exemption or granted a waiver by the city, city manager or his designee under the specifications of section 58-399. This article also applies to land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development that meets the following applicability criteria, even though multiple separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. In addition, all plans must also be reviewed by local environmental protection officials to ensure that established water quality standards will be maintained during and after development of the site and that post construction runoff levels are consistent with any local and regional watershed plans. 
(b)	To prevent the adverse impacts of stormwater runoff, the city has developed a set of performance standards that must be met at new development sites. These standards apply to any construction activity disturbing one or more acres of land. The following activities may be exempt from these stormwater performance criteria: 
(1)	Additions or modifications to existing single-family structures. 
(2)	Developments that do not disturb more than one acre of land, provided they are not part of a larger common development plan. 
(3)	Repairs to any stormwater treatment practice deemed necessary by the city, city manager or his designee. 
(c)	When a site development plan is submitted that qualifies as a redevelopment project, decisions on permitting and on-site stormwater requirements shall be governed by special stormwater sizing criteria found in the current stormwater design manual. This criterion is dependent on the amount of impervious area created by the redevelopment and its impact on water quality. Final authorization of all redevelopment projects will be determined after a review by the city, city manager or his designee. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1203)  
Sec. 58-395. - Compatibility with other permit requirements. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1204)  
Sec. 58-396. - Development of a stormwater design manual. 
(a)	The city may furnish additional policy, criteria and information, including specifications and standards, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article and may provide such information in the form of a stormwater design manual. 
(b)	This manual will include a list of acceptable stormwater treatment practices, including the specific design criteria and operation and maintenance requirements for each stormwater practice. The manual may be updated and expanded from time to time, at the discretion of the local review authority, based on improvements in engineering, science, monitoring and local maintenance experience. Stormwater treatment practices that are designed and constructed in accordance with these design and sizing criteria will be presumed to meet the minimum water quality performance standards. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1205)  
Sec. 58-397. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accelerated erosion means erosion caused by development activities that exceeds the natural processes by which the surface of the land is worn away by the action of water, wind, or chemical action. 
Applicant means a property owner or agent of a property owner who has filed an application for a stormwater management permit. 
Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and occupying more than 100 square feet of area. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Dedication means the deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for general public use. 
Detention means the temporary storage of storm runoff in a stormwater management practice with the goals of controlling peak discharge rates and providing gravity settling of pollutants. 
Detention facility means a detention basin or alternative structure designed for the purpose of temporary storage of stream flow or surface runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer means a person who undertakes land disturbance activities. 
Drainage easement means a legal right granted by a landowner to a grantee allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes. 
Erosion and sediment control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during construction activities. 
Fee in lieu means a payment of money in place of meeting all or part of the stormwater performance standards required by this article. 
Hotspot means an area where land use or activities generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a natural resource conservation service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from A soils, with high permeability and little runoff production, to D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Impervious cover means those surfaces that cannot effectively infiltrate rainfall (e.g., building rooftops, pavement, sidewalks, driveways, etc.). 
Industrial stormwater permit means a state pollutant discharge elimination system permit issued to a commercial industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater into the subsoil. 
Infiltration facility means any structure or device designed to infiltrate retained water to the subsurface. These facilities may be above grade or below grade. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Land disturbance activity means any activity which changes the volume or peak flow discharge rate of rainfall runoff from the land surface. This may include the grading, digging, cutting, scraping, or excavating of soil, placement of fill materials, paving, construction, substantial removal of vegetation, or any activity which bares soil or rock or involves the diversion or piping of any natural or manmade watercourse. 
Landowner means the legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding proprietary rights in the land. 
Maintenance agreement means a legally recorded document that acts as a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance of stormwater management practices. 
Nonpoint source pollution means pollution from any source other than from any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include, but not be limited to, pollutants from agricultural, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management measure located outside the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land development activity. 
Offset fee means a monetary compensation paid to a local government for failure to meet pollutant load reduction targets. 
On-site facility means a stormwater management measure located within the subject property boundary described in the permit application for land development activity. 
Recharge means the replenishment of underground water reserves. 
Redevelopment means any construction, alteration or improvement exceeding one acre in area where existing land use is high density commercial, industrial, institutional or multifamily residential. 
Stop work order means an order issued which requires that all construction activity on a site be stopped. 
Stormwater management means the use of structural or nonstructural practices that are designed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes, peak flow discharge rates and detrimental changes in stream temperature that affect water quality and habitat. 
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for an existing development site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater runoff means flow on the surface of the ground, resulting from precipitation. 
Stormwater treatment practices (STPs) means measures, either structural or nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective, practical means of preventing or reducing point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to stormwater runoff and water bodies. 
Water quality volume (WQv) means the storage needed to capture and treat 90 percent of the average annual stormwater runoff volume. Numerically (WQv) will vary as a function of long-term rainfall statistical data. 
Watercourse means a permanent or intermittent stream or other body of water, either natural or manmade, which gathers or carries surface water. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1206)  
Sec. 58-398. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
(a)	Permit required. No landowner or land operator shall receive any of the building, grading or other land development permits required for land disturbance activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(b)	Application requirements. 
(1)	Unless specifically excluded by this article, any landowner or operator desiring a permit for a land disturbance activity shall submit to the city, city manager or his designee a permit application on a form provided for that purpose. 
(2)	Unless otherwise exempted by this article, a permit application must be accompanied by the following in order for the permit application to be considered: a stormwater management concept plan, a maintenance agreement, and a nonrefundable permit review fee. 
(3)	The stormwater management plan shall be prepared to meet the requirements of section 58-402, the maintenance agreement shall be prepared to meet the requirements of section 58-404, and fees shall be those established by the city. 
(c)	Application review fees. The fee for review of any land development application shall be based on the amount of land to be disturbed at the site, and the fee structure shall be established by the city. All of the monetary contributions shall be credited to a local budgetary category to support local plan review, inspection and program administration, and shall be made prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
(d)	Application procedure. 
(1)	Applications for land disturbance activity permits must be filed with the city, city manager or his designee on any regular business day. 
(2)	A copy of this permit application shall be forwarded to the city, the city manager or his designee for review. 
(3)	Permit applications shall include the following: two copies of the stormwater management concept plan, two copies of the maintenance agreement, and any required review fees. 
(4)	Within two business days of the receipt of a complete permit application, including all documents as required by this article, the city, city manager or his designee shall inform the applicant whether the application, plan and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
(5)	If the permit application, stormwater management plan or maintenance agreement are disapproved, the applicant may revise the stormwater management plan or agreement. If additional information is submitted, the city, city manager or his designee shall have two business days from the date the additional information is received to inform the applicant that the plan and maintenance agreement are either approved or disapproved. 
(6)	If the permit application, final stormwater management plan and maintenance agreement are approved by the city, city manager or his designee, all appropriate land disturbance activity permits shall be issued. 
(e)	Permit duration. Permits issued under this section shall be valid from the date of issuance through the date the city, city manager or his designee notifies the permit holder that all stormwater management practices have passed the final inspection required under permit condition. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1207)  
Sec. 58-399. - Waivers to stormwater management requirements. 
(a)	Waivers for providing stormwater management. 
(1)	Every applicant shall provide for stormwater management as required by this article, unless a written request is filed to waive this requirement. Requests to waive the stormwater management plan requirements shall be submitted to the city, city manager or his designee for approval. 
(2)	The minimum requirements for stormwater management may be waived in whole or in part upon written request of the applicant, provided that at least one of the following conditions applies: 
a.	It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely to impair attainment of the objectives of this article. 
b.	Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of stormwater discharges have been established in a stormwater management plan that has been approved by the city, city manager or his designee and the implementation of the plan is required by local ordinance. 
c.	Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility. The off-site facility is required to be in place, to be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there is a legally obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the stormwater practice. 
d.	The city, city manager or his designee finds that meeting the minimum on-site management requirements is not feasible due to the natural or existing physical characteristics of a site. 
e.	Nonstructural practices will be used on the site to reduce: 
1.	The generation of stormwater from the site; 
2.	The size and cost of stormwater storage; and 
3.	The pollutants generated at the site. 
These nonstructural practices will be explained in detail in the stormwater design manual and the amount of credit available for using such practices shall be determined by the city, city manager or his designee. 
(3)	In instances where one of the conditions in subsection (a)(2) of this section applies, the city, city manager or his designee may grant a waiver from strict compliance with these stormwater management provisions, as long as acceptable mitigation measures are provided. However, to be eligible for a variance, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city, city manager or his designee that the variance will not result in the following impacts to downstream waterways: 
a.	Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, and other structures; 
b.	Degradation of biological functions or habitat; 
c.	Accelerated stream bank or streambed erosion or silting; or 
d.	Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property. 
(4)	Furthermore, where compliance with minimum requirements for stormwater management is waived, the applicant will satisfy the minimum requirements by meeting one of the mitigation measures selected by the city, city manager or his designee. Mitigation measures may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.	The purchase and donation of privately owned lands, or the grant of an easement to be dedicated for preservation. These lands should be located adjacent to the stream corridor in order to provide permanent buffer areas to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; 
b.	The creation of a stormwater management facility or other drainage improvements on previously developed properties, public or private, that currently lack stormwater management facilities designed and constructed in accordance with the purposes and standards of this article; and 
c.	Monetary contributions (fee-in-lieu) to fund stormwater management activities such as research and studies (e.g., regional wetland delineation studies, stream monitoring studies for water quality and monitoring of stormwater management practices). 
(b)	Fee in lieu of stormwater management practices. 
(1)	Where the city, city manager or his designee waives all or part of the minimum stormwater management requirements, or where the waiver is based on the provision of adequate stormwater facilities provided downstream of the proposed development, the applicant shall be required to pay a fee in an amount as determined by the city, city manager or his designee. 
(2)	When an applicant obtains a waiver of the required stormwater management, the monetary contribution required shall be in accordance with a fee schedule (unless the developer and the stormwater authority agree on a greater alternate contribution) established by the city, city manager or his designee and based on the cubic feet of storage required for stormwater management of the development in question. All of the monetary contributions shall be credited to an appropriate capital improvements program project, and shall be made by the developer prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
(c)	Dedication of land. In lieu of a monetary contribution, an applicant may obtain a waiver of the required stormwater management by entering into an agreement with the city, city manager or his designee or the granting of an easement or the dedication of land by the applicant, to be used for the construction of an off-site stormwater management facility. The agreement shall be entered into by the applicant and the city, city manager or his designee prior to the recording of plats or, if no record plat is required, prior to the issuance of the building permit. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1208)  
Sec. 58-400. - General performance criteria for stormwater management. 
Unless judged by the city, city manager or his designee to be exempt or granted a waiver, the following performance criteria shall be addressed for stormwater management at all sites: 
(1)	All site designs shall establish stormwater management practices to control the peak flow rates of stormwater discharge associated with specified design storms and reduce the generation of stormwater. These practices should seek to utilize pervious areas for stormwater treatment and to infiltrate stormwater runoff from driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas to the maximum extent practical to provide treatment for both water quality and quantity. 
(2)	All stormwater runoff generated from new development shall not discharge untreated stormwater directly into a jurisdictional wetland or local water body without adequate treatment. Where such discharges are proposed, the impact of the proposal on wetland functional values shall be assessed using a method acceptable to the city, city manager or his designee. In no case shall the impact on functional values be any less than allowed by the Army Corp of Engineers (ACE) or the state commission on environmental quality responsible for natural resources. 
(3)	For new development, structural stormwater treatment practices shall be designed to remove 90 percent of the average annual post development total suspended solids load (TSS). It is presumed that a STP complies with this performance standard if it is: 
a.	Sized to capture the prescribed water quality volume (WQv). 
b.	Designed according to the specific performance criteria outlined in the local stormwater design manual. 
c.	Constructed properly, and maintained regularly. 
(4)	To protect stream channels from degradation, specific channel protection criteria shall be provided as prescribed in the stormwater manual. 
(5)	Stormwater discharges to critical areas with sensitive resources may be subject to additional performance criteria, or may need to utilize or restrict certain stormwater management practices. 
(6)	Certain industrial sites are required to prepare and implement a stormwater pollution prevention plan, and shall file a notice of intent (NOI) under the provisions of the Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (TPDES) general permit. The stormwater pollution prevention plan requirement applies to both existing and new industrial sites. 
(7)	Stormwater discharges from land uses or activities with higher potential pollutant loadings, known as hotspots, may require the use of specific structural STPs and pollution prevention practices. 
(8)	Prior to design, applicants are required to consult with the city, city manager or his designee to determine if they are subject to additional stormwater design requirements. 
(9)	The calculations for determining peak flows as found in the stormwater design manual shall be used for sizing all stormwater management practices. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1209)  
Sec. 58-401. - Design criteria. 
(a)	Minimum control requirements. 
(1)	All stormwater management practices will be designed so that the specific storm frequency storage volumes (e.g., recharge, water quality, channel protection, ten-year, 100-year) as identified in the stormwater design manual are met, unless the city, city manager or his designee grants the applicant a waiver or the applicant is exempt from such requirements. 
(2)	In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the city, city manager or his designee reserves the right to impose any and all additional requirements deemed necessary to control the volume, timing, and rate of runoff. 
(b)	Site design feasibility. 
(1)	Stormwater management practices for a site shall be chosen based on the physical conditions of the site. In addition, the following factors should be considered: 
a.	Topography. 
b.	Maximum drainage area. 
c.	Depth to water table. 
d.	Soils. 
e.	Slopes. 
f.	Terrain. 
g.	Head. 
h.	Location in relation to environmentally sensitive features or ultra-urban areas. 
(2)	Applicants shall consult the stormwater design manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting a stormwater management practice. 
(c)	Conveyance issues. 
(1)	All stormwater management practices shall be designed to convey stormwater to allow for the maximum removal of pollutants and reduction in flow velocities. This shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.	Maximizing of flow paths from inflow points to outflow points. 
b.	Protection of inlet and outfall structures. 
c.	Elimination of erosive flow velocities. 
d.	Providing of underdrain systems, where applicable. 
(2)	The stormwater design manual shall provide detailed guidance on the requirements for conveyance for each of the approved stormwater management practices. 
(d)	Pretreatment requirements. Every stormwater treatment practice shall have an acceptable form of water quality pretreatment, in accordance with the pretreatment requirements found in the stormwater design manual. Certain stormwater treatment practices, as specified in the stormwater design manual, are prohibited even with pretreatment in the following circumstances: 
(1)	Stormwater is generated from highly contaminated source areas known as hotspots. 
(2)	Stormwater is carried in a conveyance system that also carries contaminated, nonstormwater discharges. 
(3)	Stormwater is being managed in a designated groundwater recharge area. 
(4)	Certain geologic conditions exist that prohibit the proper pretreatment of stormwater. 
(e)	Treatment/geometry conditions. All stormwater management practices shall be designed to capture and treat stormwater runoff according to the specifications outlined in the stormwater design manual. These specifications will designate the water quantity and quality treatment criteria that apply to an approved stormwater management practice. 
(f)	Landscaping plans required. All stormwater management practices must have a landscaping plan detailing both the vegetation to be in the practice and how and who will manage and maintain this vegetation. This plan must be prepared by a registered landscape architect or soil conservation district. 
(g)	Maintenance agreements. All stormwater treatment practices shall have an enforceable operation and maintenance agreement to ensure the system functions as designed. This agreement will include any and all maintenance easements required to access and inspect the stormwater treatment practices, and to perform routine maintenance as necessary to ensure proper functioning of the stormwater treatment practice. In addition, a legally binding covenant specifying the parties responsible for the proper maintenance of all stormwater treatment practices shall be secured prior to issuance of any permits for land disturbance activities. 
(h)	Nonstructural stormwater practices. The use of nonstructural stormwater treatment practices is encouraged in order to minimize the reliance on structural practices. Credit in the form of reductions in the amount of stormwater that must be managed can be earned through the use of nonstructural practices that reduce the generation of stormwater from the site. These nonstructural practices will be explained in detail in the stormwater design manual and applicants wishing to obtain credit for use of nonstructural practices must ensure that these practices are documented and remain unaltered by subsequent property owners. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1210)  
Sec. 58-402. - Requirements for plan approval. 
(a)	Stormwater management plan required for all developments. 
(1)	No application for development will be approved unless it includes a stormwater management plan detailing in concept how runoff and associated water quality impacts resulting from the development will be controlled or managed. This plan must be prepared by an individual approved by the city, city manager or his designee and must indicate whether stormwater will be managed on-site or off-site and, if on-site, the general location and type of practices. 
(2)	The stormwater management plan shall be referred for comment to all other interested agencies, and any comments must be addressed in a final stormwater management plan. This final plan must be signed by a licensed professional engineer (PE), who will verify that the design of all stormwater management practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist found in the stormwater design manual. No building, grading, or sediment control permit shall be issued until a satisfactory final stormwater management plan, or a waiver thereof, shall have undergone a review and been approved by the city, city manager or his designee after determining that the plan or waiver is consistent with the requirements of this article. 
(b)	Stormwater management concept plan requirements. A stormwater management concept plan shall be required with all permit applications and will include sufficient information (e.g., maps, hydrologic calculations, etc.) to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the project site, the potential impacts of all proposed development of the site, both present and future, on the water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of the measures proposed for managing stormwater generated at the project site. The intent of this conceptual planning process is to determine the type of stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, and ensure adequate planning for management of stormwater runoff from future development. To accomplish this goal the following information shall be included in the concept plan: 
(1)	A map indicating the location of existing and proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural stormwater management and sediment control facilities. The map will also clearly show proposed land use with tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to various uses; drainage patterns; locations of utilities, roads and easements; the limits of clearing and grading; a written description of the site plan; and justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be required. 
(2)	Sufficient engineering analysis to show that the proposed stormwater management measures are capable of controlling runoff from the site in compliance with this article and the specifications of the stormwater design manual. 
(3)	A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project and a description of the watershed and its relation to the project site. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site. Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
(4)	A written description of the required maintenance burden for any proposed stormwater management facility. 
(5)	The city, city manager or his designee may also require a concept plan to consider the maximum development potential of a site under existing zoning, regardless of whether the applicant presently intends to develop the site to its maximum potential. For development or redevelopment occurring on a previously developed site, an applicant shall be required to include within the stormwater concept plan measures for controlling existing stormwater runoff discharges from the site in accordance with the standards of this article to the maximum extent practicable. 
(c)	Final stormwater management plan requirements. After review of the stormwater management concept plan, and modifications to that plan as deemed necessary by the city, city manager or his designee, a final stormwater management plan must be submitted for approval. The final stormwater management plan, in addition to the information from the concept plan, shall include all of the information required in the final stormwater management plan checklist found in the stormwater design manual. This includes: 
(1)	Contact information. The name, address, and telephone number of all persons having a legal interest in the property and the tax reference number and parcel number of the property or properties affected. 
(2)	Topographic base map. A one-inch equals 200 feet topographic base map of the site which extends a minimum of 100 feet beyond the limits of the proposed development and indicates existing surface water drainage including streams, ponds, culverts, ditches, and wetlands; current land use including all existing structures; locations of utilities, roads, and easements; and significant natural and manmade features not otherwise shown. 
(3)	Calculations. Hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the pre-development and post-development conditions for the design storms specified in this article. Such calculations shall include: 
a.	Description of the design storm frequency, intensity and duration; 
b.	Time of concentration; 
c.	Soil curve numbers or runoff coefficients; 
d.	Peak runoff rates and total runoff volumes for each watershed area; 
e.	Infiltration rates, where applicable; 
f.	Culvert capacities; 
g.	Flow velocities; 
h.	Data on the increase in rate and volume of runoff for the design storms referenced in the stormwater design manual; and 
i.	Documentation of sources for all computation methods and field test results. 
(4)	Soils information. If a stormwater management control measure depends on the hydrologic properties of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall be determined based on what is needed to determine the suitability and distribution of soil types present at the location of the control measure. 
(5)	Maintenance and repair plan. The design and planning of all stormwater management facilities shall include detailed maintenance and repair procedures to ensure their continued function. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility that need to be maintained and the equipment and skills or training necessary. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
(6)	Landscaping plan. The applicant must present a detailed plan for management of vegetation at the site after construction is finished, including who will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. This plan must be prepared by a registered landscape architect or by the soil conservation district. 
(7)	Maintenance easements. The applicant must ensure access to all stormwater treatment practices at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance easements needed on a permanent basis. These easements will be recorded with the plan and will remain in effect even with transfer of title to the property. 
(8)	Maintenance agreement. The applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management measure in accordance with the specifications of this article. 
(9)	Erosion and sediment control plans for construction of stormwater management measures. The applicant must prepare an erosion and sediment control plan for all construction activities related to implementing any on-site stormwater management practices. 
(10)	Other environmental permits. The applicant shall ensure that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the final stormwater design plan. 
(d)	Performance bond/security. 
(1)	The city, city manager or his designee may, at its discretion, require the submittal of a performance security or bond prior to issuance of a permit in order to ensure that the stormwater practices are installed by the permit holder as required by the approved stormwater management plan. The amount of the installation performance security shall be the total estimated construction cost of the stormwater management practices approved under the permit, plus 25 percent. The performance security shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to complete work specified in the stormwater management plan. 
(2)	The installation performance security shall be released in full only upon submission of as-built plans and written certification by a registered professional engineer that the stormwater practice has been installed in accordance with the approved plan and other applicable provisions of this article. The city, city manager or his designee will make a final inspection of the stormwater practice to ensure that it is in compliance with the approved plan and the provisions of this article. Provisions for a partial pro rata release of the performance security based on the completion of various development stages can be done at the discretion of the city, city manager or his designee. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1211)  
Sec. 58-403. - Construction inspection. 
(a)	Notice of construction commencement. 
(1)	The applicant must notify the city, city manager or his designee in advance before the commencement of construction. Regular inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the city, city manager or his designee or certified by a professional engineer or their designee who has been approved by the jurisdictional stormwater authority. All inspections shall be documented and written reports prepared that contain the following information: 
a.	The date and location of the inspection. 
b.	Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan. 
c.	Variations from the approved construction specifications. 
d.	Any violations that exist. 
(2)	If any violations are found, the property owner shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. No added work shall proceed until any violations are corrected and all work previously completed has received approval by the city, city manager or his designee. 
(b)	As-built plans. All applicants are required to submit actual as-built plans for any stormwater management practices located on-site after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the city, city manager or his designee is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(c)	Landscaping and stabilization requirements. 
(1)	Any area of land from which the natural vegetative cover has been either partially or wholly cleared or removed by development activities shall be stabilized within 14 days from the substantial completion of such clearing and construction. The following criteria shall apply to stabilization efforts: 
a.	Reseeding must be done with an annual or perennial cover crop accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient coverage to control erosion until such time as the cover crop is established over 90 percent of the seeded area. 
b.	Replanting with native woody and herbaceous vegetation must be accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient coverage to control erosion until the plantings are established and are capable of controlling erosion. 
c.	Any area of stabilization must exhibit survival of a minimum of 75 percent of the cover crop throughout the year immediately following stabilization. 
d.	Stabilization must be repeated in successive years until the minimum 75 percent survival for one year is achieved. 
(2)	In addition to the requirements in subsection (c)(1) of this section, a landscaping plan must be submitted with the final design describing the vegetative stabilization and management techniques to be used at a site after construction is completed. This plan will explain not only how the site will be stabilized after construction, but who will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. This plan must be prepared by a registered landscape architect or by the soil conservation district, and must be approved prior to receiving a permit. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1212)  
Sec. 58-404. - Maintenance and repair of stormwater facilitates. 
(a)	Maintenance easement. Prior to the issuance of any permit that has a stormwater management facility as one of the requirements of the permit, the applicant or owner of the site must execute a maintenance easement agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of land served by the stormwater management facility. The agreement shall provide for access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the city, city manager or his designee, or their contractor or agent, and for regular or special assessments of property owners to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions established by this article. The easement agreement shall be recorded by the city, city manager or his designee with the central appraisal district records. 
(b)	Maintenance covenants. 
(1)	Maintenance of all stormwater management facilities shall be ensured through the creation of a formal maintenance covenant that must be approved by the city, city manager or his designee and recorded into the land record prior to final plan approval. As part of the covenant, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility. The covenant shall also include plans for periodic inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled cleanouts. 
(2)	The city, city manager or his designee, in lieu of a maintenance covenant, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(c)	Requirements for maintenance covenants. All stormwater management facilities must undergo, at the minimum, an annual inspection to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of this article and accomplishment of its purposes. These needs may include removal of silt, litter and other debris from all catchbasins, inlets and drainage pipes; grass cutting and vegetation removal; and necessary replacement of landscape vegetation. Any maintenance needs found must be addressed in a timely manner, as determined by the city, city manager or his designee, and the inspection and maintenance requirement may be increased as deemed necessary to ensure proper functioning of the stormwater management facility. 
(d)	Inspection of stormwater facilities. Inspection programs may be established on any reasonable basis, including, but not limited to, routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; inspection of drainage basins or areas identified as higher than typical sources of sediment or other contaminants or pollutants; inspections of businesses or industries of a type associated with higher than usual discharges of contaminants or pollutants or with discharges of a type which are more likely than the typical discharge to cause violations of state or federal water or sediment quality standards or the TPDES stormwater permit; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to, reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in drainage control facilities; and evaluating the condition of drainage control facilities and other stormwater treatment practices. 
(e)	Right-of-entry for inspection. When any new drainage control facility is installed on private property, or when any new connection is made between private property and a public drainage control system, or sanitary sewer, the property owner shall grant to the city, city manager or his designee the right to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred, and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
(f)	Records of installation and maintenance activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall make records of the installation and of all maintenance and repairs, and shall retain the records for at least three years. These records shall be made available to the city, city manager or his designee during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request. 
(g)	Failure to maintain practices. If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the maintenance covenant, the city, city manager or his designee, after reasonable notice, may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance needs by performing all necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the city, city manager or his designee shall notify the party responsible for maintenance of the stormwater management facility in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall have seven calendar days to effect maintenance and repair of the facility in an approved manner. After proper notice, the city, city manager or his designee may assess the owner of the facility for the cost of repair work and any penalties; and the cost of the work shall be a lien on the property, or prorated against the beneficial users of the property, and may be placed on the tax bill and collected as ordinary taxes by the county. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1213)  
Sec. 58-405. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)	Violations. Any development activity that is commenced or is conducted contrary to this article may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
(b)	Notice of violation. When the city, city manager or his designee determines that an activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner of the property. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)	The name and address of the owner or applicant; 
(2)	The address, when available, or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)	A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)	A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the development activity into compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)	A statement of the penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; 
(6)	A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the municipality by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days of service of notice of violation. 
(c)	Stop work orders. Persons receiving a notice of violation will be required to halt all construction activities. This stop work order will be in effect until the city, city manager or his designee confirms that the development activity is in compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a notice of violation in a timely manner can result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this article. 
(d)	Restoration of lands. Any violator may be required to restore land to its undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the city, city manager or his designee may take necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the property until paid. 
(e)	Holds on occupation permits. Occupation permits will not be granted until corrections to all stormwater practices have been made and accepted by the city, city manager or his designee. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1214; Ord. No. 2008-06, 9-16-2008)  
Secs. 58-406—58-423. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XII. - IDENTITY THEFT PROGRAM/POLICY 
 
Sec. 58-424. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to ensure the city has a program in place to identify, detect, prevent, diminish, and respond to identity theft in connection with the opening of water accounts, and to establish written procedures for security and storing of personal information, pursuant to the Identity Theft Red Flags Regulation implemented pursuant to section 114 of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act (FACTA) of 2008, to be effective on November 1, 2008. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1301)  
Sec. 58-425. - Application. 
This policy applies to all city employees and service providers that have access to personal information for customers of the utility billing department, regardless of medium. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1302)  
Sec. 58-426. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Identifying information means any name or number that may be used alone or with any other information to identify a specific person (includes name, social security number, date of birth, alien registration number, government passport, and employer/tax identification number). 
Identity theft means a fraud committed using the identifying information of another person. 
Red flags means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible risk of identity theft. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1303)  
Sec. 58-427. - Policy. 
(a)	Red flags alerts. When opening new accounts, staff needs to carefully scrutinize documents submitted for identification or proof of residency for red flags such as: 
(1)	Documents provided for identification appear to be altered or forged. 
(2)	The photograph or physical description on the identification is not consistent with the appearance of the customer requesting service. 
(3)	Other information on the identification is not consistent with information provided by the person requesting service. 
(4)	Other information is not consistent with information that is on file (i.e., previous application submitted with driver's license). 
(5)	Lease or deed submitted for proof of residency appears to be altered or forged. 
(6)	Personal information submitted is associated with known fraudulent activity. 
(7)	The social security number submitted is the same as another customer's. 
(8)	Notification of a chargeback received from the bank. 
(9)	New account requested immediately after disconnection for nonpayment. 
(b)	New account activation. 
(1)	To ensure proper identification verification all requests for new service must be completed in person. 
(2)	Applicants must show a government-issued photo ID (or two forms of picture identification) in person to initiate service. 
(3)	Applications may be submitted by fax, e-mail, or mail, but will not be processed until proper identification verification is completed in person. 
(4)	Applications must be completed by the person seeking to open an account. The name on the application must match the submitted identification and lease agreement/deed. 
(5)	The city reserves the right to refuse service in the event of inability to provide sufficient identification. 
(c)	Credit card transactions. The city accepts credit card payments via service vendor official payments. Customers paying with a credit card in person must show valid identification that matches the name and/or address on the credit card. 
(d)	Data security and storage. 
(1)	Employees are required to maintain a high level of confidentiality as it relates to utility customer's personal information. Release of information is limited to the account holder or as permitted by law. Customers are given the opportunity to indicate if they wish their account information to be kept confidential. 
(2)	Access into the billing system requires a user name assigned by the system administrator. A password is also required, which is determined by the user and is CJIS (criminal justice information systems) compliant based upon the city's IT security policy that has been implemented. The system will permit three sign on attempts and then will temporarily disable the password. Upon termination, employee passwords are immediately disabled. 
(3)	Disclosure of personal information. Personal information is, or could be, used as a means of identification, for internal verification, or administration purposes, credit checks, and for debt collection purposes. Information submitted to the city's debt collection agency is on file in the utility billing office. 
(4)	Data storage. Hard copy information is stored in filing cabinets in the utility billing office. The office is monitored by security cameras and two locked doors. Cash receipt information is stored in the locked safe and the senior accountants storage areas. 
(e)	Data retention/access. 
(1)	Records are disposed of in accordance with state and federal law, including the local records retention schedule issued by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission and this Code. 
(2)	All city records are subject to the Texas Public Information Act. Requests for information that fall within confidentiality conditions are forwarded to the attorney general's office for an official ruling for the information to be withheld. 
(f)	Identity theft notification. A zero tolerance policy is in effect for all fraudulent transactions pertaining to the utility billing department. Once written notification and verification is received of fraudulent activity from a customer, banking institution, and/or collection agency, the utility billing department will: 
(1)	Proceed with notating and taking corrective actions on the account; 
(2)	Gather all pertinent information that is available; and 
(3)	Immediately contact the city police department to initiate a criminal investigation. 
(g)	Periodic review and reporting. The finance director will conduct an annual review of the current policy and report any fraudulent activity to the mayor. The mayor will approve any recommended changes in policy. 
(Code 1996, § 11.1304; Res. No. R08-2008, 11-4-2008; Ord. No. 2016-03A, 8-16-2016)  
Chapter 62 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 62-1—62-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TAXICAB REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to license, control, and regulate passenger taxicab transportation services designed for carrying no more than eight passengers, Texas Transportation Code § 215.004; authority of home rule municipality to license, fix the charges or fares made by, or regulate any person who owns, operates, or controls any type of vehicle used on the public streets or alleys of the municipality for carrying passengers or freight for compensation, Texas Local Government Code § 215.073. 
 
Sec. 62-19. - Activities regulated. 
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person owning any motor vehicle, or for any person, firm or corporation, whether the owner or not, to drive, operate or cause to be operated over the streets of the city, irrespective of whether or not the operation may extend beyond the limits of the city, any motor vehicle, taxicab or service car, used for the purpose of transporting passengers for hire, except under the terms and conditions hereinafter set out. 
(Code 1996, § 4.101)  
Sec. 62-20. - License/permit requirements. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate a motor vehicle, taxicab or service car for the purpose of transporting passengers for hire as is described in section 62-19, unless the owner or operator holds a valid license or permit issued by the city authorizing the operation of such motor vehicle and the driver thereof holds a valid license or permit as a taxicab driver issued by the city authorizing him to drive such a vehicle for such purpose. 
(Code 1975, § 4-3; Code 1996, § 4.102)  
Sec. 62-21. - License fee. 
(a)	All persons, firms, or corporations, owning or operating such motor vehicles, taxicabs or service cars for hire in the city shall pay the city an annual license fee as provided for in the fee schedule. Provided, however, that in the event a vehicle becomes disabled or is withdrawn from service for repairs, another vehicle may be substituted for such disabled vehicle only until same is repaired, it being further provided that all licenses issued for the operation of motor vehicles, taxicabs and service cars under the terms of this article shall expire at 12:00 midnight, December 31, following the issuance of the same; and it being further provided that in the event a license is issued for less than six months under the terms hereof, a minimum fee, as provided for in the fee schedule, shall be paid for issuing same. Said license fees shall be used to defray the expenses incurred in administering and in the enforcement of this article. 
(b)	Said license fee may be paid in quarterly installments on or before January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1 of the calendar year. 
(c)	Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, the owner of a fleet of taxicabs, being more than ten taxicabs, shall not be required to pay more than $1,500.00 for permitting all of their taxicabs, regardless of the number of taxicabs such owners register. 
(Code 1975, § 4-3; Code 1996, § 4.103; Ord. of 11-19-1991; Ord. No. 2001-07, 11-6-2001)  
Sec. 62-22. - Operator permit application. 
Every person, firm or corporation who may hereafter require a license or permit to operate a motor vehicle, taxicab or service car for hire in the city shall file with the city secretary a written application signed and sworn to by such applicants, or a duly authorized officer thereof, stating: 
(1)	The name and place of residence of the applicant, and, if an individual or partnership, the age and customary occupation of the applicant, and, if a corporation, the name and addresses of the president and secretary thereof, and a financial standpoint showing the assets and liabilities of the applicant shall be attached to the application. 
(2)	The description of the equipment and the number of automobiles to be used. 
(3)	The stands at which the automobiles are to be located or to remain while not in actual service. 
(Code 1996, § 4.104)  
Sec. 62-23. - Driver permit application. 
Every person who may hereafter require a taxicab driver's license to drive, either for himself or as an employee of another, a motor vehicle, taxicab or service car for hire in the city shall file with the city secretary a written application, signed and sworn to by the applicant and stating: 
(1)	His name and place of residence, whether a citizen of the United States or not, age, the amount of experience such applicant has had in the operation of public automobiles, whether such person is addicted to the use of intoxicating liquors, morphine, cocaine or any kind of drug calculated to affect the mental or physical condition of the applicant. Said applicant shall also state the places of residence of the applicant for a period of at least five years next preceding the date of making such application and the business, vocation or employment engaged in during such period; also whether or not the applicant has ever been convicted of any crime or violation of the law, and, if so, the application should state the nature of the violations and the dates and places of such convictions; 
(2)	The applicant shall furnish with such application evidence that he is a licensed chauffeur under the laws of the state. 
(3)	The application must give as character references at least two reputable citizens residing in the county and shall be accompanied by two recent true photographs of himself not less than three inches by five inches in size. 
(Code 1996, § 4.105)  
Sec. 62-24. - Grounds for refusal of application. 
It is provided that if any of the representations in any application filed under section 62-22 or 62-23 are found to be false or fraudulent, then such application may be refused, and it is provided further that if such applicant has been convicted of a felony in this or any other state, the application may, at the election of the board of commissioners, be refused and further that if the applicant has been convicted in the corporation court, or any other court, for violating any of the traffic ordinances of the city or laws of the state relating to the operation of an automobile within the next six months preceding the date of application, then, and in such event, said application may be refused by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1996, § 4.106)  
Sec. 62-25. - Vehicle requirements. 
(a)	No license for the operation of a motor vehicle for transportation of passengers for hire shall be issued until and unless the applicant shall present in connection with his application for a license or permit a certificate from an official test station designated by the board of commissioners certifying that the automobile proposed to be used is in good mechanical condition and is equipped with lights and brakes regulated, adjusted and functioning as required by the laws of the state; and it shall be the duty of the owner or operator of each such automobile to have same tested quarterly and a certificate as herein provided secured and filed with the city secretary at the end of each quarter. Failure to secure and file such certificate shall be sufficient grounds for cancellation of any licenses by the board of commissioners. 
(b)	No person shall drive a taxicab that does not have painted on at least one door on each side of said taxicab the name of the owner and/or operator of said taxicab or the fictitious name under which the owner and/or operator operates or the name of the corporation owning said taxicab, together with the company's telephone number and the car number, and no person shall drive a taxicab that does not have the number of said taxicab and the telephone number of the owner painted upon the rear of such vehicle. All of the lettering required to carry out the provisions of this article shall be not less than 2½ inches in height and not less than 5/16 -inch stroke. 
(Code 1996, § 4.107)  
Sec. 62-26. - License or permit subject to cancellation. 
Any license or permit granted by the board of commissioners under the terms of this article is and shall always remain subject to cancellation, and all rights of the licensee thereunder be forfeited at the will of the board for failure to observe any ordinances of the city or for the violation of any law of the state and further such license may be canceled by the board of commissioners if the licensee should be guilty of immoral conduct, or be found intoxicated in any degree, or should become addicted to the use of any drug calculated to affect the mental or physical powers of such licensee, or be guilty of using obscene, vulgar or profane language about his place of business or on the streets of the city or in the presence of a passenger, or if the licensee should engage in any character of conduct deemed improper and detrimental to the best interest of the city by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1996, § 4.108)  
Sec. 62-27. - Public convenience and necessity requirement. 
The board of commissioners shall have and hereby reserve the right to determine whether additional taxicab service or additional drivers are required for efficiently and properly meeting and serving public interest and necessity in the city, and without other cause existing, to refuse any application filed unless said board decides that the granting of same will serve public convenience and necessity. 
(Code 1996, § 4.109)  
Sec. 62-28. - Insurance and bond requirements. 
(a)	Before any license shall be issued to any owner or operator of a taxicab hereinbefore defined, or before any renewal of said license shall be granted, the owner or operator shall be required to file with the city secretary, and thereafter keep in full force and effect, a policy of public liability and property damage insurance executed by a stock insurance company duly authorized to do business in the state, and performable in the county insuring the public against any loss or damage that may result to any person or property from the operation of such vehicles in the minimum coverage amounts for motor vehicle liability insurance as required under state law. 
(b)	The owner or operator of a taxicab, may, in lieu of the aforesaid policy of liability insurance, file with said city secretary a surety bond, performable in the county payable to the mayor of the city and his successors in office, executed by a responsible and solvent stock corporation authorized to conduct a bonding business under the laws of the state, which bond shall be conditioned for the payment of all final judgments which may be rendered against any such person, firm or corporation for damages on account of death or injuries to property or person, including both passengers and the public, occasioned by the operation of any such taxicab, and which bond shall be in an amount graduated according to the number of vehicles owned or offered for hire, according to the following scale: 
(1)	Where such person, firm or corporation owns or offers for hire only one such motor vehicle such bond shall be in the sum of $20,000.00. 
(2)	Where such person, firm or corporation owns or offers for hire more than one but less than six such motor vehicles, such bond shall be in the sum of $25,000.00. 
Said bond of indemnity shall provide that the amount of recovery on each vehicle named in said bond shall not be less than the following sums: 
(1)	For the injury to any one person or the death of any one person in any one accident: $5,000.00. 
(2)	For the injury to two or more persons or the death of two or more persons in any one accident: $10,000.00. 
(3)	For the injury or destruction of property in any one accident: $5,000.00. 
(c)	The public liability insurance and surety bonds described in subsection (b) of this section shall be for protection of the passengers of said vehicle and for the public, but shall not cover personal injuries sustained by the servants, agents or employees of the persons, firms or corporations so filing the same, while such employee is engaged in the performance of the duties of his employment. All policies of insurance or indemnity bonds shall contain a provision for a continuing liability thereon up to the full amount thereof, notwithstanding any recovery thereon. In the event of the return unsatisfied of any execution issued on any final judgment, or on any judgment from which an appeal may be taken without bond, rendered against any such person, firm or corporation in any suit for damages on account of injury to person or property occasioned by the operation of any such motor vehicle, such person, firm or corporation, within ten days after the return of such execution unsatisfied, provided such judgment is still unpaid, shall increase the amount of such policy or bond by the amount of such judgment, and failing to do so shall forthwith cease the operation of motor vehicles in the city until such additional policy or bond is deposited or such judgment is paid. The board of commissioners shall be the sole judge of the sufficiency of any policy or bond tendered and of the financial solvency and sufficiency of the surety thereon. 
(d)	Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, in lieu of the policy of liability insurance prescribed by subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section, the applicant may file with the city secretary a certificate issued by the state department of public safety showing that the applicant has qualified as a self-insurer as that term is defined in the Texas Motor Vehicle Safety Responsibility Act, as now in force or hereafter amended. Further, the city commission shall be the sole judge of the sufficiency of any policy of insurance or certificate tendered under this section. 
(Code 1975, § 4-3; Code 1996, § 4.110; Ord. No. 2001-07, 11-6-2001) 
State Law reference— Amount of insurance required by Motor Vehicle Safety Responsibility Act, Texas Transportation Code § 601.072.  
Sec. 62-29. - Taxation of vehicles. 
It shall be the duty of every owner of every taxicab operated within the city to render for ad valorem taxes to the city all vehicles or other equipment used in such business, and a failure to render for and to pay such ad valorem taxes to the city before they become delinquent shall operate as a revocation of any license or permit authorizing the operation over the public streets, alleys and ways of the city of any such taxicab. 
(Code 1996, § 4.111)  
Sec. 62-30. - Only licensee to operate. 
No taxicab for which a license shall have been issued shall be operated by anyone except the licensee thereof or any employee of the licensee. 
(Code 1996, § 4.112)  
Sec. 62-31. - License nontransferable. 
No license issued under the terms of this article shall be transferred to any other person, nor shall such license be used for the operation of any other vehicle except for the vehicle for which said license is issued. 
(Code 1996, § 4.113)  
Sec. 62-32. - Responsibility for compliance. 
Where the owner of the taxicab is a corporation, the duty of carrying out the provisions of this article shall rest upon the president of the corporation. 
(Code 1996, § 4.114)  
Sec. 62-33. - Duty of drivers. 
Any driver employed to carry passengers to a definite point shall take the most direct route possible that will carry the passengers safely and expeditiously to their destination. When a taxicab is engaged, the occupant shall have the exclusive right to the full and free use of the passenger department, and it shall be unlawful for the owner or driver of said taxicab to solicit or carry additional passengers therein, except with the consent of the first occupant. 
(Code 1996, § 4.115)  
Sec. 62-34. - Duty of passengers. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the full fare of any of the vehicles mentioned in this article after having hired the same, and any person who shall hire any vehicle herein defined with the intent to defraud the person from who it is hired shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1996, § 4.116)  
Sec. 62-35. - Disposition of articles left in vehicles. 
All drivers of taxicabs shall promptly deliver to the city secretary all property left in such vehicle by passengers. When articles left in taxicabs have been delivered to the office of the city secretary, he shall make an entry of the fact in a book provided for that purpose and shall keep all such articles until claimed by the owner or as the board of commissioners may authorize. 
(Code 1996, § 4.117)  
Secs. 62-36—62-58. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - AUTOMOBILE WRECKER SERVICE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local regulation of towing and booting, Texas Occupations Code § 2308.201 et seq. 
 
Sec. 62-59. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein, unless the context indicates a different meaning. 
Auto wrecker means any automobile, truck, or other motor vehicle used for the purpose of towing, carrying, pushing, or otherwise transporting any motor vehicle which has collided with another motor vehicle or other object, or which has been wrecked or disabled in any manner, from one place to another for any purpose, including, but not limited to, the purpose of wrecking, storing, or repairing the vehicle, and which does not appear at the scene of an accident where a vehicle has been wrecked or disabled upon a public street or public place for the purpose or in expectation of towing one of the vehicles from the scene unless summoned there by the owner of the vehicle involved in such accident or by the police department. The term "auto wrecker" does not include a service car or other vehicle not equipped with mechanical devices for transporting wrecked vehicles and not used for such purpose, such as service cars equipped with compressed air containers and tools for performing minor repairs not involving towage or transportation of wrecked or disabled vehicles. This exception does not authorize evasion of this article and if any vehicle, although not equipped with devices primarily used for towing wrecked or disabled vehicles, is actually used for such purposes through means of ropes, chains, or otherwise, the same shall be considered an auto wrecker, within the terms of this article. 
Emergency auto wrecker means an auto wrecker which appears at the scene of an accident where a vehicle has collided with another vehicle or other object or which has been wrecked or disabled in any manner for the purpose or in expectation of towing, removing, or hauling away the wrecked vehicles from the scene of the accidents without having been expressly summoned there by the police department or the owner of one of the vehicles involved in the accident. 
Heavy duty wrecker means an auto wrecker with a manufacturer's carrying capacity certificate of no less than 6,000 pounds. All of such vehicles shall be equipped with a wench capable of lifting a minimum of 30,000 pounds and such wench line shall be at least three-fourths-inch in diameter. Any such wrecker shall additionally be equipped with an "A" frame capable of being used for lifting vehicles, truck trailer or equipment, air brakes and air lines, and must also have a tow bar sufficient to prevent the swinging of any equipment being transported by any such wrecker. Heavy duty wreckers shall qualify for licensure in the same manner as auto wreckers and shall be treated for all purposes as auto wreckers with the exception of fees. 
Motor vehicle means any motor vehicle subject to registration pursuant to the Texas Certificate of Title Act (Texas Transportation Code § 501.001 et seq.). 
Owner means any person or his agent engaged in the business of towing motor vehicles for hire or engaged in the business of storing, wrecking or repairing motor vehicles for hire and who owns or is entitled to use any auto wrecker or emergency auto wrecker, and who uses the same in the conduct of his business or any part thereof. 
Permit holder means any person, partnership, corporation or other enterprise which has a valid auto wrecker or emergency auto wrecker permit issued by the city. The term "permit holder" includes the agents of any such person, partnership, corporation or other enterprise. 
Wrecker driver means any individual who actually operates and drives any auto wrecker on the streets of the city, either on his own account or in the employ of another. 
(Code 1996, § 4.601)  
Sec. 62-60. - Rotating basis. 
All licensed wrecker operators will be posted at the police station and dispatched on a rotating basis. 
(Code 1996, § 4.602)  
Sec. 62-61. - Permits required. 
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate or cause to be driven or operated any auto wrecker upon any public street in the city for the purpose of performing a nonconsent tow involving the towing or hauling wrecked or disabled vehicles, either for hire or as an incident to obtaining the business of storing, wrecking or repairing such wrecked or disabled vehicles, without having first obtained an auto wrecker permit from the city duly issued to such person to operate an auto wrecker on the streets of the city under the terms and provisions of this article. 
(b)	The term "auto wrecker" shall not be construed to include the following and are exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(1)	The delivery of a vehicle by an auto wrecker towed from outside the city limits to a location in the city, at the request of the owner. 
(2)	The towing or otherwise transporting any motor vehicle with another vehicle, both of said vehicles having the same owner. 
(Code 1975, § 4-8; Code 1996, § 4.604)  
Sec. 62-62. - Storage of disabled vehicle. 
An emergency wrecker driver, unless otherwise instructed by the owner of a disabled vehicle being removed from the site of a collision, shall cause said vehicle to be stored within the corporate limits of the city or at such other location outside the city limits provided such location is not more than five miles from the city limits. 
(Code 1996, § 4.605; Ord. No. 2002-02, 8-20-2002)  
Sec. 62-63. - Application for wrecker permits. 
(a)	All applications for wrecker permits shall be presented to the city commissioners, by the police chief, together with his recommendations for approval or rejection, and shall state the following in the application: 
(1)	The name and address of the owner. If an individual, the application shall so state. If a partnership, the partnership name and address shall be given, together with the names and addresses of all partners. If a corporation, the corporate name and office address shall be given, together with the names and addresses of the president and secretary. 
(2)	The number of auto wreckers the applicant desires to operate, listing the make, model, motor number and correct state license number of each auto wrecker. 
(3)	The true ownership of each auto wrecker. If not owned outright by the owner, the name and address of the true owner shall be given. If the auto wrecker is operated under the terms of a contract with some other company than the owner, a copy of the contract shall also be attached. 
(4)	That the owner will obey the provisions of this article and of all other ordinances and statutes applicable to motor vehicles and agrees that upon his failure to so obey such laws that his permit may be revoked or suspended. 
An application under this subsection shall be signed by the owner. If a partnership, it shall be signed by a member of the firm. If a corporation, it shall be signed by the president and attested by the secretary and the corporate seal affixed. In all cases, the person signing shall execute an affidavit, on the application form, that the statements contained in such affidavit are true and correct. 
(b)	The city commission shall on the favorable recommendation of the chief of police authorize the issuance of transfer and heavy duty wrecker permits as long as they meet all other requirements of this article. 
(c)	The city commission shall issue emergency wrecker permits based on the recommendation and findings of the chief of police of a determination of public convenience and necessity for said permits. 
(d)	In the event the chief of police recommends against the issuance of an emergency permit or in the event the city commission fails to approve a recommendation for an emergency permit, the applicant shall be given written notice of said rejection within ten days. Said applicant shall be entitled to a public hearing on said rejection of his application by giving written notice to the city commission within ten days. 
(Code 1996, § 4.606)  
Sec. 62-64. - Hearings on public convenience and necessity. 
(a)	The city commission on receipt of an appeal from a rejection of an emergency permit shall conduct a public hearing within 30 days. 
(b)	At the time of the hearing and investigation with reference to whether or not public convenience and necessity exist, the city commission shall consider all the evidence of the applicant, and his witnesses. It shall hear all the evidence of the protestants and their witnesses and shall have the right to call such other witnesses as the commission may deem necessary. In all such hearings, the burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to establish by clear, cogent and convincing evidence that public convenience and necessity exist for the operation of the emergency auto wrecker designated in the application. 
(c)	In determining whether the public convenience and necessity exist for the issuance of a certificate on the application to operate an emergency auto wrecker on the streets of the city, the commission shall take into consideration the following: 
(1)	The financial responsibility of the applicant. 
(2)	The number of vehicles to be operated. 
(3)	Moral character of the applicant. 
(4)	Make, model and type of vehicles to be used. 
(5)	The effect of additional vehicles upon traffic congestion, vehicular and pedestrian alike. 
(6)	Storage facilities for wrecked vehicles and size of business location and lot. 
(7)	Determination that the ad valorem taxes and other taxes of the applicant have been paid. 
(8)	Whether the vehicles shall be operated by the owner, or by his employee with bona fide employer-employee relationship. 
(9)	Whether the applicant proposes to own, rent, or lease the vehicle to be used. 
(10)	The number of emergency auto wreckers then in existence and licensed. 
(11)	Whether the requirements of public convenience and necessity can be met and complied with only by the issuance of additional certificates of public convenience and necessity for emergency auto wreckers. 
(12)	The resulting effect upon the business of holders of existing permits. 
(13)	The effect upon working conditions and wages and other compensation paid to drivers of emergency auto wreckers of holders of existing permits and any other facts the commission may deem relevant. 
(d)	If the commission finds after the hearing and investigation that public convenience and necessity exist for the operation of the emergency auto wreckers that have been applied for, the city secretary shall then notify the applicant in writing within 15 days that such vehicles are authorized to operate under the provisions of this article so long as they are in compliance with all of the provisions hereof and all applicable federal, state, county and city laws and ordinances. 
(e)	If the city commission finds from its hearing and investigation that convenience and necessity do not exist for the operation of the emergency auto wrecker for which a permit is applied for, it shall notify the applicant in writing within 15 days from the last date of the hearing. 
(Code 1975, § 4-8; Code 1996, § 4.607)  
Sec. 62-65. - Fees. 
(a)	The fees for the emergency, transfer, and heavy duty auto wrecker permits shall be as provided for in the fee schedule. 
(b)	If a permit is granted subsequent to August 15 in any permit year, the fee shall be paid pro rata for the balance of the year, and any portion of a month shall be considered as an entire month in calculating the fee to be charged. The term "month" means a permit month, that is from the 15th day of one month to the 15th day of the next month. 
(Code 1996, § 4.608)  
Sec. 62-66. - Contents. 
A permit issued under this article shall bear upon its face a notice that the same expires on the succeeding August 15. Each permit shall be dated and numbered and shall show on its face the make, model, motor number and state license number of each auto wrecker authorized to operate and the medallion number assigned to it by the city secretary. 
(Code 1996, § 4.609; Ord. of 3-6-1990, § 1)  
Sec. 62-67. - Permit is personal to owner. 
An auto wrecker permit issued under this article shall be a personal permit to the owner and shall not entitle any other person to operate such auto wrecker. 
(Code 1996, § 4.610)  
Sec. 62-68. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)	Upon complaint being filed by any person with the police chief of a violation of any of the terms or provisions of this article or the violation of any of the applicable laws of the state, federal government, or city, the police chief shall, after 15 days written notice to the holder of a permit under this article of the grounds of such complaint or upon his motion, conduct a hearing to hear evidence with reference to such complaint or motion. Should such hearing reveal a violation of any of the terms of this article or the laws of this state or federal government or ordinances of the city, the police chief may suspend, cancel or revoke the permit of such permit holder as the offense may direct. 
(b)	After the police chief has held the hearing and investigation upon the complaint or motion for the suspension, cancellation, or revocation of a permit of any owner of an auto wrecker, he shall make his findings and declare the same in writing to the owner or operator of such auto wrecker within 15 days after such hearing. The owner of such auto wrecker shall have the right to appeal to the city commission within ten days from the receipt of the written decision of the city secretary only in the event of a revocation of the permit of the owner by the police chief. Upon receiving such appeal, the city commission, as soon as practicable thereafter, shall notify the appellant as to whether or not such an appeal will be heard and if the commission approves such an appeal, it then may hear such appeal and shall either sustain or reverse the revocation of the police chief. If no appeal is taken from the police chiefs action within ten days, as set out in this section, then the decision of the police chief shall be final. 
(Code 1975, § 4-8; Code 1996, § 4.611)  
Sec. 62-69. - Proof of financial responsibility. 
No application shall be issued for an auto wrecker permit until the applicant has filed proof of financial responsibility with the chief of police and city secretary in the sum of no less than $100,000.00 for property damage and the further sum of $100,000.00 for injury of one person and the sum of $300,000.00 for injury of more than one person. This section can be complied with by furnishing a paid up insurance policy from a reputable insurance company duly authorized to do business in the state. The failure of the permittee to provide a current insurance policy and/or the renewals thereof to the chief of police shall result in the automatic cancellation of the emergency wrecker permit. 
(Code 1996, § 4.612; Ord. of 3-6-1990, § 2)  
Sec. 62-70. - Towing charges. 
The maximum fee that may be charged for wrecker service in the city is provided for in the fee schedule. 
(Code 1996, § 4.613; Ord. of 3-6-1990, § 3)  
Sec. 62-71. - Regulations for towing vehicles by owners. 
(a)	Permit is personal to owner. An emergency auto wrecker permit shall be personal to the owner and shall not entitle any other person, firm or corporation to operate such emergency auto wrecker. No transfer from owner or company shall be permitted without the express written approval of the city secretary. 
(b)	Assignments on rotating basis. The names of all licensed emergency auto wrecker owners or companies shall be posted at the police station and dispatched on a rotating company by company basis regardless of the number of permits held by such company. 
(c)	Police chief to establish certain regulations. The police chief is directed to establish and fairly administer reasonable rules and regulations within the scope and intent of this article for the orderly dispatching and rotation of the emergency auto wreckers on a company by company basis. Such rules and regulations shall be reduced to writing for prior approval by the mayor and police commissioner and then shall be distributed to each owner or company holding such emergency auto wrecker permits. 
(Code 1996, § 4.614; Ord. of 3-6-1990, § 4)  
Appendix A - MUNICIPAL FEES AND FINES[1] 
Code section 	Description 	Amount 
Administration 
2-2 	Returned check charge 	$30.00 
2-3 	Emergency medical service fees:* 	
	Transport fees: 	
		Basic life support 	$325.00 
		Advanced life support 	$375.00 
		MICU life support 	$450.00 
		BLS non-emergency 	$325.00 
		Emergency response fee/no transport 	$150.00 
		BLS discharge/return fee 	$325.00 
		Industrial accident/MVA first-responder fee 	$100.00 
		Heavy rescue fee 	$250.00 
	Mileage fee: BLS/ALS/MICU per mile 	$9.00 
2-276 	Municipal court cost per each and every fine levied 	$3.00 
2-304 	Municipal court technology fee for misdemeanor offense 	$4.00 
	*Note: The above fees are hereby adopted and shall be charged by the city and collected by the city secretary/treasurer or such other person designated by the city secretary/treasurer and approved by the mayor for all emergency medical service, including materials and supplies used in connection with such services, and including fees for mileage required for transportation of individuals using the emergency medical services provided by the City of Galena Park, to-wit. For materials and supplies fees, see Exhibit "A" as maintained on file in the office of the city secretary and made a part hereof for all purposes. 	
Animals 
6-27 	Annual license fee for neutered dog or cat 	$5.00 
	Annual license fee for non-neutered dog or cat 	$10.00 
6-32 	Redeeming impounded dog or cat fees: 	
		Flat fee 	$30.00 
		Additional charge per day or fraction thereof 	$25.00 
6-73 	Redeeming impounded livestock fee, per animal 	$1.50 
6-99 	Redeeming impounded wild animals fees: 	
		Impoundment fee 	$100.00 
		Boarding fee per animal per day 	$100.00 
Buildings and Construction 
10-1 	Heating and air conditioning work permit fees: 	
		Application fee 	$15.00 
		An additional one percent of the total cost 	$20.00 
minimum 
10-2 	Installation and removal of underground tanks fee 	$100.00 
10-4 	Mechanical permit issuance fee, per permit 	$20.00 
	Mechanical permit unit fees: 	
		Furnaces: 	
			For the installation or relocation of each forced-air or gravity-type furnace, including ducts and vents attached to such appliance, up to 100,000 Btu/h 	$12.00 
			For the installation or relocation of each forced-air or gravity-type furnace, including ducts and vents attached to such appliance, over 100,000 Btu/h 	$15.00 
			For the installation or relocation of each floor furnace, including vent 	$12.00 
			For the installation or relocation of each suspended heater, recessed wall heater or floor mounted unit heater 	$12.00 
		Appliance vents: 	
			For the installation, relocation or replacement of each appliance vent installed and not included in an appliance permit 	$5.00 
		Repairs or additions: 	
			For the repair of, alteration of, or addition to each heating appliance, refrigeration unit, cooling unit, absorption unit, or each heating, cooling, absorption or evaporative cooling system, including installation of controls regulated by the mechanical code 	$10.00 
		Boilers, compressors and absorption systems 	
			For the installation or relocation of each boiler or compressor up to and including 3 horsepower, or for each absorption system to 100,000 Btu/h 	$12.00 
			From 3 hp to 15 hp, or from 100,000 Btu/h to 500,000 Btu/h 	$12.00 
			From 15 hp to 30 hp, or from 500,000 Btu/h to 1,000,000 Btu/h 	$20.00 
			From 30 hp to 50 ph, or from 1,000,000 Btu/h to 1,750,000 Btu/h 	$30.00 
			Over 50 hp, or over 1,750,000 Btu/h 	$80.00 
		Air handlers: (Note: This fee does not apply to an air-handling unit which is a portion of a factory-assembled appliance, cooling unit, evaporative cooler or absorption unit for which a permit is required elsewhere in the mechanical code.) 	
			For each air-handling unit to 10,000 cfm including ducts 	$5.00 
			For each air-handling unit over 10,000 cfm 	$15.00 
		Evaporative coolers: 	
			For each evaporative cooler other than portable type 	$5.00 
		Ventilation and exhaust: 	
			For each ventilation fan connected to a single duct 	$5.00 
			For each ventilation system which is not a portion of heating or air conditioning system 	$7.50 
			For the installation of each hood which is served by mechanical exhaust, including the duct 	$7.50 
		Incinerators: 	
			For the installation or relocation of each commercial or industrial incinerator 	$50.00 
		AC installation and repair: 	
			Complete installation (or) replacement heating & air conditioning system: 	
				Minimum charge per unit 	$50.00 
				Additional charge per ton 	$5.00 
			AC duct replacement addition or extension: 	
				Minimum 	$30.00 
				Additional charge per each additional run 	$3.00 
			Duct system only: 	
				Minimum charge per unit 	$30.00 
				Additional charge per outlet 	$3.00 
			Refrigeration: 	
				Minimum charge per unit 	$40.00 
				Additional charge per HP 	$3.00 
			Boilers, installation or replacement: 	
				Minimum charge per unit 	$50.00 
				Additional charge per HP 	$3.00 
			Cooling tower installation or replacement: 	
				Minimum charge per unit 	$50.00 
				Additional charge per ton 	$3.00 
			Residential evaporator coil & drains (each) 	$40.00 
			Residential replacement of A/C condenser (each) 	$40.00 
			Residential replacement of heater or air handler (each) 	$40.00 
			Residential replacement of air treatment system (each) 	$40.00 
			Residential addition or replacement of exhaust fans/vents 	$40.00 
			Decorative appliance installation or replacement (each) 	$40.00 
			Unit or infrared heaters: 	
				Initial charge 	$40.00 
				Per additional 	$25.00 
			Complete installation or replacement of commercial heating and/or air conditioning system: 	
				Initial charge 	$60.00 
				Per ton 	$5.00 
			Commercial replacement of A/C condenser: 	
				Initial charge 	$60.00 
				Per ton 	$5.00 
			Commercial replacement of heating or air handler: 	
				Initial charge 	$60.00 
				Per ton 	$5.00 
			VAV, mix boxes (each) 	$15.00 
			Commercial ventilating fans (each) 	$40.00 
			Minimum/miscellaneous air conditioning permit 	$50.00 
		Miscellaneous: 	
			For each appliance or piece of equipment regulated by the mechanical code but not classed in other appliance categories, or for which no other fee is listed in the Code 	$7.50 
	Mechanical permit inspection fees and other fees: 	
		Inspections outside of normal business hours, per hour (minimum 2 hours) 	$42.00 
		Reinspection fees assessed under provisions of section 116.6, per hour 	$45.00 
		Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated, per hour (½ hour minimum) 	$42.00 
		Additional plan review required by changes, additions, or revisions to plans which have been approved, per hour (minimum charge ½ hour) 	$42.00 
	Plumbing permit issuance fee, per permit 	$20.00 
	Plumbing permit unit fees: 	
		For each plumbing fixtures on one tap or a set of fixtures on one trap, (including water, drainage piping and back flow protection thereof) 	$7.00 
		For each building sewer 	$25.00 
		Rainwater systems, per drain (inside building) 	$7.00 
		For each cesspool (where permitted) 	$25.00 
		For each private sewer disposal system 	$40.00 
		For each water heater and/or vent (residential) 	$15.00 
		For each water heater and/or vent (commercial) 	$20.00 
		For each gas-piping system of one to five outlets 	$5.00 
		For each additional gas-piping system outlet, per outlet 	$1.00 
		For each industrial waste pretreatment interceptor including its trap and vent, except kitchen-type grease interceptors functioning as fixture traps 	$20.00 
		For each installation, alteration or repair of water piping and/or water treating equipment, each 	$7.00 
		For each repair or alteration of drainage or vent piping, each fixture 	$7.00 
		For each lawn sprinkler system on any one meter, including back-flow protection devices thereof 	$20.00 
		For atmospheric-type vacuum breakers not included in item 12: 	
			1 to 5 	$5.00 
			over 5, each 	$1.00 
		For each back-flow protection device other than atmospheric-type vacuum breakers: 	
			2" diameter or smaller 	$20.00 
			Over 2" in diameter 	$30.00 
		For each gray water system 	$40.00 
		For each initial installation and testing for a reclaimed water system, per hour 	$42.00 
		For each annual cross-connecting testing of a reclaimed water system, per hour 	$42.00 
		Sewer disconnect 	$20.00 
		Gas turn on (GTO) (one to five outlets) 	$20.00 
		Sewer, water or gas lines: 	
			0—100 ft. 	$20.00 
			Additional or portion of 	$25.00 
	Plumbing permit inspection fees and other fees: 	
		Inspections outside of normal business hours, per hour (minimum charge of 2 hours) 	$42.00 
		Reinspection fee, per hour (minimum charge of ½ hour) 	$45.00 
		Inspection for which no fee is specifically indicated, per hour (minimum charge of ½ hour) 	$42.00 
		Additional plan review required by changes, additions, or revisions, per hour 	$42.00 
	Electrical permit issuance fee: 	
		Per permit 	$20.00 
		Minimum fee on any permit 	$25.00 
	Electrical permit unit fees: (Note: The following do not include permit issuing fee) 	
		Meter loop and service: 	
			Up to 50 kw 	$10.00 
			50 kw to 250 kw 	$15.00 
			Over 250 kw 	$25.00 
		Temporary saw pole 	$25.00 
		Temporary cut-in 	$25.00 
		Reconnection fee 	$25.00 
		Outlets and switches, each 	$0.50 
		Lighting fixtures, each 	$0.50 
		Range receptacle 	$5.00 
		Cooking tops 	$5.00 
		Ovens 	$5.00 
		Garbage disposal 	$2.00 
		Dishwater 	$2.00 
		Washing machine 	$2.00 
		Clothes dryer 	$5.00 
		Water heater 	$2.00 
		Window A/C receptacle 	$2.00 
		Electric heaters: 	
			Up to 1 kw 	$2.00 
			Over 1 kw 	$5.00 
		Motors: 	
			Up to 1 hp 	$1.00 
			1 hp to 10 hp 	$5.00 
			10 hp to 25 hp 	$10.00 
			25 hp to 50 hp 	$15.00 
			Over 50 hp 	$20.00 
		Transformers 	
			Up to 1 kva 	$2.00 
			1 kva to 10 kva 	$5.00 
			Over 10 kva 	$10.00 
		Festoon lighting & streamers, per circuit 	$4.00 
		Shop inspection, electrical sign 0—5 kva 	$20.00 
		Installation inspection, electrical sign 0—5 kva 	$20.00 
		Residential meter loop and service, 2 outlets 	$25.00 
		Commercial meter loop and service: 	
			Up to 400 amps 	$50.00 
			Up to 800 amps 	$100.00 
	Electrical permit inspection fees and other fees: 	
		Inspections outside of normal business hours, per hour (minimum charge of 2 hours) 	$42.00 
		Reinspection fee assessed under provisions of section 305(h), per hour 	$45.00 
		Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated, per hour (minimum of ½ hour) 	$42.00 
		Additional plan review required by changes, additions or revision to approved plans, per hour (minimum ½ hour) 	$42.00 
10-5 	Deposit from contractors for putting water meters on fire hydrants 	$1,000.00 
	Contractor registration fee, per year 	$30.00 
10-28 	Building permit fees, per square foot 	$0.35 
	Building permit fees (based on valuation): 	
		Valuation of $1.00 to $500.00 	$20.00 
		Valuation of $500.00 to $2,000.00: 	
			First $500.00 	$20.00 
			For each additional $100.00 or fraction thereof to $2,000.00 	$2.00 
		Valuation of $2,001.00 to $25,000.00: 	
			First $2,000.00 	$60.00 
			For each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof to $25,000.00 	$10.00 
		Valuation of $25,001.00 to $50,000.00: 	
			First $25,000.00 	$250.00 
			For each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof to $50,000.00 	$9.00 
		Valuation of $50,001.00 to $100,000.00: 	
			First $50,000.00 	$500.00 
			For each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof to $100,000.00 	$8.00 
		Valuation of $100,001.00 to $500,000.00: 	
			First $100,000.00 	$850.00 
			For each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof to $500,000.00 	$7.00 
		Valuation of $500,001.00 to $1,000,000.00: 	
			First $500,000.00 	$2,500.00 
			For each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof to $1,000,000.00 	$6.00 
		Valuation of $1,000,000.00 and over: 	
			First $1,000,000.00 	$5,000.00 
			For each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof 	$5.00 
	Building permit inspection fees and other fees: 	
		Inspections outside of normal business hours, per hour (minimum charge of 2 hours) 	$42.00 
		Reinspection fee, approved by building official, per hour 	$45.00 
		Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated, per hour (minimum charge of ½ hour) 	$42.00 
		Additional plan review required by changes, additions or revisions, per hour (minimum charge of ½ hour) 	$42.00 
		For use of outside consultants, plan review fees, and specialized inspections 	Actual cost 
	Building plan review, per square foot: 	$0.15 
10-99 	Mobile home placement fee 	$15.00 
10-218 	Minimum charge per response to activation of alarm system 	$50.00 
	Response to false alarms in excess of 11 alarms within a 12-month period per alarm 	$50.00 
	Response to an alarm for which the alarm does not have a valid permit, first violation 	$25.00 
	Response to an alarm for which the alarm does not have a valid permit, additional violations 	$30.00 
10-242 	Fence/screen permit application fee 	$25.00 
Business and Commerce 
14-2 	Annual business license fees: 	
		First year of any new business 	$50.00 
		Each year after the first year 	$25.00 
		Change in ownership, upon change 	$50.00 
		Annual fee each year after change in ownership fee 	$25.00 
14-4 	Late fee for business license 	$15.00 
14-33 	Itinerant merchant/vendor annual fee 	$50.00 
	Additional itinerant merchant/vendor annual fee per each agent/employee 	$15.00 
14-100 	Sexually oriented business license annual fee 	$100.00 
14-149 	Salvage yard annual permit fee 	$50.00 
14-172 	Garage sale permit fee 	$15.00 
14-204 	Trunk pipeline initial permit fee 	$2,000.00 
	Trunk pipeline annual renewal fee 	$800.00 
14-207 	Transfer or assignment fee for registration of pipeline 	$800.00 
14-268 	Right-of-way use permit by telecommunications providers application fee 	$500.00 
14-314 	Container/chassis yard city license fee 	$250.00 
Fire Prevention 
22-225 	Appeal filing fee 	$100.00 
22-245 	(1) Apparatus 	
		2. Class A pumper, per hour 	$500.00 
		28. Command unit 	$250.00 
		140. Rehab unit, per hour 	$125.00 
		141. Staff vehicle, per hour 	$75.00 
		300. Ambulance standby charges 	$350.00 
	(2) Personnel 	
		8. Haz-Mat tech 	$40.00 
		9. Haz-Mat operation 	$35.00 
		10. Haz-Mat specialist 	$65.00 
		11. Haz-Mat awareness 	$12.00 
		34. Fire inspectors 	$100.00 
		35. Fire investigators 	$100.00 
		143. Personnel overtime 	$0.00 
		190. Haz-Mat incident command 	$75.00 
		301. EMS supervisor 	$75.00 
	(3) Equipment 	
		12. Flat head axe 	$22.00 
		13. Pick axe 	$22.00 
		14. Water extinguisher 	$22.00 
		15. Chain saw, per hour 	$45.00 
		16. Generator, per hour 	$55.00 
		17. Sheetrock pike pole 	$22.00 
		18. Piercing nozzle 	$40.00 
		19. Bolt cutters 	$22.00 
		20. Pry axe 	$22.00 
		21. Hooligan tool 	$22.00 
		22. PPV fan, per hour 	$55.00 
		23. CO2 extinguisher 	$45.00 
		24. Dry chemical extinguisher 	$45.00 
		25. Foam eductor 	$50.00 
		27. Gas plug kit 	$50.00 
		29. 1¾ inch fire hose 	$137.50 
		30. Pike pole 	$22.00 
		31. SCBA 	$85.00 
		36. SCBA mask 	$365.00 
		37. Long pike pole 	$22.00 
		38. Salvage cover 	$28.00 
		39. Hall runner 	$18.00 
		60. Spreaders 	$250.00 
		61. Cutters 	$250.00 
		62. Rams 	$250.00 
		63. Air bags 	$200.00 
		64. K-12 saw 	$55.00 
		65. Ajax tool 	$22.00 
		66. K-tool 	$22.00 
		67. Door unlocking set 	$12.50 
		68. Windshield tool 	$12.50 
		69. Rescue rope, per ft. 	$1.25 
		70. Utility rope, per ft. 	$0.85 
		71. Webbing, per ft. 	$0.65 
		72. Carabineer 	$2.50 
		73. Figure 8 	$6.50 
		74. Brake bar rack 	$6.50 
		75. Pulley 	$6.50 
		76. Ascender 	$6.50 
		77. Tripod 	$225.00 
		78. Rescue harness 	$22.00 
		79. Full body harness 	$65.00 
		80. 1" redline 	$175.00 
		82. 2½" attack line 	$155.00 
		83. 3" supply line 	$215.00 
		84. 4" supply line 	$625.00 
		85. 5" supply line 	$750.00 
		86. 1" fog nozzle 	$650.00 
		87. 1½—1¾ fog nozzles 	$800.00 
		88. 2½" fog nozzle 	$1,200.00 
		89. 2½" playpipe 	$1,100.00 
		90. M/S fog nozzle 	$55.00 
		91. M/S straight tip 	$30.00 
		92. Foam nozzle 	$55.00 
		100. Scene lights, each 	$22.00 
		101. Pry bar 	$22.00 
		103. Flappers 	$15.00 
		104. Fire rakes 	$15.00 
		105. Water vest 	$30.00 
		106. Shovels 	$15.00 
		109. Port-a-Power 	$55.00 
		111. 8' attic ladder 	$187.00 
		112. 10' attic ladder 	$245.00 
		113. 12' roof ladder 	$300.00 
		114. 14' roof ladder 	$325.00 
		115. 24' extension ladder 	$605.00 
		117. A-frame ladder 	$355.00 
		118. Fire brooms 	$15.00 
		128. Stokes basket 	$65.00 
		158. Heat detector 	$0.00 
		164. Box lights 	$25.00 
		165. Drager unit 	$150.00 
		166. Drager tubes, per box 10 	$75.00 
		201. AIM 3000 	$0.00 
		209. Light tower 	$95.00 
		238. Electrical cord reel 	$45.00 
		239. Electrical junction box 	$45.00 
		244. Gas detector 	$350.00 
		260. High water rescue equip 	$0.00 
	(4) Miscellaneous 	
		1. Dispatch fee 	$80.00 
		43. Minor extrication 	$150.00 
		44. Major extrication 	$300.00 
		133. Decon charges 	$0.00 
		134. Disposal charges 	$0.00 
		135. See page two 	$0.00 
		137. Wrecker service/towing 	$0.00 
		138. Remediation charges 	$0.00 
		142. Administration fee 	$0.00 
		148. Rehab supplies 	$0.00 
		149. False alarm charge 	$0.00 
		159. Cool packs 	$2.00 
		160. Heat packs 	$2.00 
		163. Cellular phone charges 	$0.00 
		200. Utility knife 	$0.00 
		202. Emergency services fees 	$250.00 
		210. Medical supplies 	$0.00 
		212. Litmus paper 	$15.00 
		213. Chemical classifier strip 	$0.00 
		215. PH paper 	$0.00 
		223. Road flares, each 	$2.00 
		226. Waste bag 	$0.00 
		228. Electrical tape 	$0.00 
	(5) Materials 	
		46. Absorbent, per bag 	$15.00 
		47. Absorbent pads, per 100 	$80.00 
		48. Absorbent booms, 10' 	$30.00 
		119. 15 gallon salvage drum 	$55.00 
		120. 30 gallon salvage drum 	$70.00 
		121. 55 gallon salvage drum 	$85.00 
		122. 30 gallon overpack drum 	$60.00 
		123. 55 gallon overpack drum 	$85.00 
		124. Drum liners 	$8.00 
		126. Lite-Dri, per 501b bag 	$20.00 
		127. Top-Sol 	$30.00 
		129. Barricade tape 	$20.00 
		130. Decon soap 	$10.00 
		131. Poly sheeting 	$50.00 
		150. Plug and patch kit 	$30.00 
		151. Duct tape 	$10.00 
		152. Sand bags 	$2.00 
		191. Epoxy, 5 minute 	$0.00 
		192. Epoxy 10 TAC 	$0.00 
		214. Petroseal, 4 oz can 	$0.00 
	(6) Chemicals 	
		26. AFFF foam 	$35.00 
		42. Class A foam, per gal. 	$20.00 
		45. Light water 	$20.00 
		59. Super-All 38, per gal. 	$20.00 
		145. Microblaze, per gallon 	$30.00 
		146. Microblaze, per 5 gallon 	$132.50 
		167. Aquaseal, 4 oz can 	$0.00 
		250. Terrazyme 	$70.00 
		251. Microbes, per packet 	$15.00 
	(7) Protective Equipment 	
		49. Disp. coveralls 	$20.00 
		50. Level B suit 	$150.00 
		51. Level A suit 	$700.00 
		52. Neoprene gloves 	$15.00 
		53. Butyl gloves 	$30.00 
		54. Nitrile gloves 	$15.00 
		55. Latex gloves 	$5.00 
		56. Overboots 	$20.00 
		57. Boot covers 	$10.00 
		58. Disp. goggles 	$12.00 
		93. Helmet 	$180.00 
		94. Nomex hood 	$25.00 
		95. Bunker coat 	$450.00 
		96. Bunker pants 	$350.00 
		97. FF boots 	$120.00 
		98. FF gloves 	$45.00 
		99. Pass alarm 	$200.00 
		125. Chemical boots 	$70.00 
		153. Ear plugs, box of 200 	$30.00 
		154. Haz-Mat jump suit 	$10.00 
		248. Nomex jump suit 	$150.00 
Health and Sanitation 
30-25 	Food peddlers annual permit fee, per stand or location 	$100.00 
	Food peddlers annual permit fee, per vehicle 	$100.00 
30-26 	Mobile food vendor plan checking fee 	$25.00 
30-63 	Weed and vegetation removal fee, per lot 	$1.50 
Offenses and Nuisances 
34-116 	Taking and impounding any personal property 	$10.00 
	Preparing advertisements of sale for each article 	$5.00 
	Selling each article 	$3.00 
	Posting notices of sale relating to any one article 	$3.00 
	Storage charge per day 	$3.00 
Parks and Recreation 
38-5 	Swimming pool admission fee per person per day 	$4.00 
	Swim class fees for one child 	$30.00 
	Swim class fees for two children 	$40.00 
	Swim class fees for three children 	$50.00 
	Swim class fees for four children 	$60.00 
38-31 	Rental facilities fees for persons, groups and organizations residing inside the city limits: 	
		Rental fee per hour (minimum of two hours) 	$65.00 
		Security deposit 	$100.00 
		Cleaning and damage deposit 	$500.00 
		Opening/closing fee 	$25.00 
		Rental deposit 	$50.00 
38-32 	Rental facilities fees for persons, groups and organizations residing outside the city limits: 	
		Rental fee per hour (minimum of two hours) 	$115.00 
		Security deposit 	$100.00 
		Cleaning and damage deposit 	$500.00 
		Opening/closing fee 	$25.00 
38-33 	Additional holiday rental fee, per hour 	$10.00 
38-38 	Ball park facilities: 	
		Rental fee per day during daytime hours 	$100.00 
		Rental fee per day during night hours 	$150.00 
		Security deposit 	$35.00 
38-39 	Swimming pool rental, per three hours 	$50.00 
Sign Regulations 
42-9 	Sign permit fees 	TBD 
42-11(b) 	Reclaiming confiscated portable signs found on public property: 	
	Civil penalty 	$200.00 
	Cost of removal and hauling (minimum $50.00) 	Actual cost 
	Storage fee per day per 160 square feet of storage surface 	$5.00 
	The cost of the employee's time to administer such confiscation 	$100.00 
42-11(c) 	Reclaiming all other confiscated signs found on public property: 	
		Civil penalty 	$200.00 
		Cost of removal and hauling (minimum $50.00) 	Actual cost 
		Storage fee per day per 160 square feet of storage surface 	$5.00 
		The cost of the employee's time to administer such confiscation 	$100.00 
Traffic Control 
54-16 	Bicycle annual license fee 	TBD 
54-180 	Load restricted vehicle permit fee 	$50.00 
54-270 	Commercial parking lot special use permit fee 	$50.00 
Utilities and Solid Waste 
58-1 	Reinstatement of service 	$35.00 
	Reinstallation of meter 	$45.00 
58-23 	Residential water service monthly rates: 	
		One family units, minimum charge: 	
			First 3,000 gallons 	$12.47 
			Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$6.69 
		Two family units, minimum charge: 	
			First 6,000 gallons 	$24.94 
			Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$6.69 
		Three family units, minimum charge: 	
			First 9,000 gallons 	$37.41 
			Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$6.69 
		Four family units, minimum charge: 	
			First 12,000 gallons 	$49.88 
			Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$6.69 
		Seniors and disabled, minimum charge: 	
			First 3,000 gallons 	$9.13 
			Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$4.91 
		All additional units, minimum charge, to be charged with preceding scale: 	
			Additional amount per unit, per additional 3,000 gallons 	$12.47 
			Additional usage per 1,000 above the minimum 	$6.69 
58-24 	Residential sewer service monthly rates: 	
		One-family units, minimum charge: 	
			First 3,000 gallons 	$12.47 
			Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$7.25 
		Two-family units, minimum charge: 	
			First 6,000 gallons 	$24.94 
			Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$7.25 
		Three-family units, minimum charge: 	
			First 9,000 gallons 	$37.41 
			Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$7.25 
		Four-family units, minimum charge: 	
			First 12,000 gallons 	$49.88 
			Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$7.25 
		Seniors and disabled, minimum charge: 	
			First 3,000 gallons 	$9.13 
			Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$5.32 
		All additional units, minimum charge, to be charged with preceding scale: 	
			Additional amount per unit, per additional 3,000 gallons 	$12.47 
			Additional usage per 1,000 above the minimum 	$7.25 
58-25 	Commercial water service monthly rates: 	
		1-inch water meter: 	
			First 1,000 gallons 	$20.50 
			Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$6.69 
		1½-inch water meter: 	
			First 1,000 gallons 	$65.10 
			Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$6.69 
		2-inch water meter: 	
			First 1,000 gallons 	$81.89 
			Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$6.69 
		3-inch water meter: 	
			First 1,000 gallons 	$284.28 
			Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$6.69 
		4-inch water meter: 	
			First 1,000 gallons 	$489.25 
			Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$6.69 
		6-inch water meter: 	
			First 1,000 gallons 	$1,019.40 
			Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$6.69 
58-26 	Commercial sewer service rates 	
		1-inch water meter: 	
			First 1,000 gallons 	$20.50 
			Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$7.25 
		1½-inch water meter: 	
			First 1,000 gallons 	$65.10 
			Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$7.25 
		2-inch water meter: 	
			First 1,000 gallons 	$81.89 
			Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$7.25 
		3-inch water meter: 	
			First 1,000 gallons 	$284.28 
			Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$7.25 
		4-inch water meter: 	
			First 1,000 gallons 	$489.25 
			Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$7.25 
		6-inch water meter: 	
			First 1,000 gallons 	$1,019.40 
			Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$7.25 
58-27 	Industrial water service rates 	
		1-inch water meter: 	
			First 1,000 gallons 	$20.50 
			Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$6.69 
		1½-inch water meter: 	
			First 1,000 gallons 	$65.10 
			Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$6.69 
		2-inch water meter: 	
			First 1,000 gallons 	$81.89 
			Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$6.69 
		3-inch water meter: 	
			First 1,000 gallons 	$284.28 
			Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$6.69 
		4-inch water meter: 	
			First 1,000 gallons 	$489.25 
			Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$6.69 
		6-inch water meter: 	
			First 1,000 gallons 	$1,019.40 
			Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$6.69 
58-28 	Industrial sewer service rates 	
		1-inch water meter: 	
			First 1,000 gallons 	$20.50 
			Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$7.25 
		1½-inch water meter: 	
			First 1,000 gallons 	$65.10 
			Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$7.25 
		2-inch water meter: 	
			First 1,000 gallons 	$81.89 
			Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$7.25 
		3-inch water meter: 	
			First 1,000 gallons 	$284.28 
			Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$7.25 
		4-inch water meter: 	
			First 1,000 gallons 	$489.25 
			Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$7.25 
		6-inch water meter: 	
			First 1,000 gallons 	$1,019.40 
			Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$7.25 
58-29 	Water and sewer monthly rates outside city:* 	
		Water service using a 5/8 " meter: 	
			Residential: 	
				Minimum charges 	$18.71 
				Per 1,000 gallons above 3,000 gallon minimum 	$6.69 
			Commercial: 	
				Minimum charges 	$18.71 
				Per 1,000 gallons above 1,000 gallon minimum 	$6.69 
		Sewer service using a 5/8 " meter: 	
			Residential: 	
				Minimum charges 	$18.71 
				Per 1,000 gallons above 3,000 gallon minimum 	$7.25 
			Commercial: 	
				Minimum charges 	$18.71 
				Per 1,000 gallons above 1,000 gallon minimum 	$7.25 
	*The monthly rates for water and sewer to be charged all other accounts, including, but not limited to, all business, commercial or industrial accounts outside the city shall be the same as set forth above. 	
58-30 	Water rates applicable to contractors when meter and connections supplied by contractor: 	
		First 3,000 gallons 	$50.00 
		Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$6.00 
	Water rates applicable to contractors when meter and connections supplied by city: 	
		First 3,000 gallons 	$75.00 
		Per 1,000 gallons over the minimum 	$6.00 
58-31 	Water turn off minimum charge 	$25.00 
58-32 	Mosquito control fee per month 	$1.00 
58-33 	Temporary water and sewer service minimum fee 	$35.00 
58-34 	Water and sewer tap fees: 	
		Water tap 	$1,200.00 
		Sewer tap 	$1,200.00 
		¾-inch tap 	$440.00 
		1-inch tap 	$650.00 
		1½-inch tap 	$980.00 
		2-inch tap 	$1,100.00 
	Water and sewer deposits: 	
		Residential owners 	$80.00 
		Residential occupants other than owner 	$125.00 
		Commercial 	$200.00 
		Industrial 	$187.50 
	Service modification fee to add second meter where there is more than one user on a single water meter 	$335.00 
58-58 	Garbage rates per residential unit per month 	$12.95 
	Reduced garbage rate for customers over 65 years of age, per month 	$9.50 
58-59 	Garbage rates for commercial customers, per unit per month 	$15.00 
58-114 	Industrial waste permit application fee 	$100.00 
	Industrial waste permit renewal application fee 	$50.00 
Vehicles for Hire 
62-21 	Annual vehicle for hire license fee per vehicle 	$50.00 
	Minimum license fee for license issued for less than six months 	$5.00 
	Maximum fee for owner of a fleet of taxicabs 	$1,500.00 
62-65 	Auto wrecker permit fees: 	
	Emergency 	$200.00 
	Transfer 	None—state law 
	Heavy duty wrecker 	None—state law 
62-70 	Maximum auto wrecker towing fee for any vehicle or truck whose empty weight is less than 5,500 pounds 	$75.00 
Zoning 
	Request for an exception 	$50.00 
	Request for a variance 	$100.00 
	Request for rezoning, plus cost of mail notices 	$150.00 
	Annexation fee 	$200.00 
 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein are the municipal fees and fines for the City of Galena Park, Texas. The fees and fines were adopted by the mayor and council through individual ordinances. Additions made for purposes of clarity are indicated by brackets. For the purpose of the following tables, the designation "TBD" means that the fees are to be determined by ordinance or resolution of the mayor and council of the City of Galena Park, Texas. 
 
Appendix B - WINDOW FINES AND BOND AMOUNTS[1] 
The clerk of the municipal court of Galena Park, Texas, is authorized to accept the recommended minimum "window fines," in lieu of a trial which must be waived by the person charged, as set forth in the schedule below and incorporated herein for all purposes, provided, however, such "window fine" shall each be first approved by the municipal judge of the municipal court of the city. 
The attached recommended "window fines" shall be used and accepted by the clerk of the court after the person charged waives his right to a trial by judge or jury and advises the clerk of his desire to pay such fine in lieu of a trial and only after the judge of the municipal court approves such fine for each case. 
Code 	Violation Name 	Fine 	Court Cost 	Total 
3029 	Amusement Ride Intoxication 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
3801 	Att to Purchase Alcohol by Minor 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
3035 	Consume Alcohol While Driv 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
2000 	Con Alcohol Bev. off Pre 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
2010 	Con of Alco Bev. Near Sch 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
3323 	Open Container 	$200.00 	$60.00 	$260.00 
1220 	Public Intoxication 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
3901 	Att to Purch Alcohol by Minor 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
3803 	Con of Alcohol by Minor 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
3903 	Con of Alcohol by *(Def) 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
3042 	DUI Juvenile 	$400.00 	$93.00 	$493.00 
3800 	Minor in Poss of Alcohol 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
3900 	Minor in Poss of Alcohol *(Def) 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
3805 	Public Intoxication 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
3905 	Public Intoxication by Minor 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
3802 	Purchase Alco by Minor 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
3902 	Purchase Alcohol My Minor *(Def) 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
3272 	Accident Fail to Comply W/Req 	$200.00 	$93.00 	$293.00 
3273 	Accident Fail to Comply W/Req 	$200.00 	$93.00 	$293.00 
3045 	Accident Fail to Give Info/Render 	$200.00 	$93.00 	$293.00 
3330 	Accident Fail to Report Injury 	$200.00 	$93.00 	$293.00 
3319 	Accident Leaving the Scene 	$200.00 	$93.00 	$293.00 
3312 	Accident Negligent Collision 	$200.00 	$93.00 	$293.00 
4303 	Alarm Violate City Ordinance 	$495.00 	$60.00 	$555.00 
4217 	Alcohol Contribute Making Alco 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
1100 	Assault by Physical Contact 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
1101 	Assault by Threat 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
4305 	Building Permit Violate Cy Ordi 	$500.00 	$60.00 	$560.00 
4308 	Business Lic Violate Cy Ordi 	$500.00 	$60.00 	$560.00 
3009 	Changed Lane When Unsafe 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
4321 	City Property Destruction of 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
1000 	Criminal Mischief Damage/Destr 	$200.00 	$60.00 	$260.00 
4202 	Criminal Mischief Grafitti 	$200.00 	$60.00 	$260.00 
4207 	Criminal Trespass 	$200.00 	$60.00 	$260.00 
3028 	Crossing Physical Barrier 	$200.00 	$60.00 	$260.00 
4306 	Curfew Violation Cy Ordi 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
3081 	Cut Across Driveway to Make Tu 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3013 	Cut Corner Left Turn 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3213 	Defective Equipment 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3213E 	Defective Equip Brakes 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3229 	Defe Equip Exhaust Emission 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3162 	Defe Equip Head Lamp 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3162A 	Defe Equip Head Lamp(S) 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3161 	Defe Equip No Hd Lamp/Motocyc 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3174 	Defe Equip Parking Lamp(S) 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3170 	Defe Equip Stop Lamp(S) 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3167 	Defe Equip Tail Lamp(S) 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3172 	Defe Equip Turn Signal Lamp(S) 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3233 	Defe Equip Windshield Wiper 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3156 	Dim Failed to Dim Headlights 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3155 	Dim Failed to Dim Headlights 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
1175 	Disorderly Conduct Affray 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
1180 	Disorderly Con Breach of Peach 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
3067 	Disregard Flashing Red Signal 	$150.00 	$93.00 	$243.00 
3008 	Disregard Flashing Yellow Sig 	$150.00 	$93.00 	$243.00 
3069 	Disregard Lane Control Signal 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3071 	Disregard No Lane Change Sign 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3059 	Disregard Off Traffic Con Dev 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3582 	Disregard Ped Control Signal 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3121 	Disregard Police Officer 	$200.00 	$93.00 	$293.00 
3072 	Disregard Signal at RR 	$200.00 	$93.00 	$293.00 
3006 	Disregard Stop Sign 	$150.00 	$93.00 	$243.00 
3065 	Disregard Warning Sign @ Const 	$200.00 	$93.00 	$293.00 
4201 	Disruption of Classes 	$200.00 	$60.00 	$260.00 
3302 	Cdl Change Name/Address 	$100.00 	$60.00 	$160.00 
3301 	Cdl DL No Comm DL When Required 	$151.00 	$60.00 	$210.00 
3305 	Cdl Endorsement Violation 	$100.00 	$60.00 	$160.00 
3303 	Cdl Fail to Get Tx Cdl After 30 day 	$151.00 	$60.00 	$210.00 
3300 	Cdl More Than One License 	$200.00 	$60.00 	$260.00 
3140 	DL Display Altered DL 	$200.00 	$60.00 	$260.00 
3101 	Driving While Susp 	$200.00 	$60.00 	$260.00 
3260 	Expired Comm Operators Lic 	$200.00 	$60.00 	$260.00 
3614 	DL Posses More Than 1 Valid ID/DL 	$200.00 	$60.00 	$260.00 
3103A 	DL No DL 2nd Offense 	$200.00 	$60.00 	$260.00 
3103B 	DL No DL 3rd Offense 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
3365 	DL Non Guardian Permit Unlic 	$200.00 	$60.00 	$260.00 
3142 	DL Present ID/DL From Other Pers 	$200.00 	$60.00 	$260.00 
3143 	DL Refuse to Surrender ID/DL 	$200.00 	$60.00 	$260.00 
3306 	DL Restriction Violation Cdl 	$200.00 	$60.00 	$260.00 
3106 	DL Violate DL Restriction 	$200.00 	$60.00 	$260.00 
1173 	Doc Abuse or Threaten 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
1170 	Doc Abusive/Obscene Language 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
1178 	Doc Discharge Firearm 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
1179 	Doc Indecent Exposure 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
1172 	Doc Noxious Unreasonable Odor 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
1171 	Doc Offensive Gesture/Display 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
1174 	Doc Unreasonable Noise 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
4510 	Doc Unreasonable Noise Private 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
1177 	Doc Urinating in Public 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
1176 	Doc Window Peeping 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
1231 	Dog Fight Spectator 	$200.00 	$60.00 	$260.00 
4326 	Dog Keeping of More Than 1 Dog 	$200.00 	$60.00 	$260.00 
4317 	Dogs No City Dog Tags 	$100.00 	$60.00 	$160.00 
4318 	Dog No Rabies Vacc 	$100.00 	$60.00 	$160.00 
4332 	Dog Permit Dog to Run Loose 	$100.00 	$60.00 	$160.00 
4329 	Dog Vicious Dangerous Dog 	$200.00 	$60.00 	$260.00 
3103 	Drivers License Violation 	$200.00 	$60.00 	$260.00 
3906 	Driving Under the Influence 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3806 	Driving Under the Influence Minor 	$300.00 	$93.00 	$393.00 
3194 	Driving Coasting 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3589 	Driving Cross Fire Hose W/O Perm 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3070 	Driving Fail to Drive Single Lane 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3085 	Driving Failed to Give½ Roadway 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3124 	Driving Failed to Give Way When 0 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3038 	Driving Oper Veh W/Child U 18 Op B 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3201 	Driving Oper Veh W/More Than 1 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3089 	Drove Center Lane 	$150.00 	$93.00 	$243.00 
3590 	Drove into Blk Whr Fire Eng Stop 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3315 	Drove on Sidewalk 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3088 	Drove on Wrong Side of Div High 	$125.00 	$93.00 	$218.00 
3015A 	Drove on Wrong Side of Road 	$125.00 	$93.00 	$218.00 
3015B 	Drove on Wrong Side of Road 	$125.00 	$93.00 	$218.00 
3015C 	Drove on Wrong Side of Road 	$125.00 	$93.00 	$218.00 
3127 	Drove on Controlled Access 	$125.00 	$93.00 	$218.00 
3198 	Drove W/O Lights When Req 	$125.00 	$93.00 	$218.00 
3015F 	Drove Wrong Side of Road 	$125.00 	$93.00 	$218.00 
3016 	Drove Wrong on One Way Road 	$125.00 	$93.00 	$218.00 
2100 	Poss of Drug Paraphernalia 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
4330 	Dumping Illegal 	$400.00 	$60.00 	$460.00 
3242 	DWI Minor 	$100.00 	$60.00 	$160.00 
4312 	Electrical Permit Violate Cy Ord 	$495.00 	$60.00 	$555.00 
4511 	Excessive Noise Dogs 	$150.00 	$60.00 	$210.00 
3311 	Exhibition of Acceleration 	$150.00 	$93.00 	$243.00 
3259 	Expired Operators License 	$150.00 	$60.00 	$210.00 
3050 	Fail to Control Speed/Accident 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3263 	Fail to Display DL 	$100.00 	$60.00 	$160.00 
3049 	Fail to Maintain Financial Respon 	$298.00 	$60.00 	$358.00 
3025 	Fail to Maintain Fin Respo 2nd Off 	$376.00 	$60.00 	$436.00 
3264 	Fail to Report Change of Add/Nam 	$100.00 	$60.00 	$160.00 
3097 	Failed to Signal Intent to Turn 	$75.00 	$93.00 	$168.00 
3084 	Failed to Signal Lane Change 	$75.00 	$93.00 	$168.00 
3096A 	Failed to Signal Turn 	$75.00 	$93.00 	$168.00 
1140 	Failure to Appear/Bail Jumping 	$200.00 	$60.00 	$260.00 
1130 	Failure to ID 	$200.00 	$60.00 	$260.00 
4307 	Fireworks Violate Cy Ord 	$200.00 	$60.00 	$260.00 
3591 	Following Ambulance 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3591A 	Following Fire Apparatus 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3017 	Following too Closely 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3314 	Funeral Interfere with 	$200.00 	$93.00 	$293.00 
1230 	Gambling 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
4331 	Health Code Violation 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
4304 	Humane Ordinance Violate Cy Ordi 	$200.00 	$60.00 	$260.00 
3283 	Illegal Load Extension 	$100.00 	$60.00 	$160.00 
4328 	Illegal Posting of Signs-Cy Ord 	$100.00 	$60.00 	$160.00 
3003 	Impeding Traffic 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3277 	Improper Flashing Lights 	$100.00 	$60.00 	$160.00 
3014 	Improper Turn 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3099 	Improper Turn or Hand Signal 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3175 	Improper Use of Backup Lamps 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3096 	Improper Use of Turn Indicator 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3622 	Improperly Secure Tailgate 	$100.00 	$60.00 	$160.00 
4309 	Junk Car Violate Cy Ordin 	$200.00 	$60.00 	$260.00 
4310 	Junk Yard Violate Cy Ordin 	$200.00 	$60.00 	$260.00 
4206 	Leaving Child Unattended In Veh 	$200.00 	$60.00 	$260.00 
3358 	Littering 	$250.00 	$60.00 	$310.00 
3657 	LP Display Fictitious Plate 	$150.00 	$60.00 	$210.00 
3658 	LP Display Unclean Lic Plate 	$100.00 	$60.00 	$160.00 
3226 	LP Improper/Unauth Lic Plate 	$150.00 	$60.00 	$210.00 
3274 	LP No License Plate Light 	$75.00 	$93.00 	$168.00 
3666 	LP Operate Motor Veh W/Fic Pla 	$150.00 	$60.00 	$210.00 
3667 	LP Operate Mt Veh W/O Lic P1 	$75.00 	$60.00 	$135.00 
3904 	Misrepresent Age *(Def) 	$75.00 	$60.00 	$135.00 
3804 	Misrepresent Age by Minor 	$90.00 	$60.00 	$150.00 
3668 	No Motor Veh Reg 	$100.00 	$60.00 	$160.00 
3656 	Motor Veh Reg Violation 	$100.00 	$60.00 	$160.00 
3120 	Motorcycle Pass W/O Head Gear 	$145.00 	$60.00 	$205.00 
3409 	Motorcycle Safety Course 	$75.00 	$60.00 	$135.00 
3207 	Motorcycle Operate W/O Appr 	$75.00 	$60.00 	$135.00 
3227 	Muffler Violation 	$75.00 	$93.00 	$168.00 
3205A 	MVI Violation 	$75.00 	$93.00 	$168.00 
3205 	MVI Violation 	$75.00 	$93.00 	$168.00 
3112 	No Motor Cycle Endorsment 	$100.00 	$60.00 	$160.00 
3378 	Obscure/Interfere W/Traffic 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
3320 	Obstructing Traffic 	$90.00 	$60.00 	$150.00 
3322 	Operate Vehicle Where Proh 	$200.00 	$93.00 	$293.00 
4316 	Oversized Weh in Res Area 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
4319 	Over Width Veh W/O Permit Cy Ord 	$200.00 	$60.00 	$260.00 
3364 	Parent/Guar Permit Unlic to Drive 	$100.00 	$60.00 	$160.00 
3555 	Park Bicycle On Sidewalk/Imp Traf 	$30.00 	$38.00 	$68.00 
3570 	Park Or Stand W/I 20 ft Crosswalk 	$60.00 	$38.00 	$98.00 
3571 	Park Or Stand W/I 20 ft Driveway 	$60.00 	$38.00 	$98.00 
3572 	Park Or Stand W/I 30 ft of Traffic 	$60.00 	$38.00 	$98.00 
4322 	Park-No Parking in Cy Park Cy Ord 	$60.00 	$60.00 	$120.00 
3552 	Park/Stand in Front of Public 	$60.00 	$38.00 	$98.00 
3551 	Park/Stand Stop Between Saf Zn 	$60.00 	$38.00 	$98.00 
3284 	Parked Double 	$60.00 	$38.00 	$98.00 
3561 	Parked Facing Traffic 	$75.00 	$38.00 	$113.00 
3594 	Parked in Blk Where Fr Eng Stop 	$60.00 	$38.00 	$98.00 
3553 	Parked in Proh Area 	$100.00 	$38.00 	$138.00 
3253 	Parked On Crosswalk 	$75.00 	$38.00 	$113.00 
3564 	Parked W/Wheels Over 18 Inches 	$75.00 	$38.00 	$113.00 
3565 	Parked W/I 50ft of RR Crossing 	$100.00 	$38.00 	$138.00 
3252 	Parked W/I an Intersection 	$100.00 	$38.00 	$138.00 
4314 	Park more Than 2 hrs Viola Cy Ord 	$100.00 	$60.00 	$160.00 
3026 	Parking on Roadway 	$92.00 	$38.00 	$130.00 
3568 	Parking Unlawfully 	$75.00 	$38.00 	$113.00 
4315A 	Parking Handicap 2nd Off 	$175.00 	$60.00 	$235.00 
4315 	Parking Handicap No Card 	$150.00 	$60.00 	$210.00 
3569 	Parking Standing W/I 15 ft Fire Hyd 	$150.00 	$38.00 	$188.00 
3556 	Park, Stop, Standing on Sidewalk 	$125.00 	$38.00 	$163.00 
3557 	Park, Stop, Standing on RR 	$150.00 	$38.00 	$188.00 
3160 	Passenger Load Obstruct Dr View 	$100.00 	$60.00 	$160.00 
3204 	Passing Author Emergency Veh 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3092 	Passing Cut in After Passing 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3019 	Passing Disregard No Passing Zn 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3022 	Passing Fail to Pass to Rgt Safe 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3020 	Passing Illegal Pass on Rgt 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3018 	Passing Passed W/Insuff Clearan 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3517 	Pedestrian Fail to Cross As Desig 	$75.00 	$60.00 	$135.00 
4301 	Plumbing Permit Viol Cy Ordi 	$495.00 	$60.00 	$555.00 
4320 	No Police Escort When Required 	$75.00 	$60.00 	$135.00 
4335 	Poss of Alcohol in A Public Place 	$200.00 	$60.00 	$260.00 
4327 	Posting Garage Sale Sign On Ut Pl 	$100.00 	$60.00 	$160.00 
1010 	Property Reckless Dam Or Dest 	$225.00 	$60.00 	$285.00 
3007 	Ran Red Light 	$110.00 	$93.00 	$203.00 
3123 	Reckless Driving 	$95.00 	$93.00 	$188.00 
3276 	Red Lights on Front 	$90.00 	$60.00 	$150.00 
3288 	Row Fail to Row Changing Lane 	$85.00 	$93.00 	$178.00 
3005 	Row Fail to Row Private Propert 	$85.00 	$93.00 	$178.00 
3005A 	Row Fail to Row Veh Enter Hwy 	$90.00 	$93.00 	$183.00 
3052 	Row Fail to Row to Veh in Interse 	$90.00 	$93.00 	$183.00 
3005B 	Row Fail to Row to Veh Leav 	$90.00 	$93.00 	$183.00 
3116A 	Row Fail to Row to Ped in Cross 	$70.00 	$93.00 	$163.00 
3138 	Row Fail to Stop Alley, Driveway 	$70.00 	$93.00 	$163.00 
3060 	Row Fail to Stop at Desig Point 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3074 	Row Fail to Stop @ Mark RR Cross 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3068 	Row Fail to Stop @ Proper Place 	$70.00 	$93.00 	$163.00 
3063 	Row Fail to Stop @ Proper Place 	$95.00 	$93.00 	$188.00 
3131 	Row Fail to Stop for Approch Trn 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3052A 	Row Fail to Yield @ Stop Interse 	$95.00 	$93.00 	$188.00 
3053 	Fail to Yield @ Yield Inter 	$95.00 	$93.00 	$188.00 
3005C 	Row Fail to Yield Row 	$95.00 	$93.00 	$188.00 
3056 	Row Fail to Yield Row Private Dr 	$95.00 	$93.00 	$188.00 
3054 	Row Fail to Yield Row @ Intersec 	$95.00 	$93.00 	$188.00 
3058 	Row Fail to Yield Row @ Green Ar 	$95.00 	$93.00 	$188.00 
3057 	Row Fail to Yield Row to Emerg 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3055 	Row Fail to Yield Row Turn Left 	$90.00 	$93.00 	$183.00 
3287 	Row Fail to Yield Row Turn on Red 	$90.00 	$93.00 	$183.00 
3115 	Row Fail to Yield to Peds Sidewalk 	$90.00 	$93.00 	$183.00 
3116 	Row Fail to Yield to Pede on Cros 	$150.00 	$93.00 	$243.00 
3021 	Sch Bus Failed to Stop for Bus 	$145.00 	$118.00 	$263.00 
1061 	Sch Disre School Cross Guard 	$150.00 	$80.00 	$230.00 
4334 	Scooter/Simi Devices Vio Cy Ord 	$90.00 	$60.00 	$150.00 
3033 	Sb Adult Pass Unsecure Seatbelt 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3034 	Sb Child 4-17 Not Secure Seatbelt 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3032 	Sb Driver Not Secure Seatbelt 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3251 	Sb No Front Seatbelts Required 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3031 	Sb Unres Child Under 4yrs Or 36in 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3030 	Sb Unres Child Younger Than 2yrs 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
4324 	Solicit W/O Permit 	$175.00 	$60.00 	$235.00 
3001 	Speeding 	$65.00 	$93.00 	$158.00 
3039A 	Speeding Cdl Hazardous 	$65.00 	$60.00 	$125.00 
3002CZ 	Speeding Cons Zone 	$200.00 	$93.00 	$293.00 
3596 	Speeding School Zn 	$150.00 	$93.00 	$243.00 
3039 	Speeding Over 15 mph Cdl Only 	$150.00 	$93.00 	$243.00 
3004 	Speeding Racing Drag Accel 	$170.00 	$93.00 	$263.00 
3002 	Speed Unsafe Too Fast For Cond 	$65.00 	$93.00 	$158.00 
3586 	Speeding Above 10% of Posted 	$75.00 	$93.00 	$168.00 
4325 	Taxicab W/O Permit 	$100.00 	$60.00 	$160.00 
3250 	Television in View 	$100.00 	$60.00 	$160.00 
3206 	Theft Motor Veh Fuel Theft 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
1020 	Theft Property 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
1021 	Theft Service 	$300.00 	$60.00 	$360.00 
4216 	Tobacco Making Avail to Minor 	$175.00 	$60.00 	$235.00 
4215 	Tobacco Poss/Pu/Cons by Minor 	$175.00 	$60.00 	$235.00 
2010 	Tobacco Smoking in Proh Area 	$100.00 	$60.00 	$160.00 
2090 	Tobacco Sale of to Minor 	$175.00 	$60.00 	$235.00 
1050 	Train Obstructing Traffic 	$100.00 	$60.00 	$160.00 
3629 	Trans Loose Material/Unsec Load 	$500.00 	$60.00 	$560.00 
6000 	Truancy 	$100.00 	$80.00 	$180.00 
3011 	Turned Left From Wrong Lane 	$75.00 	$93.00 	$168.00 
3012 	Turned Right From Wrong Lane 	$75.00 	$93.00 	$168.00 
3080 	Turned When Unsafe 	$75.00 	$93.00 	$168.00 
3158 	Unauthorized Use If Siren Bell 	$40.00 	$60.00 	$100.00 
3225 	Unnecessary Use of Horn 	$25.00 	$93.00 	$118.00 
3010 	Unsafe Start 	$60.00 	$93.00 	$153.00 
3316 	Unsafe Illegal Backing 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3628 	Use of Equipment Not Approved 	$75.00 	$93.00 	$168.00 
4336 	Violate Cy Ordi Discharge Gun 	$198.00 	$60.00 	$258.00 
3333 	Violate Promise to Appear 	$173.00 	$93.00 	$266.00 
4323 	Violate Uniform Fire Code 	$100.00 	$60.00 	$160.00 
3091 	Wrong Side of Road Not Passing 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
3015 	Wrong Side 4 Or More Lane 2way 	$100.00 	$93.00 	$193.00 
 
(Code 1996, App. D; Ord. No 2007-02, 4-13-2007) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein are the window fines and bond amounts for the City of Galena Park, Texas. For the purpose of the following tables, the designation "TBD" means that the fees are to be determined by ordinance or resolution of the mayor and council of the City of Galena Park, Texas. 
 
Appendix C - PLANNING AND ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is Chapter 12, Planning and Zoning, of the 1996 Galena Park City Code. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. The style used for headings and catchlines has been made uniform, and the same system of capitalization and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity, such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications, are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference— Zoning authority, Texas Local Government Code § 211.001 et seq.; municipal comprehensive plans, Texas Local Government Code § 213.001 et seq.; authority to establish building lines, Texas Local Government Code § 214.131 et seq.; zoning and restriction discrimination against community homes prohibited, Texas Human Resources Code § 123.003. 
 
ARTICLE 12.100. - FINDINGS 
 
[Sec. 12.101. - Finding and determination.] 
The city commission of Galena Park, Texas, hereby finds and determines: that the zoning commission of the City of Galena Park, Texas, was appointed, among other things, as the zoning commission of said city, to recommend the boundaries of the various districts and appropriate regulations to be enforced therein; that there was referred to such commission as the zoning commission of said city all proposals for the rearrangement and amendment of the zoning ordinances of the City of Galena Park, Texas, heretofore existing, and all proposals for incorporation of any new features therein; that after notice duly given in the manner and time required by law to all interested parties and persons, said zoning commission duly held public hearings upon all such proposals and thereafter submitted its final report and recommendations to the city commission of the City of Galena Park, Texas, which, after notice duly given in the manner and time required by law to all interested parties and persons, also held a public hearing on all such proposals, at which hearing all persons desiring to be heard on any and all of such proposals were duly heard; that the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Galena Park, Texas, will be promoted by lessening congestion in the streets, securing greater safety from fire, panic and other dangers, providing more adequate light and air, preventing the overcrowding of land, avoiding undue congestion of population, facilitating more adequate provisions for transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks and other public improvements, and by other means through the enactment of the provisions contained in this article. 
(Code 1975, § 12-1; Code 1996, art. 12.100)  
ARTICLE 12.200. - DEFINITIONS 
 
[Sec. 12.201. - Definitions.] 
Accessory building or use. A subordinate building, a portion of the main building, or a use customarily incident to and located on the lot occupied by the main building or use of the property. 
Alley. A public way which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
Accessory. A subordinated use or buildings customarily incident to and located on the lot occupied by the main use or building. 
Apartment. A room or suite of rooms with an apartment house arranged, intended, designed for, or used as the place of residence of a single family or group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit. 
Apartment house. A building or portion thereof, arranged, designed or occupied by three or more families living independent of each other. 
District. A section of the City of Galena Park for which the regulations governing the area, type, construction, height, or use of buildings are uniform. 
Family. Any number of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, lodging house or hotel as defined herein. 
Front yard. An open space, unoccupied (except as hereinafter provided) across the full width of the lot extending from the front line of the building to front street line of the lot. 
Gross floor area. The gross area shall be measured by taking outside dimensions of the building at each floor level, excluding, however, the floor area of attached garages, open or screened porches, basements or attics not used for residential purposes. 
Height. The height of a building or portion of a building shall be measured from the average established grade at the street lot line or from the average natural ground level if higher, to the highest point of the roof's surface if a flat surface; or to the deck line of mansard roofs; or to the mean level between eaves and ridges for hip or gable roofs. In measuring the height of a building the following structures shall be excluded: chimneys, tanks, water towers, radio towers, ornamental cupola, dome or spires, and parapet walls not exceeding four feet in height. 
Lot. Land occupied or to be occupied by a building and its accessory buildings, and including such open spaces as are required under this article, and having its principal frontage upon a public street or officially approved place. 
Lot, corner. A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. A corner lot shall be deemed to front on that street on which it has its least dimension, unless otherwise specified by the city engineer. 
Lot, interior. A lot whose side lines do not abut upon street. 
Lot, through. An interior lot having frontages on two streets. 
Lot lines. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein. 
Lot depth. The mean horizontal distance from the front street line. 
Lot width. The mean horizontal distance between side lines measured at right angles to the depth. 
Non-conforming use. A building or premises occupied by a use that does not conform to the regulations of the use district in which it is situated. 
Open space. Any unoccupied space on the lot that is open and unobstructed to the sky and occupied by no building whatever. 
Place. An open, unoccupied space other than a street or alley permanently established or dedicated as the principal means of access to property abutting thereon. 
Rear yard. An open space, unoccupied (except as hereinafter provided) between the rear lot line and the rear line of the principal building and the side lot lines. 
Rear line. The boundary line which is opposite and most distant from the front street line; except that in the case of uncertainty the city engineer shall determine the rear line. 
Side line. Any lot boundary line not a front or rear line thereof. A side line may be a party lot line, a line bordering on an alley or place or a side street line. 
Side yard. An open space, unoccupied (except as hereinafter provided) between the main building and the adjacent side line of the lot, and extending through from the front yard to the rear yard. 
Single family dwelling. A detached building having accommodations for and occupied by only one family. 
Street. A public thoroughfare or place which affords principal means of access to property abutting thereon. 
Street line. The dividing line between the street and the abutting property. 
Story. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between such floor and the ceiling next above. 
Story, half. A story having an average height of not more than eight feet covering a floor area of not more than 75 percent of the area of the floor on the first story below. 
Structural alteration. Any changes in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders. 
Two-family dwellings. A detached dwelling arranged, intended or designed to be occupied by two families living independently of each other. 
Width of side yard. The mean horizontal distance between a side wall of a building and the side line of the lot. 
Square foot dimensions. The outside width of a building multiplied by the outside length of the building; excluding attached garages, attics, basements, open or screened porches. If the building be of two stories, the result should be multiplied by two; if of three stories, the result should be multiplied by three, etc. 
(Code 1975, § 12-2; Code 1996, art. 12.200)  
ARTICLE 12.300. - DISTRICTS 
 
[Sec. 12.301. - Division of city into districts.] 
For the purposes of regulating and restricting the location of trades, industries, and other uses and the location of buildings designed, erected, altered or occupied for such specific purposes, the City of Galena Park, Texas, is hereby divided into nine districts as follows: 
(1)	District "A" - Single-Family Residences. 
(2)	District "B" - Single-Family Residences. 
(3)	District "C" - Two-Family Dwelling Districts. 
(4)	District "D" - Apartment House. 
(5)	District "E" - Secondary Business District. 
(6)	District "F" - Business. 
(7)	District "G" - Light Industrial. 
(8)	District "H" - Heavy Industrial. 
(9)	District "I" - Special. 
The boundaries of the districts are shown upon the official zoning map, which is here referred to and made a part of this article. It shall be the duty of the city engineer to keep on file in his office said official map and to make thereon all changes, amendments, and additions thereto. When definite distances in feet are now shown on the zoning map, the district boundaries are to be along existing streets, alleys, or platted lot lines or extensions of same, or according to scale as shown on said zoning map. When the streets or alleys on the ground differ from the street or alleys, as shown on the zoning map, the streets or alleys on the ground shall control. 
Whenever any street or alley is vacated, the boundaries of the particular district in which the property lies that fronts on any such street or alley shall automatically be extended to the center line of any such street or alley. 
(Code 1975, § 12-3; Code 1996, art. 12.300)  
ARTICLE 12.400. - REQUIREMENTS MUST BE OBSERVED 
 
[Sec. 12.401. - Prohibited.] 
Except as hereinafter provided: 
(1)	No building shall be erected, moved, reconstructed, or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used for any purposes other than permitted in the district in which such building or land is situated or proposed to be situated. 
(2)	No building shall be erected, moved, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered to exceed the height or area limits herein established for the district for which such building is situated or proposed to be situated. 
(3)	No lot area shall be reduced or diminished so that the lot size or the yards shall be smaller than prescribed by this article, nor shall the number of dwelling units in a given area be increased in any manner, except in conformity with the regulations herein established. 
(Code 1975, art. 12-4; Code 1996, art. 12.400)  
ARTICLE 12.500. - [DISTRICT "A"] 
 
[Sec. 12.501. - District "A" regulations.] 
In District "A" - First Single-Family Dwelling District, as shown on said zoning map, the following shall apply: 
(a)	Use regulations. 
(1)	Single-family dwellings. 
(2)	Churches and rectories. 
(3)	Public parks and playgrounds, golf courses, public recreational facilities, community buildings and public museums, not operated for private profit. 
(4)	Public schools, private schools, not conducted for profit, with curriculum equivalent to that of a public elementary or high school, and institutions of higher learning, not conducted for profit. 
(5)	Municipal and governmental buildings, public libraries, police stations, fire stations, and public hospitals. 
(6)	Farms, nurseries, and truck gardens, limited to the propagation and cultivation of plants, provided no retail or wholesale business is conducted on the premises. 
(7)	Telephone exchanges and equipment, provided that no public business office and no repair or storage facilities for materials, equipment or commercial vehicles be maintained on the premises. 
(8)	Water supply reservoir, filter bed, tower, surface, or below surface tank, artesian well, water pumping plant, water well. 
(9)	Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work on the premises, which buildings shall be removed on the completion or abandonment of construction work; and also real estate offices on and during the development of residential subdivisions, but not to exceed two years. 
(10)	Accessory uses. Uses customarily incident to any of the above uses when located upon the same lot and not involving the conduct of a business; including customary home occupations engaged in by the office of a physician, surgeon, dentist, or artist when situated in the same dwelling used by such physician, surgeon, dentist, musician or artist as his private dwelling, provided no name plate exceeding one square foot in area, containing the name and occupation of the occupant of the premises, and no sign exceeding eight square feet in area appertaining to the lease, hire or sale of a building or premises; and no commercial advertising sign of any other character shall be permitted in such a dwelling district. 
(b)	Height and area regulations. The height of buildings, the minimum area of buildings, the minimum lot size, and the minimum dimensions of yards shall be as follows: 
(1)	Height. Two and one-half stories or 35 [feet]; 
(2)	Building area. Not less than 1,000 square feet of floor area; 
(3)	Lot size. Not less than 65 front feet or size of lot, whichever is less; 
(4)	Front yard. Twenty-five feet set back; 
(5)	Side street yard. 20 feet; 
(6)	Side yards. Building setback: five feet to side of lot; 
(7)	Rear yard. Building: five feet to rear of lot. 
(Code 1975, art. 12-5; Code 1996, art. 12.500; Ord. No. 99-05, 7-20-1999)  
ARTICLE 12.600. - [DISTRICT "B"] 
 
[Sec. 12.601. - District "B" regulations.] 
In District "B" - Second Single-Family Dwelling District, as shown on said zoning map, the following shall apply: 
(a)	Use regulations. Same as District "A." 
(b)	Height and area regulations. 
(1)	Height. The height restriction of residences situated in District "B," as described in Exhibit "A" and the zoning map of the city, shall hereafter be to 2½ stories or 35 feet in height. 
(2)	Building area. Not less than 700 square feet of floor area. 
(3)	Lot size. Not less than 45 feet or size of lot as platted, whichever is less. 
(4)	Front yard. Twenty-five feet set back. 
(5)	Side street yard. Ten feet set back. 
(6)	Side yard. Five feet to side of main building. 
(7)	Rear yard. Minimum five feet from main building to rear of lot. 
(Code 1975, § 12-6; Code 1996, art. 12.600; Ord. No. 99-02, 6-6-1999; Ord. No. 99-05, 7-20-1999)  
ARTICLE 12.700. - DISTRICT "C" 
 
[Sec. 12.701. - District "C" regulations.] 
In District "C" - Two-Family Dwelling District, as shown on said zoning map, the following shall apply: 
(a)	Use regulations. 
(1)	Any use permitted in District B. 
(2)	Two-family dwellings. 
(b)	Height and area regulations. 
(1)	Height. Not to exceed 35 feet or 2½ stories. 
(2)	Building area. 
(A)	No building shall be used as a single-family dwelling with less than 520 feet of floor area. 
(B)	No dwelling used as a two-family dwelling shall contain less than 1,000 square feet of floor space for both family dwelling units. 
(3)	Lot size. Not less than 47 front feet or size of lot as platted, whichever is less. 
(4)	Front yard. Twenty feet set back, provided that 25 percent of the block frontage is improved with buildings, but in no case less than 15 feet set back. 
(5)	Side street yard. Ten feet set back, except concrete driveways. 
(6)	Side yard. Five feet to side of main building. 
(7)	Rear yard. Five feet from main building to rear of lot. 
(8)	[Single family residence and garage apartment.] Single family residence and garage apartments may be used, provided each structure contains 520 square feet floor space. 
(Code 1975, § 12-7; Code 1996, art. 12.700; Ord. No. 99-05, 7-20-1999)  
ARTICLE 12.800. - DISTRICT "D" 
 
[Sec. 12.801. - District "D" regulations.] 
In District "D" - Multiple-Family Dwelling District, as shown on said zoning map, the following shall apply: 
(a)	Use regulations. No building or land shall be used and no building shall hereafter be erected, moved or altered, except for one or more of the following purposes: 
(1)	Any use permitted in District C. 
(2)	Apartment houses. 
(b)	Height and area regulations. The height of buildings and minimum area of buildings, the minimum lot size and the minimum dimensions of yards upon any lots shall be as follows: 
(1)	Height. Not to exceed 35 feet or 2½ stories. 
(2)	Building area. 
(A)	No building used as a single-family dwelling shall contain less than 520 square feet of floor area. 
(B)	No building used as a two-family dwelling shall contain less than 1,000 square feet of floor area. 
(3)	Lot size. Not less than 47 front feet or size of lot as platted, whichever is less. 
(4)	Front yard. Twenty feet set back, provided that 25 percent of the block frontage is improved with buildings, but in no case less than 15 feet set back. 
(5)	Side street yard. Ten feet set back, except concrete driveways. 
(6)	Side yard. Five feet to side of main building. 
(7)	Rear yard. Five feet from main building to rear of lot. 
(8)	[Three or more dwellings.] Any building containing three or more family dwellings shall contain not less than 500 square feet of floor area per family unit. 
(Code 1975, § 12-8; Code 1996, art. 12.800; Ord. No. 99-05, 7-20-1999)  
ARTICLE 12.900. - DISTRICT "E" 
 
[Sec. 12.901. - District "E" regulations.] 
In District "E" - Secondary Business District, as shown on said zoning map, the following shall apply: 
(a)	Use regulations. No buildings or land shall be used and no building shall hereafter be erected, moved or altered except for one or more of the following uses: 
(1)	Any use permitted in District D. 
(2)	Retail stores; cafes; washaterias; drive-ins; filling stations; public garages; offices; office buildings; real estate offices; tourist courts; lumber yards; plumbing shops; cleaning, pressing, and dyeing plants; creameries; manufacture of products such as sheet metal or other uses similar in character, provided that such use is not noxious or offensive by reason of the emission of odor, dust, vibration, smoke, gas or noise or other offensives which would constitute a nuisance. 
(b)	Height and area regulations. Applicable to residences only: 
(1)	Height. Not to exceed 35 feet or 2½ stories. 
(2)	Building area. 
(A)	No building used as a single-family dwelling shall contain less than 520 square feet of floor area. 
(B)	No building used as a two-family dwelling shall contain less than 1,000 square feet of floor area. 
(3)	Lot size. Not less than 47 front feet or size of lot as platted; whichever is less. 
(4)	Front yard. Twenty feet set back, provided that 25 percent of the block frontage is improved with buildings, but in no case less than 15 feet set back. 
(5)	Side street yard. Ten feet set back, except concrete driveways. 
(6)	Side yard. Five feet to side of main building. 
(7)	Rear yard. Five feet from main building to rear of lot. 
(Code 1996, art. 12.900; Ord. No. 99-05, 7-20-1999)  
ARTICLE 12.1000. - DISTRICT "F" 
 
[Sec. 12.1001. - District "F" regulations.] 
In District "F" - Business District, as shown on said zoning map, the following shall apply: 
(a)	Use regulations. No building or land shall be used, and no building shall be hereafter erected, moved or altered except for one or more of the following uses: 
(1)	Uses as permitted in District E. 
(2)	Retail stores; restaurants; theater; bank; lumber yard; retail community center; offices; hotels; cleaning and pressing plants; laundries; filling station; garages; hospitals; mortuary; private clubs; plumbing shops; tin shops; studios and parking lots; and any other uses not included in the above classes, but similar in nature, provided such use shall not be noxious or offensive by reason of the emission of odor, dust, vibration, smoke, gas or noise or other offensives which would constitute a nuisance. 
(b)	Height and area regulations. Applicable to residential structures only: 
(1)	Height. Not to exceed 35 feet or 2½ stories. 
(2)	Building area. 
(A)	No building used as a single-family dwelling shall contain less than 520 square feet of floor area. 
(B)	No building used as a two-family dwelling shall contain less than 1,000 square feet of floor area. 
(3)	Lot size. Not less than 47 front feet or size of lot as platted, whichever is less. 
(4)	Front yard. Twenty feet set back, provided that 25 percent of the block frontage is improved with buildings, but in no case less than 15 feet set back. 
(5)	Side street yard. Ten feet set back, except concrete driveways. 
(6)	Side yard. Five feet to side of main building. 
(7)	Rear yard. Five feet from main building to rear of lot. 
(Cod 1975, § 12-10; Code 1996, art. 12.1000; Ord. No. 99-05, 7-20-1999)  
ARTICLE 12.1100. - DISTRICT "G" 
 
[Sec. 12.1101. - District "G" regulations.] 
In District "G" - Light Industrial [District,] as shown on said zoning map, the following shall apply: 
(a)	Use regulations. 
(1)	Any use permitted in District F. 
(2)	Light manufacturers; storage; warehouses; railroad switch yards with tracts; loading and unloading facilities and other uses not included in the above class, but similar In nature, provided such use shall not be noxious or offensive by reason of the emission of odor, dust, vibration, smoke, gas or noise or other offensives which would constitute a nuisance. 
(b)	Height and area regulations. Applicable to residences only: 
(1)	Height. Not to exceed 35 feet or 2½ stories. 
(2)	Building area. 
(A)	No building used as a single family dwelling shall contain less than 520 square feet of floor area. 
(B)	No building used as a two-family dwelling shall contain less than 1,000 square feet of floor area. 
(3)	Lot size. Not less than 47 front feet or size of lot as platted, whichever is less. 
(4)	Front yard. Twenty feet set back, provided that 25 percent of the block frontage is improved with buildings, but in no case less than 15 feet set back. 
(5)	Side street yards. Ten feet set back, except concrete driveways. 
(6)	Side yards. None 
(7)	Rear yard. None 
(Code 1975, §12-11; Code 1996, art. 12.1100)  
ARTICLE 12.1200. - DISTRICT "H" 
 
[Sec. 12.1201. - District "H" regulations.] 
In District "H" - Heavy Industrial [District, as shown on said zoning map, the following shall apply:] 
(a)	Use regulations. 
(1)	Any use permitted in District G. 
(2)	Light and power plants with electrical terminal; manufacture and storage and accessory uses pertaining to the heavy industrial uses such as steel mills; foundries; chemical plants; railroad and terminal facilities; oil refineries; and other heavy industry, such as will not be noxious or offensive by reason of the emission of odor, dust, vibration, smoke, gas or noise or other offensives which would constitute a nuisance. 
(b)	Height and area regulations. 
(1)	None. 
(Code 1975, §12-12; Code 1996, art. 12.1200)  
ARTICLE 12.1300. - DISTRICT "I" 
 
[Sec. 12.1301. - District "I" regulations.] 
Any of the following uses may be located in any district by special permission of the city commission, after public hearing, provided that, in judgment, such use shall not seriously injure the appropriate use of neighboring property and will conform to the general interest and purpose of this article, and provided, further, that such use may be granted with a time limitation and shall, unless otherwise provided, comply with the height and area regulations in the district in which they may be located: 
(1)	Amusement parks, athletic fields, circuses, carnivals and fair grounds. 
(2)	Cemeteries, mausoleums and crematories for the disposal of the human dead. 
(3)	Hospitals for the insane or feeble minded, or penal or correctional institutions. 
(4)	Hotels, tourist courts or trailer or trailer-camper camps subject to such rules as may be adopted by the board. 
(5)	Radio towers. 
(6)	Refuse dumps or garbage disposal plants. 
(7)	Buildings or the use of premises for public utility services or public service corporations, which buildings or uses the board deems reasonably necessary for convenience or welfare and for such other uses as may be deemed advisable by said board. 
(Code 1975, §12-13; Code 1996, art. 12.1300)  
ARTICLE 12.1400. - NON-CONFORMING USES 
 
[Sec. 12.1401. - Continuation; prohibited.] 
(a)	Lawful non-conforming uses existing on the effective date of this article may be continued, although such uses do not conform with the provisions of this article. 
(b)	No non-conforming use may be extended so as to replace a conforming residential use. 
(c)	Whenever a district shall hereafter be changed, any then existing lawful non-conforming use in such changed district may be continued, provided all other regulations governing the new use are complied with. 
(d)	Whenever a non-conforming use of a building has been discontinued or changed to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a non-conforming use. 
(e)	No building which has been damaged by fire or other causes to the extent of more than 75 percent of its value shall be repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of this article. 
(Code 1975, §12-14; Code 1996, art. 12.1400)  
ARTICLE 12.1500. - HEIGHT, AREA AND YARD REGULATIONS 
 
[Sec. 12.1501. - Generally.] 
The regulations and requirements as to height of buildings and area of lot which may be occupied by buildings, side yards, and front yards, and other regulations and requirements as established in the foregoing sections of this article, shall be subject to the following exceptions and additional regulations. 
(Code 1975, §12-15; Code 1996, art. 12.1500)  
[Sec. 12.1502.] - Height regulations. 
(1)	Public or semi-public buildings, such as hospitals, churches, sanitariums, public utility buildings, or schools, whether public or private, where permitted, may be erected to a height not exceeding 50 feet, provided that such buildings shall be set back two additional feet on all sides for each additional foot that such buildings exceed the specified height limit as established by the regulations of the district in which such buildings are situated. 
(2)	Flagpoles, chimneys, cooling towers, electric power line poles and towers, elevator bulkheads, penthouses, finials, gas tanks, grain elevators, stacks, storage towers, radio towers, ornamental towers, monuments, cupolas, domes, spires, standpipes, and necessary mechanical appurtenances may be erected as to height in accordance with other ordinances of the City of Galena Park. 
(Code 1975, §12-15; Code 1996, art. 12.1500(a))  
[Sec. 12.1503.] - Area regulations. 
(1)	For any building used jointly for business and dwelling purposes or industry and dwelling purposes, the number of families permitted by the lot area requirements per family shall be reduced in the same proportion as the floor area devoted to business or industry bears to the entire floor area of the building. 
(2)	For any building providing jointly for hotel and apartment house uses, the number of families permitted in apartments by the lot area requirements per family shall be reduced in the same proportion as the total floor area devoted to hotel or non-housekeeping rooms bears to the total floor area devoted to both uses. 
(3)	Where a lot of smaller dimensions than required in the district in which it lies is in separate ownership upon the effective date of this article, the lot size regulation shall not prohibit the erection thereon of any residential building permitted in the district, provided that the minimum area requirements as set forth are met. 
(Code 1975, §12-15; Code 1996, art. 12.1500(b))  
[Sec. 12.1504.] - Yard regulations. 
(1)	Where 25 percent or more of the lots abutting upon the same side of a street between intersecting streets is occupied by a building or buildings, having front and/or side street yards abutting such streets, as the case may be, of greater depth than is required by this article, no other lot upon the same side of such street between such intersecting streets shall be occupied by a building with such a front and/or side street yard of less than the least depth of any such existing front and/or side street yards. 
(2)	Where an inside lot face a side street, no adjoining corner lot shall be occupied by a building with a side street yard of depth less than that existing or required of the front yards of the inside lot, provided that this requirement shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the buildable width of a corner lot, in separate ownership upon the effective date of this article, to less than 30 feet. 
(3)	Where the rear line of any lot abuts a street, the rear yard requirements shall be the same as the front yard requirements, provided that this requirement shall not be so interpreted as to reduce the buildable depth of any lot, in separate ownership upon the effective date of this article, to less than 40 feet. 
(4)	Where a gasoline filling station is built on a corner lot, a front yard and a side street yard of as little as, but no less than, 14 feet each shall be allowed and required, provided that concrete curbs sufficient to protect pedestrians are erected on all street sides of the lot except at automobile entrances and exits to and from the station, and that no building, canopy, pump, or other structure shall be permitted to project into either of these yards. 
(5)	No building shall be placed closer than 30 feet to the center line of any street. 
(6)	Where an official line has been established for future widening or opening of a street upon which a lot abuts, the width of a front or side street yard shall be measured from such official line. 
(7)	No wall, fence or other structure shall be erected and no hedge, shrub, trees, or other growth shall be maintained on any corner lot within the required front and/or side street yard space so as to cause danger to traffic by obstructing the view. 
(8)	A porch may not extend more than ten feet into the front yard nor more than four feet into a side street yard or rear yard. Cornices or eaves may not extend more than three feet into a front, side-street, side or rear yard. Except for such projections as listed above, all required yard space shall be open and unobstructed, provided that a private garage or other accessory building not over 20 feet in height may occupy not over 20 percent of the rear yard space. 
(Code 1975, §12-15; Code 1996, art. 12.1500(c))  
ARTICLE 12.1600. - INTERPRETATION AND PURPOSE 
 
[Sec. 12.1601.] - Conflict with other restrictions. 
It is not the intent of this article to interfere with or annul any easement, contract or covenant between parties, provided that wherever the regulations of this article require an equal or greater width or size of yard or other open spaces, or require an equal or lower height of building or an equal or less number of stories, or require an equal or greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied, or impose an equal or higher standards than are required in any other easement, contract or covenant, the provisions of this article shall govern. Wherever the provisions of any other easement, contract, or covenant require a greater width of yard or other open spaces, or require a lower height of building or a less number of stories, or require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied, or impose other higher standards than are required by this article, the provisions of such easement, contract or covenant shall govern. Nothing herein contained shall have the effect of making lawful any use now prohibited by law. 
(Code 1975, §12-16; Code 1996, art. 12.1600(a))  
[Sec. 12.1602.] - Completion of structures and pending applications. 
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans or intended use of a building for which a building permit has been heretofore issued ant the construction of which shall have been diligently prosecuted within 90 days of the date of such permit, and which entire building shall be completed, according to such plans as filed, within six months from the effective date of this article. 
(Code 1975, §12-16; Code 1996, art. 12.1600(b))  
ARTICLE 12.1700. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
[Sec. 12.1701. - Duty of building inspector.] 
It shall be the duty of the building inspector to enforce the provisions of this article and to refuse to issue any permit for any building or for the use of any premises which would violate any of the provisions hereof. The said building inspector, or any deputy or inspector working under his direction, may cause any building or premises to be inspected and examined and order in writing the remedying of any condition found to exist therein or thereat in violation of any provision of this article. 
(Code 1975, §12-17; Code 1996, art. 12.1700)  
ARTICLE 12.1800. - BUILDING PERMITS 
 
[Sec. 12.1801. - Required; application; fee.] 
(a)	No permit for the erection, alteration, reconstruction, conversion or use of any building shall be issued by the building inspector unless there shall be filed in his office by the applicant therefor, a plan in duplicate, drawn to scale, correctly showing the location and actual dimensions of such building, with measurements from all lot lines to all foundations lines of the building, together with a true statement, in writing, signed by the applicant, showing the use for which such building is intended and the location and dimensions of all accessory buildings. No permit shall be issued by the said building inspector unless such plan shall show in every detail that such building is to be erected and used in conformity with all the provisions of this article. 
(b)	A record of such applications and plans shall be kept in the office of the building inspector. Failure of any applicant or of his agents or employees to erect, alter, move or maintain any building in conformance with such plans on which such permit is issued, when such failure constitutes a violation of any provisions of this article, shall render such permit void. The building inspector is hereby authorized and directed to revoke any such permit by giving written notice to the applicant or his agents or employees, and all work upon such building shall be immediately discontinued on the serving of such notice until such buildings shall be changed so as to comply with such plans and permits. 
(c)	The building permit fees for each structure shall be as provided for in the fee schedule. 
(Code 1975, § 12-18; Code 1996, art. 12.1800)  
ARTICLE 12.1900. - CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY 
 
[Sec. 12.1901. - Required; application.] 
No land shall be used or occupied and no building hereafter structurally altered or erected shall be used or changed in use until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the building inspector or other official stating that the building or the proposed use thereof complies with the provisions of this article, and no land or building shall be used or occupied except in conformity to a valid and existing certificate of occupancy issued for such land and/or building. A like certificate shall be issued for the purpose of maintaining, renewing, changing, or extending a non-conforming use. A certificate of occupancy, either for the whole or a part of a building, shall be applied for coincident with the application for a building permit and shall be issued within ten days after the erection or structural alteration of such building or part shall have been completed in conformity with the provisions of this article. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the building inspector, and copies shall be furnished, on request, to any persons having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building affected. 
(Code 1975, § 12-19; Code 1996, art. 12.1900)  
ARTICLE 12.2000. - BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT 
 
Sec. 12.2001. - Procedure. 
A board of adjustment is hereby established which shall consist of five members to be appointed by the city commission, each for a term of two years. Members of the board of adjustment may be removed from office by the city commission for cause upon written charges and after public hearing, vacancies shall be filled by resolution of the city commission for the unexpired term of the member affected. 
(Code 1996, § 12.2001)  
Sec. 12.2002. - Proceedings. 
The board of adjustment shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs, and in keeping with the provisions of this article. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairperson, or, in his absence, the acting chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All meetings shall be open to the public. 
The board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such facts, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be a public records and be immediately filed in the office of the building official. 
(Code 1996, § 12.2002)  
Sec. 12.2003. - Appeals; hearings; notice. 
Any person aggrieved, or any official or department of the governing body of the city affected by any decision or judgment of the building official concerning interpretation or administration of this article, may appeal such decision or judgment to the board of adjustment. Such appeals shall be taken within 20 days by filing with the building official and with the board of adjustment a notice of appeal accompanied by a fee as established by the city commission, specifying the grounds thereof. The building official shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustments, all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of appeal, give public notice thereof as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. At the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
(Code 1996, § 12.2003)  
Sec. 12.2004. - Stay of proceedings. 
Any appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the building official from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of adjustment after the notice of appeal is filed with him that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of adjustment or by a court of record on application, on notice of the building official from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(Code 1996, § 12.2004)  
Sec. 12.2005. - Powers and duties. 
The board of adjustment shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)	Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirements, decision or determination made by the building official in the enforcement of this article. 
(2)	Exceptions: conditions governing applications; procedures. 
(A)	To hear and decide only such exceptions or temporary use permits as the board of adjustment is specifically authorized to pass on by the terms of this article; to decide such questions as are involved in determining whether exceptions should be granted; and to grant exceptions with such conditions and safeguards as are appropriate under this article, or to deny exceptions when not in harmony with the purpose and intent of this article. An exception or temporary use permit shall not be granted by the board of adjustment unless and until: 
(i)	A written application for an exception, together with fee, is submitted, accompanied by an accurate legal description, maps site plans drawings, and any necessary date, indicating the section of this article under which the exception is sought and stating the grounds on which it is requested. 
(ii)	Notice shall be given as such time and place of such public hearing by one publication in the official newspaper at least 15 days prior to such hearing and also to the owner of such property for which the change is requested. Provided, however, that the board of adjustment may continue any matter before it and require such other notice as it deems necessary and proper. 
(iii)	The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
(iv)	The board of adjustment shall make a finding that it is empowered under the section of this article described in the application to grant the exception and that the granting of the exception will not adversely affect the public interest. 
(B)	In granting any exception, the board of adjustment [may] prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this article. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the exception is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this article and punishable under Section 12.1800 of this article. The board of adjustment shall prescribe a time limit within which the action for which the exception is required shall be begun or completed or both. Failure to begin or complete, or both, such action within the time limit set shall void the exception. 
(3)	Variance: conditions governing applications; procedures. 
(A)	To authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, such variances from the terms of this article as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this article would result in unnecessary hardship. Variance from the terms of this article shall not be granted by the board of adjustment unless and until: 
(i)	A written application for variance, together with fee, is submitted, accompanied by an accurate legal description, maps, site plans, drawings and any necessary data, demonstrating: 
a.	That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district; 
b.	That literal interpretation of the provisions of this article would deprive the applicant of the right commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this article; 
c.	That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant; 
d.	That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this article to other lands, structures or buildings in the same district; 
e.	No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures or buildings in the same district, and no permitted use of lands, structures, or buildings in other districts, shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance; 
f.	May grant approval, up to a period of two years, for hardship cases to place an inhabited mobile home on the back of any lot subject to the prior approval of the property owners within 200 feet. The permit must be reviewed for renewal and is also subject to review at any time. Fees for such permit will be $50.00 per year. 
(ii)	Notice of public hearing shall be given as in subsection 12.2005(2)(A)(ii) above. 
(iii)	The public hearing shall be held. Any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(iv)	The board of adjustment shall make findings that the requirements of subsection 12.2005(3)(A)(i) above have been met. 
(v)	The board of adjustments shall further make a finding that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance, and that the variance is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building or structure. 
(vi)	The board of adjustment shall further make a finding that the granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this article, and will not be injurious to the neighborhood, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. 
a.	In granting any variance, the board of adjustment may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this article. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this article and punishable under Section 12.1800 of this article. 
b.	Under no circumstances shall the board of adjustment grant a variance to allow a use not permissible under the terms of this article in the district involved, or any use expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this article in said district. 
(Code 1996, § 12.2005)  
Sec. 12.2006. - Decisions. 
(a)	In exercising the above mentioned powers, the board of adjustment may, so long as such action is in conformity with the terms of this article, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order requirements, decisions or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirements, decisions, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal is taken. 
(b)	The concurring vote of four of the members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the building official, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this article, or to affect any variation in the application of this article. 
(Code 1996, § 12.2006)  
Sec. 12.2007. - Appeals. 
Any person, or any board, taxpayer, department, board or bureau of the city aggrieved by any decision of the board of adjustment may seek review by a court of record of such decision, in the manner provided by the laws of the State of Texas. 
(Code 1996, § 12.2007)  
Sec. 12.2008. - Questions of interpretation and enforcement. 
It is the intent of this article that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the board of adjustment only on appeal from the decision of the building official, and that recourse from the decisions of the board of adjustment shall be to the courts as provided by the laws of the state. 
(Code 1996, § 12.2008)  
Sec. 12.2009. - Duties of city commission. 
It is further the intent of this article that the duties of the city commission in connection with this article shall not include hearing and deciding questions of interpretation and enforcement that may arise. The procedure for deciding such questions shall be as stated in this section and this article. Under this article, the city commission shall have only the duties of: 
(1)	Considering and adopting or rejecting proposed amendments or the repeal of this article, as provided by law; and 
(2)	Establishing a schedule of fees and charges as stated in section 12.2010 below. 
(Code 1996, § 12.2009)  
Sec. 12.2010. - Schedule of fees established. 
The city commission shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses, and a collection procedure for building permits, amendment applications, appeals and other matters pertaining to this article, The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the building official, and may be altered or amended only by the city commission. 
(Code 1996, § 12.2010)  
Sec. 12.2011. - Payment of fees. 
No permit, amendment, special exception or variance shall be issued unless or until such costs, charges, fees or expenses have been paid in full, nor shall any action be taken or public hearing be held unless or until preliminary charges and fees have been paid in full. 
(Code 1996, § 12.2011; Ord. No. 2007-03, 4-3-2007)  
ARTICLE 12.2100. - PENALTY FOR VIOLATION 
 
[Sec. 12.2101. - Violation; penalty.] 
Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or fail to comply therewith any of the requirements thereof, or who shall build or alter any building in violation of any detailed statement or plan submitted and approved hereunder or who shall occupy or use any land or building without a certificate of occupancy, in a manner not authorized by the certificate of occupancy applicable to such land or buildings, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be liable to a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1-6 of this Code; and each day such violation shall be permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. The owner or owners of any building or premises or part thereof, where anything in violation of this article shall be placed, or shall exist, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, person, or corporation employed in connection therewith and who may have assisted in the commission of any separate offense and upon convictions thereof shall be fined as herein provided. 
(Code 1975, § 12-21; Code 1996, art. 12.2100)  
ARTICLE 12.2200. - AMENDMENTS 
 
[Sec. 12.2201. - Amendments to zoning regulations and map.] 
(a)	The city commission may, from time to time, on its own motion, on petition or other application, amend, supplement, modify, or repeal the regulations and restrictions as established herein, and may alter, restrict or extend the boundaries of the various districts established herein or shown on said zoning map. However, no such amendment, supplement, modification, or repeal of said regulations or restrictions and no alteration, restriction, or extension of said boundaries of said districts shall become effective until after a public hearing in relation thereto at which parties in interest and citizens of Galena Park shall have the opportunity to be heard. At least 15 days notice of the time and place of such hearings shall be published in an official paper, or a paper of general circulation in Galena Park. 
(b)	In case of a protest against any change of the kind referred to in the preceding paragraph, signed by the owners of 20 percent or more either of the area of the lots included in such proposed change, or of those immediately adjacent in the rear thereof extending 200 feet therefrom, or of those directly opposite thereof extending 200 feet from the street frontage of such opposite lots, or of those immediately adjacent on either side of the area of said lots extending 200 feet therefrom, such change shall not become effective except by the favorable vote of three-fourths of all members of the city commission. 
(Code 1975, § 12-22; Code 1996, art. 12.2100) 
